Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

SECTION 4

THE CHURCH AND THE WORLD

No man ever calmly sat down with a prayerful heart to examine the claims of this work, popularly termed Mormonism, who did not rise from the investigation convinced that there was a power, an influence and a spirit accompanying this work, that he had never met with before. . . . If mankind loved the truth and would examine these things, they would see something desirable about this work, and they would be prompted to investigate. . . . An honest man cannot go to the Lord in the name of Jesus Christ, and ask Him respecting this Gospel without receiving a knowledge for himself that it is true. —GEORGE Q. CANNON Journal of Discourses 19:199] July 21,1867

CHAPTER 25

Truth—The Only Anchor

Truth a sure foundation. Men of understanding have left on record, as the fruit of their experience and their observation of mankind, that "the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." (Psalm 111:10.) It is the sure foundation upon which all true knowledge is based. Men may acquire extensive information and learning; but unless accompanied by faith in and fear of God such acquirements are not so profitable unto them as they might be. A knowledge of the truth as revealed by the Lord furnishes men who obtain it a sure foundation on which to stand; it is also a standard by which all man-made systems, theories and opinions can be measured.

A most excellent illustration of its value for this purpose can be found in judging what is known as the Darwinian theory. According to this theory, man has gradually ascended, through a process of evolution covering ages of time, from some low form of animal life; he stands today as the product of a long period of development. . . .

But to the Latter-day Saints who understand the principles of truth, it is the greatest absurdity and folly to state that man has been evolved from an inferior form of animal life, and has progressed step by step through the ages until he has reached his present stage of development. They do not need to spend any time to examine such a proposition for they know better.

God has revealed in these last days, as well as in former times, that He is the Father of mankind, that we are descended from Him, that he "created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Genesis 1:27.) The theories of all the philosophers in the world, however cunningly framed or speciously argued, cannot shake the faith of a man or woman of God in this immutable truth.

Here, then, is seen the value of the fear of God. It "is the beginning of knowledge." (Proverbs 1:7.) He who fears God and receives the truths He reveals can safety trust them; he can test men's opinions and systems by them without a doubt as to the result. Building upon these truths, he can go on from knowledge to knowledge until he enters into possession of a fullness.

But "the fool has said in his heart, there is no God." (Psalms 14:1; 53:1.) He seeks no light from heaven. He gropes in search of it by his own wisdom. He builds theories and systems of philosophy which only exhibit his own folly. Calling himself wise, and proud of his acquirements, he fails to recognize the truths of heaven and measures Divinity by his miserable little yardstick.

Man by his own wisdom cannot know God. To know Him man must go to Him in the way he has appointed, or he cannot find him. (June 11, 1888, MS 50:371-72)

The value of truth. Too great a value cannot be placed upon the possession of the truth. It is indeed beyond estimate. For its sake men have died and gone to their fate with gladness. Latter-day Saints have endured all manner of afflictions and privations and hardships and in many instances have risked and even suffered death for the sake of truth. Yet, the thought sometimes occurs that we do not sufficiently value this precious knowledge.

Everything untrue, no matter how widely believed and advocated, must sooner or later perish. This huge structure which has grown up in the earth since the withdrawal of the Priesthood from men after the death of the Apostles, which is called Babylon by sacred writers, must at some time not far distant topple over and be broken to pieces, because it is not founded upon the truth. It has grown, and its roots have spread in every direction and have sought to fasten themselves in the earth never to be destroyed; yet, sooner or later it will undoubtedly perish. The truth, though it may have but a slight foothold and be believed by few, will endure forever. . . .

Truth to prevail. The Prophet Joseph Smith received the truth. God gave it to him. He stood alone. But he and the truth he represented were mightier than the whole world. He taught the true knowledge of God. The opposition of the whole world could not affect this; it could not change it, for the truth concerning God is eternal. Joseph received the true Priesthood. He received the true ordinances of salvation. He received the true Gospel. He was empowered to organize the true Church. By the introduction and teaching of these truths a power that cannot be overcome was brought among men.

If the enemies of the Prophet Joseph had succeeded in killing him before anyone else received from him the truths that he had received, would that have changed or destroyed the truth? Not in the least. Truth cannot be changed. It cannot be altered. It is eternal. All other things may perish; the heavens and the earth may pass away; but the truth cannot be destroyed. Wicked men may succeed in hiding the truth; they may make lies take the place of truth; they may kill men for believing and practicing the truth and may appear very successful in their operations, but their success is false; it has no real foundation.

The man that dies for the truth will live, and the truth that he believes in will live when falsehood and lies will be swept away. The triumph of error and falsehood and the believers therein over truth and its believers is very short-lived. It is only a temporary victory. It must in the very nature of things be made apparent that it is not a victory. It is those who cling to the truth who become victors in every conflict, either in a small circle or upon a large scale. False gods, false religion, false worship, false doctrine, false conduct cannot save the least human being. Error may triumph for a while, but its triumph is only temporary. The man who possesses the truth and will abide by it and cling to it will most assuredly, whatever conflicts he may have and evil influences to contend with, be ultimately victorious.

Love the truth. As a people and as individuals we should love the truth. Our hearts should be filled with gratitude to God for having revealed it. It will endure forever. It will triumph. Nothing can hinder it. We shalt triumph with it if we are true to it. No one who has the truth need fear falsehood. No one who has the true doctrine need fear error. The contest between error and truth may sometimes involve serious consequences to the individual or the people who possess truth; but there can be no question nor the shadow of a doubt concerning the result. This is true of us as a people. We have only to be patient in the midst of our trials and difficulties, and we shall emerge into the glorious light of truth from the darkness which those who practice falsehood endeavor to surround us with.

A man whose life is truthful need not fear slander and misrepresentation. All that is necessary is for him to patiently endure, and whether in this life or in the life to come he is sure to be vindicated and sustained. That which is true in him, whether in his belief, in his worship, in his words, in his actions and conduct, will live, and no amount of falsehood and misrepresentation can submerge it. It will come forth shining, bright and lustrous and will never perish. . . .

How necessary is it, then, that we should love the truth, that we should cherish it with all our hearts, that we should teach it and endeavor to obtain a foothold for it in the earth, that we should impress upon our children its value, even in the smallest details of life. Our children should be taught to always shun everything that is false, whether in belief, in word or in act. Every falsehood must perish. Truth alone will survive and triumph. (May 1, 1895, JI 30:273-75)

Love of truth the only anchor. That which has influenced men and women to join this Church has been their desire to embrace the truth. The truth—God's truth—has appealed to them and for that they have been willing to forsake their homes, their country, their kindred and all earthly ties and in many cases to go to a far distant land, among a strange people, whose language perhaps was unknown to them and who had been represented to them as such wicked, unprincipled characters. . . .

There is no inducement for men and women to remain Latter-day Saints, only the love of the truth. . . . Therefore, when the love of truth dies out of any Latter-day Saint, you find them ready to leave the Church . . . because when that which caused them to join the Church—the love of the truth—has gone from their hearts, there is no inducement for them to remain associated with the people.

Now, experience has proved that the love of truth can be extinguished in the hearts of men. It will not live under circumstances adverse to purity and to truth itself. Men must be pure to have the love of the truth remain with them. Do you know why men and women leave this Church? They leave it because the love of the truth dies out in their hearts. The love of the truth is the only anchor that will save them amid the storms that beat upon them. It is that which prompted them to embrace the Gospel when they heard it declared by a servant of the Lord; it is that which holds them secure and safe when they are in the Church. When that is gone, all that ties them to the work of God and makes them secure in the midst of trials and difficulties is gone too. The anchor which held them fast is broken, and they drift away. But remember, this love does not die without cause. . . .

Opposition to truth. I expect if we could get a glimpse of heaven we would find many things there that would be so contrary to our ideas and traditions that we might revolt in our feelings against them. I heard the Prophet Joseph Smith make a remark at one time which, though I was but a boy, made a deep impression upon me. Said he, "If I were to reveal what the Lord has revealed to me there are men on this stand, sitting beside me, (and he mentioned two of them by name, one of them being an Apostle) who would go around the streets of Nauvoo seeking to take my life." I wondered what there could be that he knew that would produce such a result. One of those men did apostatize and join the murderers of Joseph Smith. (DEN, Sept. 15, 1900)

Truth has ever met with opposition; but that opposition is intensified when the principles of truth are embodied in a system of salvation such as was taught by Jesus when he was upon the earth and as revealed by Him from the heavens in these last days.

Jesus knew perfectly well what effect the rejection of truth would have on the human mind. He knew that if obedience to the Gospel would produce love, peace and good will to all, its rejection must leave the person rejecting it a prey to hatred, strife and bloodthirstiness. He knew that obedience to the Gospel would implant in the human breast a desire to save, while its rejection would produce the opposite feeling—a desire to destroy. He perfectly understood the operations of the two spirits—the spirit of light and the spirit of darkness—and that the rejection and decrease of one was sure to be accompanied by the encouragement and increase of the other, and, therefore, he could with perfect assurance say that his teachings would be followed by variance and division.

Men imagine that because these effects follow the preaching of the Gospel by the Latter-day Saints they must of necessity be deceivers; whereas, instead of such things being an evidence of an incorrect doctrine, they are a strong evidence to the contrary. While the Gospel of Jesus causes variance to spring up between those who reject and those who obey it, yet it causes peace, unity and every good feeling to increase in the breasts of those who listen to its precepts. (Sept. 6, 1856, WS 198-99)

Truth will triumph. Nothing can be done against the truth but for it. Circumstances of an opposing nature may apparently overwhelm it temporally, but by and by the storm subsides, the clouds disperse, the sun breaks forth as brightly as before and the rock of truth is seen again firm and enduring as ever. It is the same with principles. There never was a new and needed principle promulgated, or an old and needed one restored to notice and new development, that was not met by storm after storm of opposition and abuse, and followed up and relentlessly pursued thereby, until it was manifest that the new or newly presented principle had obtained such influence that it would no longer pay to oppose it. Then is the time the abuse and the opposition cease, or become so weak and local as to be no longer worthy of notice. But at all other times the opposition and the abuse ebb and flow like the tide.

Thus it is in regard to what the world knows as "Mormonism." It is a system of needed truths, some new, some old, but which had become practically obsolete. From the beginning unmeasured opposition and abuse have met and followed and sought to overwhelm it, but in vain. Though sometimes struck at fiercely and apparently near utter destruction, yet in one way or another, it has invariably triumphed over its enemies, and has advanced with mighty strides while they have retrograded.

Opposition to the principles of "Mormonism" now and henceforth will have the same results—the truth, though overshadowed for a time, will ultimately triumph. This is just as sure as that the sun will shine again after it sets or is obscured by clouds. Storms and clouds, physical, religious, social or political, do not endure forever; they are only temporary and often evanescent, while the truth does and will endure unimpaired and immutable through all eternity, and those who abide by it will partake of its character and share in its triumphs. (1873, MS 33:700-701)

Misconceptions of truth. I do not believe that, taking the human family generally, there could be many found who would hesitate concerning this matter if they could be convinced of its truth. But, the difficulty is to get men and women to comprehend the truth, to recognize it, to understand it when they hear it, to be able to separate the truth from error, for the reason that in the human mind there are certain conceptions of truth. We entertain certain ideas as to what the truth should be, how it should come to us and also as to who its teachers should be, the kind of men they should be. And this is the difficulty that is all the time in the way of preaching the Gospel. There is an arch enemy of mankind who is constantly laboring to blind the eyes, to darken the understanding and to harden the hearts of the children of men and to prevent them from receiving the truth when they hear it. (May 15, 1881, JD 22:369)

All truth not revealed. All truth has not been revealed. Paul said once he knew a man who had ascended into the third heaven, and he had heard things that were not lawful for man to utter. That has been a good deal the case with us. Many things have been revealed to us which, if we had taught, men would have sought to kill us, so entirely opposed would they have been to the prevailing religious sentiment. This has been the case even with the small amount of truth which we have taught. We dare not tell all the truth we know, because it would not be lawful to utter some things that God has revealed. That which we do teach and which has enabled us to progress to our present condition sometimes gets us into trouble when we attempt to tell it. It arouses hatred and prejudice. . . .

New truths are unwelcome, and you have to lead mankind along by degrees to comprehend truth. . . . Will there be more truth revealed? Why, yes, the heavens are full of truth, and the Lord desires to communicate it to His children when they are ready to receive it. Things which, as I have said, are not lawful for man to utter at the present time will be revealed, and God will continue giving revelation if we will prepare our hearts for it. (Jan. 28, 1900, MS 62:163-64)

The possession and complete understanding of one truth or principle in the system is but the stepping-stone to the complete and perfect comprehension of its adjacent truth; and thus the investigator is gradually led on from one truth to another, until the mind is fully developed, and he beholds a grand and beautiful system, perfect in all its parts, and every truth having such an intimate relationship with its fellow-truth, that to believe and fully grasp one with the mind is to believe and grasp the other. (Apr. 12, 1856, WS 67)

Voice of people not voice of God. Some assert that "what everybody says must be true." We confess we see no must in the case. What everybody says is as likely to be false as true. Truth does not depend on what is said of it or what anybody knows about it. Truth is independent of anybody and everybody and still remains the same however much it may be praised or blamed. Yet, we hope to see the day when ignorance, error and sin will be swept away, and the knowledge of God and truth will be universal. When that day comes, "what everybody says will be true."

Vox Populi vox Dei, that is, "The voice of the people is the voice of God," is a favorite saying with many in this land who believe in the "sovereignty of the people." It is true that the voice of the people may be very powerful, but it is very changeable and very liable to err and, moreover, often very unjust, especially when the wicked rule. How different from the voice of God. . . .

Sometimes we hear it said, "One might as well be out of the world as out of the fashion." Why so? Is fashion more valuable than life? Does fashion add one virtue to that which is vicious or make a folly wise? . . . If we have no excuse but fashion for doing any certain thing, we have the poorest of excuses, the weakest of all crutches. Remember that "fashion is the plague of wise men and the idol of fools." Let none of us make it our idol. (Apr. 25, 1874, JI 9:102)

Popular opinion unreliable. One of the most unreliable things connected with mankind is popular opinion. So far as God's dealings with the children of men are concerned and the sending of Prophets and Apostles to them, those who have been guided by popular opinion have always erred. The opinions of the great majority concerning the truth have in almost every instance been unreliable. . . .

The more wicked the generation, the harder they were to convince of the truth of the predictions that were uttered among them by the servants of God; and so much was this the case that it became almost an infallible rule that when a majority of the people decided against a man he was sure to be a servant of God. . . .

God's ways higher than man's. There is one saying written in ancient days that is as true today as when it was written, that is, "For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my [God's] ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isaiah 55:9.) In our degradation and ignorance we cannot comprehend the purposes and plans of our Heavenly Father. No man can do this. If any man were capable of doing this, he would be unfit to dwell on earth, and he might perhaps be translated, as Enoch was anciently.

No man can rise to the wisdom of Deity and comprehend the purposes and designs of Him who created the earth and placed us upon it and Who regulates the movements of the universe of which we form a part; and when we try to do it, it is like a child just beginning to talk, seeking to dictate and comprehend the movements, actions and thoughts of men who are in possession of the wisdom and experience of mature age. In fact, the difference is greater. (Mar. 23, 1873, JD 15:368-69)

Scientific research and skepticism. Fortunately for the Latter-day Saints, the Lord has not left us to be carried about by every wind of doctrine or the cunning craftiness of men. He has given unto us a sure word, upon which we can rely, and from which, if we are faithful, we cannot be moved. There are certain immutable truths which the Lord has revealed in our day to His Church and to every member of it, if they will seek for them. First, that God our Eternal Father is a personal Being. Second, that man was created in His image and likeness. Third, that we are His offspring, and that we have not been evolved from some low order of creation.

These are important truths. No amount of scientific assertion or argument can disturb these. Therefore, we can permit people to go on with their theories, and publish volume after volume in support of them, and pay no attention to them, because if they attempt to attack these truths, we know that their arguments are not worth listening to or spending time upon. We know, too, that while it may be an ancient Chaldean belief, that which is contained in the books of Moses, those books nevertheless were written by Moses, and that they are not what those who indulge in the higher criticism endeavor to prove them to be. (1867, MS 60:13)
