Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 26

The Gospel—A Practical Religion

Superiority of Gospel. The Gospel of the Son of God is superior to every system known among men. It feeds the soul with knowledge. It points out with exceeding plainness the path which leads to God. It teaches man his duty to his fellow-man and to his Maker. It gives him understanding concerning the nature of God and the character of the Godhead.

Through the Gospel man learns why he is here, why he is in ignorance, why exposed to temptation, and what is expected from him. Who can place a proper estimate upon this knowledge? In value it is beyond price. . . .

With the promises before us which the Gospel brings, what a boundless career of glory is opened before the Saints of God! The kingly dignity is promised—not a toy crown and a bauble throne, but an actual dominion, a fruitful sceptre, an extensive realm—to all who honor the laws of God. They are promised increase—perpetual, eternal increase—and through that increase they will have that employment which the cares of royalty or, more properly speaking, government always demand. Every power inherited from our Father, the Almighty Ruler of heaven and earth, and which is now latent and undeveloped within us, will then find room for its exercise; and with the exercise these powers will expand and develop from eternity to eternity. . . .

How glorious is the Gospel when compared with the systems of men! How full of intelligence, light and happiness! It is the only philosophical system on the earth . . . which answers questions to the immortal soul of man, and satisfies the longing of his divine nature. Before its grand truths sectarianism flees away and skepticism becomes abhorrent. (1888, MS 50:786-87)

The Gospel—a practical religion. The Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ as taught in our day by His servants is a practical, every-day religion. This constitutes its chief beauty and chief strength. . . . Our religion is not a holiday or Sunday religion—a religion to be assumed on the Sabbath day—but a religion that enters into all the affairs of our lives, that which accompanies us in our fields, in our gardens, in our workshops, in our offices, in our households, in our schools, in every vocation and calling and in every direction. (July 5, 1891, MS 53:481)

The object of the Gospel. The Gospel has been revealed for the purpose of enabling mankind to comprehend saving truths. It contains the laws which men and women must obey to prepare them for that higher society which exists in heaven. It is by observing these laws and precepts that angels have attained to their glory and by which also He who is greater than the angels has reached His high and exalted position—our beloved Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

If we would have our children attain to heavenly glory, it must be by obeying these same laws. Nor can we who are adults reach that blissful condition except by the same power and conforming to the same requirements. (Nov. 1, 1894, JI 29:680)

Jesus, the Son of God, has attained to His exalted station by obeying the very principles that constitute our religion. The angels that surround the throne of our Almighty Father have received their exaltation and glory by obeying these principles, observing one law after another until the whole character is transformed and becomes Godlike. (DEN, June 30, 1900)

Happiness the object. When men or women become acquainted with the principles of the Gospel, as they are revealed for the salvation of mankind, they have had a treasure revealed unto them of priceless worth—a mine of endless riches opened up before them, the proper appreciation of which will lead them to seek after the acquisition of those truths which will bring salvation to them and affect for good all their temporal and spiritual interests. This is the object for which the Gospel was revealed to man. It was revealed in ancient days for the purpose of making men and women happy, and a proper cultivation of its principles will make them happy now, even as it did then. (Nov. 10, 1861, MS 23:795)

Salvation—both body and spirit. The Gospel when thoroughly and effectively preached will not only improve a man's spiritual being and reveal unto him new and pleasing spiritual truths but will also improve his physical being and teach him the necessity of taking proper care of his body—the tabernacle of his spirit—and of adopting such principles as will tend to improve and develop, to its utmost extent, every faculty of the mind and body. When this is the case, then and only then is the Gospel a system of salvation—salvation in the broadest sense of the term, saving and redeeming both body and spirit from the evils to which they may have been subjected. A system that is not capable of this, we can not recognize as the fullness of the Gospel of Christ. (Mar. 8, 1856, WS 25)

Must conquer ourselves. There is a work developing upon every son and daughter of Adam; there is a fight that we have to fight against—the evils of our own natures, for the heart of man is deceitful and desperately wicked. . . . We may be heralded through the earth as famous; but unless we conquer ourselves, it is in vain that our names are known and that our deeds resound through the earth. . . .

That which is applicable to the individual is applicable to us as a people. Our fame may go forth for great works and mighty things that we have done; but unless we ourselves bring forth the fruits of righteousness in our lives, unless we conquer our evil passions, our evil habits, our evil inclinations, our evil desires, and bring them under complete subjection to the Spirit of God, our labor is comparatively profitless for that is the object of preaching the Gospel to us. (Oct. 5, 1879, JD 21:79)

Saved from consequences of fall. In the prayer of the brother of Jared to the Lord. . . the Prophet used this language: "Because of the fall our natures have become evil continually; nevertheless, O Lord, thou hast given us a commandment that we must call upon thee, that from thee we may receive according to our desires." (Ether 3:2.)

The fall that was here referred to by the brother of Jared took place when Adam and Eve disobeyed the command of God and partook of the forbidden fruit and were driven out of Eden. Through that act the natures of man and his posterity became, as the Prophet said, subject to evil continually. . . .

The Gospel has been revealed to save man from all the consequences of the fall. . . . While here in this probation, we have to struggle to overcome our fallen natures and to bring them in subjection to the holy principles which we call the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It requires a constant struggle for all human beings to resist the temptations of Satan who appeals to us and tries to obtain power over us through our fallen natures. (May 15, 1900, JI 35:312)

The Gospel always interesting. It is a characteristic of the Gospel of Jesus Christ to not be easily exhausted; on the contrary, it is always attractive. You hear it today as you heard it thirty years or thirty-five years ago, and it possesses as many charms and as many attractions now as then; repeating it does not wear it out—does not make the subject threadbare—does not deprive it of its interest; but, on the contrary, its interest increases as years roll over our heads; as they pass by, our interest in the work of God and our love for it and our appreciation of its greatness increase. In this respect it differs from everything else we know of; it satisfies every want of man's nature. (Oct. 8, 1865, JD 11:169)

A comprehensive religion. Everything . . . is so intimately blended in the work in which we are engaged that it is an exceedingly difficult thing to draw the line of distinction between the temporal and the spiritual, between that which pertains to the body and that which pertains to the spirit, or which pertains to the dissemination of the Gospel and the welfare of the people in political matters. . . . Our religion extends its ramifications into every department of our lives, leaving nothing untouched, nothing connected with our earthly existence uninfluenced by its power and its teaching. . . .

Our God is not a religious God alone. The God we worship does not confine himself to religious matters, so-called, in contradistinction from those that are secular. He is not a God that concerns himself alone with the spirit of man, but He is a God of science; He is a God of mechanism; He is a God of creative power, a God of government, a God who attends to all the departments of human life and progress, as we see them exemplified here upon the earth. . . .

There was no principle connected with man's existence upon the earth that is not a part and parcel of that Gospel which God has revealed unto us and commanded us to obey; that which the world call "Mormonism" embraces within its scope every good thing upon the face of the earth, leaving nothing outside. Every true principle of science, everything connected with the cultivation of the earth, with the government of cities and of nations, with the management of all the multiplied affairs of men in their great and varied diversity—everything of this character comes within the scope of the Gospel which God has revealed, in the system of salvation that He has commanded us to receive. (Mar. 18, 1883, JD 24:57-58)

False traditions and their effects. The greatest obstacle that has ever opposed the spread of truth and the diffusion of correct principles is the traditions of the people. So potent is their influence and so much importance is there attached to them that truth is but seldom received, even when supported by the best of reasons and evidence, if it comes in contact with them. They are set up as a standard or criterion by which every new principle or idea must be measured and judged; and whether they be true or false, correct or incorrect, by its agreement or disagreement with them must it be accepted or rejected. Every advocate of truth, whether religious or scientific, has experienced this. . . .

But the people who have not received "Mormonism" are not the only people who have to contend with these things. The Latter-day Saints themselves have not progressed as they might have done had they been free from traditions which induce unbelief. . . .

The people have not yet learned the lessons which the experience of the past should have taught them. They have not yet learned that every tradition must be uprooted and that when God speaks and commands, even if it should be contrary to everything that tradition may make dear, there is no other course but to obey. They are too apt to set up their traditions (which their experience has repeatedly proved to be unreliable) as a standard or criterion. Everything that agrees with them is readily gulped down—it is all right—but every truth that does not is viewed with distrust and unbelief.

Mankind will yet learn that they cannot by their wisdom know God; to know Him they will have to strip themselves of the multitudinous notions and opinions which they have imbibed and come before Him humbly, realizing their own lack of knowledge, and submit to be taught by His Spirit and by those to whom He has delegated a portion of His authority on the earth. This they will have to learn before they can make any progress. (Mar. 27, 1857, WS 370-74)

Tendencies toward worldliness. There are many, perhaps all of us, that have more or less of a desire to conform to the ideas which prevail in the world. These ideas we have inherited, and they come natural to us; and not having progressed sufficiently to overcome them, we naturally lean toward them. . . .

If we could have a glimpse of heaven and understand things as they are, we might be able to do better; but this is not God's way of doing things. He wants us to work out our own development and to exert the powers we have inherited from Him in conquering the wrong tendencies we have inherited from our fathers. He gives us line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; but He does not reveal it all at once. At the same time He would like us to comprehend more than we do.

Our leaders far ahead of us. I have sometimes thought that the Prophet Joseph, with the knowledge he possessed and the progress he had made, could not stay with the people, so slow were we to comprehend things and so enshrouded in our ignorant traditions. The Saints could not comprehend Joseph Smith; the Elders could not; the Apostles could not. They did do a little towards the close of his life; but his knowledge was so extensive and his comprehension so great they could not rise to it. It was so with President Young; and I may say it is so with the leaders of the Church now. It is a continual labor on their part to lift the people up to the comprehension of the will of God and His purposes connected with this work. The people are bound down by their traditions, and because of this it is rarely that you can get even the Elders to see the propriety of certain things. . . .

God is lifting this people, and He will do it faster and faster if we will obey His counsels and seek to free ourselves from these miserable traditions that we have inherited from our fathers. . . . Men have strayed from God and adopted systems of their own; and the difficulty with us is to comprehend the truth so that we may know how to emancipate ourselves from this condition. (Apr. 16, 1899, MS 61:629-30)

Plan of salvation broad as eternity. The work of God is not confined to this little earth of ours; but it embraces within it all the eternities of God. It embraces the work that took place before the earth was created, and it brings within its pale that which will take place thousands of centuries hereafter. The plan of salvation is as broad as eternity and is as eternal as its Great Author. (Mar. 28, 1869, DNW 18:103)

The Church of Christ among the Jews at Jerusalem, among the Nephites in South America and among the people who now live is the same Church in every minute particular. The organization is alike, the officers are alike, the ordinances are alike and the doctrines are alike. The truths of God are eternal. They do not wear out or become changed by the lapse of time. (Mar. 1, 1883, JI 18:72)

God has revealed unto us that Adam himself was taught the Gospel in the same purity and with the same power and gifts that it was taught to the Twelve Apostles whom the Lord chose as His disciples. We have been taught that Jesus Himself was the Revelator, so to speak. He was the Being who revealed to Adam and to his children, to Abraham, to Moses, and to the Prophets, the plan of salvation and gave them the laws which they practiced. . . .

Ancients had same Gospel. In that early day God sent His angels to Adam; he repented of his sins and was baptized in water by an angel, and he received the Holy Ghost, just as much as we who live now do, and probably in greater power. These are the principles of the Gospel, and this was in the beginning. Every principle that was taught to men by the Savior in His day, so far as pertaineth to the Gospel, was taught in those early days.

It is the height of folly, it is a libel on our Father in heaven, to say that those men who lived in those days walked in ignorance or that the revelations of God to them were imperfect or that God has improved since their day. He was perfect then; He knew all things then; and He taught that which was necessary then for man's salvation.

The name of Jesus is the only name given under heaven whereby man can be saved. No man could be saved in the beginning without that name, and if he did not hear it on the earth, he would have to hear it somewhere else, or he could not be saved. . . . (Sept. 24, 1893, DW 47:506-7)

Gospel principles to save mankind. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been built up by the revelations of God for the purpose of correcting the evils that exist in society, as well as to save the inhabitants of the earth from their sins; not only to prepare them for the life to come, but to qualify them to enjoy the life that now is. Its mission is to save the people spiritually and temporally. (Mar. 11, 1894, DW 48:477)

Its principles alone will save mankind; there is no other plan of salvation, either temporal or spiritual, than that which is found in the Gospel, and there is no salvation, temporal or spiritual, excepting that resulting from obedience to it. Its principles are from God; by its principles God is what He is today. By observance of its principles heaven is made heaven and is peopled by beings who have obeyed the Gospel, and through their practical obedience to the Gospel have produced heaven, or rather made themselves fit to dwell in heaven. And through those glorious principles, which we have received to some extent at least, and through obedience to them, carrying them out practically in our lives, the children of men can be elevated into the region of God and angels, and heaven can be brought about, to a certain extent at least, upon the earth, thus fulfilling the prayer of the Savior when He commanded His disciples to pray, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven." (Matthew 6: 10.) (Feb. 23, 1890, DW 40:378)

Mormonism either true or false. "Mormonism" is advocated before mankind on the testimony of God's word. To this its advocates appeal to substantiate its truth. By this it should be judged. If it be untrue and contrary to the revealed will and laws of God, the proof should be produced from His accredited records. It is time that men should think calmly, considerately and impartially on this subject. Every man should thoroughly satisfy himself as to the truth or falsity of this system. It is a question of momentous importance, upon the correct decision of which eternal destinies hang. To trust to another's opinion, to another's judgment, to another's convictions, and be guided by them, in an affair of so much importance, is folly.

"Mormonism" . . . is either true or false; if true, it is every man's duty to obey it; if false, it is every man's prerogative to know its falsity. We say it is true. . . . We say it will have to be believed and obeyed by all men, or they will be condemned. (Sept. 27, 1856, WS 205)

Doctrines are impregnable. Our doctrines are impregnable, so far as the Bible is concerned. No man can successfully meet the Latter-day Saints on the Bible. It is our Bible. We need not talk about "Joseph Smith's Bible"; King James' translation of the Bible is sufficient for us to prove the doctrines we teach to be from God, for they are precisely similar to the doctrines taught in the ancient days. It is our Bible more than any other people's, because we live nearer to it; we practice its principles; we teach its ordinances, and we do everything for man's salvation that it teaches us is necessary.

Men have ceased long ago to endeavor to disprove our doctrine from the Bible, and in place of that they have had recourse to falsehood, to maligning us and telling all manner of stories concerning us to prejudice the minds of those who would listen to them. That is now their only refuge. (Sept. 23, 1900, MS 62:771)

It is astonishing that "Mormonism," or the "Mormons," cannot be assailed by any other weapons than ridicule and falsehood—that their system present no vulnerable spot for them to be attacked reasonably and logically. One would think that after making such bold pretensions and laying so broad a foundation there would be some point that would be sufficiently unguarded to afford the assailants an opportunity to overturn their position with advantage. But it is not the case. (June 21, 1856, WS 137)

The religion of the Latter-day Saints is the only religion that will bear the test of philosophical investigation and that will meet the burning questions of the day. I believe that it is the only religion that will satisfy the yearnings of the human heart and that will give light upon points that are considered mysterious by the religious world. I believe that the religion of the Latter-day Saints shows in the plainest, in the simplest and in the most conclusive manner the relation of man to God. (Oct. 9, 1892, DW 45:617)

An infallible religion. Who is there that can recall a single instance of recantation of any of its [the Church's] principles? Has there ever been a doctrine declared by the authorities of this Church, as a part of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that they have had to take back or modify? Not one. Has there been anything in the organization that has had to be perfected? No. The organization was as perfect in theory—being revealed of God—50 years ago as it is today. . . .

That constitutes the strength of this work. It is its infallibility. Not that man connected with it is infallible, for he is fallible; but the work itself, its principles and everything connected with it, is infallible, having a divine origin, being revealed of God. (July 15, 1883, JD 24:184)

Evidence of the true Gospel. Many people ask for signs to prove that this is the work of the Lord and they close their eyes to the evidence which is before them. It is a great evidence of the truth of the Gospel to see the change that takes place in the people who join the Church; they are born again; they become new creatures in the Lord; a love takes possession of them which they never knew before. They love their brothers and sisters in the Church with an affection entirely new to them. . . . The great evidence of its being the work of the Lord is seen in the fruits which the people bring forth. Union, love and peace prevail among all genuine Latter-day Saints. Where they live as they should do, we can see the beginning of that spirit and feeling which will prevail during the millennium. (Feb. 15, 1898, JI 33:150-51)

The Gospel our greatest love. If we cannot sacrifice everything there is upon the face of the earth that men hold dear to them, then we are unworthy of that great salvation that God has promised unto the faithful. The man that cannot bring every appetite into subjection to the mind and will of God, that cannot forgo everything of this kind and that is not willing to sacrifice houses and lands and father and mother, wives and children and everything that men hold dear to them, is unworthy of that great salvation that God has in store for His faithful children. . . .

If we value this salvation as we should, there is nothing that will stand between us and it. . . . We must love the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the cause that He established, better than we do our wives and our children, better than we do our own lives. There is nothing upon the face of the earth that we should love as we do the Gospel. God requires this of us. (Nov. 20, 1881, JD 23:100)

The love of the Gospel. When men receive the everlasting Gospel and the Priesthood, there is a love begotten in their hearts for their fellowmen such as they never have felt before. Like the love of Jonathan for David, it is "Passing the love of women." It is stronger than the love of women. It overpowers it. Not that it quenches the love of women or makes it improper; but it is a greater love; it surpasses it. This is the love that enters into the hearts of women who embrace the Gospel and causes them to love the Elders of this Church as they never loved any one before. And it is a pure love. They love them as they would angels from heaven.

It is not an unvirtuous love. It is a love that comes from God. It is the love of the Holy Ghost, the love of purity, the love of truth, the love that we would have for holy beings—a part of the love that we have for God Himself and for our Lord and Savior Jesus. This love unites them together with a bond and strength of affection that was never known before. (Aug. 3, 1890, DW 41:486)

What are its fruits? Precisely the same as the gospel brought forth anciently. Men are no longer Americans, British, French, Scandinavians, Germans, Swiss or any other nation; they are Latter-day Saints. Differences of language, of education, of race and of nationality all disappear. Under its influence, prejudices and animosities vanish. Union and love prevail. Its power in blending people together and making them one is marvelous. (Jan. 1, 1884, JI 19:8)

Gospel elevates mankind. The Gospel lifts the poorest, the humblest, the most obscure and places him on the level with the most intelligent, the most exalted man in the Church, in that every man and every woman is exhorted and pleaded with to seek to God for himself and for herself, that he and she may know . . . whether that is the word of God or not. (Sept. 19, 1897, DW 55:483)

It is said that in the old countries it takes three generations to make a gentleman. The Gospel of Jesus Christ will make a man a gentleman in one generation. . . . The poor, the lowly and the obscure who have obeyed and carried out in their lives the principles of the Gospel have been elevated and polished. This work is not for the abasement but the elevation of mankind. It is a work of evolution. Out of this people God will evolve a nation that will excel in everything. (Sept. 18, 1898, DW 57:514)

Only Gospel can cure world's ills. Apart from religion no schemes or plans for the amelioration of the condition of mankind can hope to be successful; relief can only be found in the teachings of the Son of God. Men must learn to carry into practical effect His precepts; they must learn to love their neighbor as they do themselves.

If ever the time shall come, such as has been described by Prophets and Apostles—that millennium era to which the righteous of all ages have looked forward—it will only be brought about by the practical adoption and application in every-day life of those principles that the Savior inculcated and which He commanded His followers to observe and practice. This cannot be done without His aid; there must be divine power brought into operation and made to bear upon mankind. Man of himself is incapable of effecting the needed reforms; he must have God's help. (June 1, 1896, JI 31:333-34)
