Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 27

Temptations, Trials and Persecutions

Trials—a necessary experience. What a variety of circumstances the Latter-day Saints have had to contend with from the organization of the Church up to the present time. No people of modern times have had such a variety of trials by which their faith, their constancy and their devotion have been tested. The persecutions which the people have endured and the wrongs which have been practiced upon them have furnished excellent opportunities for the exhibition of the qualities they possess, and they have shown their greatness and strength and nobility of character to the world in a very convincing manner. Step by step, from the very outset, they have had the most serious and forbidding obstacles to encounter and overcome. Their pathway has been beset with difficulties. Yet, in the great majority of cases, they have never wavered but pressed steadily onward, bearing patiently and heroically their afflictions and surmounting all difficulties.

In the providence of the Almighty it is undoubtedly necessary that we should have such a schooling as we have received. It is scarcely possible that we could fill the destiny that lies before us without this severe training. It is not pleasant to have to pass through these ordeals; but after we have emerged from them, we look back at them with satisfaction, and do not regret that we had to grapple with them. In fact, the most bitter and painful experience, after it has once been gained, is appreciated as most valuable; and no man who has endured such, regrets after he has passed through it that he had it to encounter. (Aug. 15, 1890, JI 25:503-4)

The experience of the Latter-day Saints has taught one important lesson which everyone should endeavor to make profitable. It is that it is not a wise thing for men to define the lines which the work of God shall pursue, or to set stakes concerning results that will be brought about.

Though the Church has been favored with the spirit of prophecy and revelation, and those who have borne the Priesthood have been inspired to counsel the people according to the mind and will of the Lord, still there are many details connected with the work of God which have not been fully made known. The reason for this is obvious. We must be a tried people. We must walk by faith, putting our trust in the Lord and not, at present, by sight. In this way the leaders of the people of God, as well as the people themselves, have their faith tested. . . .

This is God's work. One thing, however, has been clearly made manifest, and that is that this is God's work. He is shaping its destinies. He is permitting events to occur which, from a human standpoint, may not be viewed as favorable to the accomplishment of the destiny predicted. But knowing all things, the end from the beginning, He, in His infinite wisdom, can perceive plainly how His purposes shall be accomplished in ways that are strange to men.

It is natural for men to expect, in connection with a work like this in which we are engaged, success to attend every step of its progress. When what men call success is wanting, then fears come in, and doubts are apt to intrude; and yet how often it has been the case, as we have proved by our experience, that that which we have viewed as a disaster has been overruled and made a cause of triumph.

We are apt to mark out in our feelings certain lines that the work of God should pursue. . . . But how different has been the result. We have been thrown into the arena. We have been like a city set upon a hill that cannot be hid. The eyes of all nations have been drawn toward us. The power of Babylon has been leveled against us, with a view of our overthrow and destruction. . . .

It should be the aim of all to exercise faith, so that whatever the trials may be we may stand firm, steadfast and immovable in the truth, cherishing within us the testimony which God has given, and relying on His promises. Depend on it, He is able to fulfill every word that He has spoken. He will not leave His people to themselves. He will sustain those who put their trust in Him, and they will be brought off victorious. (Aug. 1, 1890, JI 25:470-72)

All to be tested to uttermost. If we will be faithful to our God, He will redeem us, no matter what the circumstances may be through which we may be called to pass. We may wade through sorrow. We may have to endure persecution. We may have to meet with death. We may have to endure imprisonment and many other things that our predecessors had to endure. God may test us in this manner.

Every human being that is connected with this work will have to be tested before he can enter into the Celestial Kingdom of our God. He will try us to the uttermost. If we have any spot more tender than another, He will feel after it. He will test all in some way or other. But like the promises that have been made in regard to the work as a work, so are the promises made to us as individual members of the Church. (Oct. 5, 1884, JD 25:326)

We have learned that there are plenty of trials and difficulties for all, if they will live faithful, to have their full share and all that are necessary to test them and their faith and integrity to the fullest extent. Each generation may not have to pass through exactly the same scenes. They are apt to vary as the circumstances which surround each vary; but they will, nevertheless, accomplish the desired end. There is one thing certain, every Latter-day Saint who is faithful to the truth and who lives to the ordinary age of man will have all the opportunities of this kind he or she can desire to gain experience and to have his or her zeal, integrity, courage and devotion to the truth fully exhibited. (May 1, 1885, JI 20:136)

Different kinds of trials. If trials do not come to the Latter-day Saints in one shape, they will in another. The Lord has said that He will have a tried people. Trials must, therefore, come. In the early days of the Church there were mobs and persecutions to test the faith and constancy of the people. The Saints were driven by the wicked from place to place, and those who did not love the Lord and His truth better than all else were apt to have their faith and fortitude fail them.

But since the people came to these valleys, mobs have not had power to afflict them. . . . Not having the trials of mobs and persecutions to endure, there have been trials of a different character to overcome. They have had the effect to test the people in a different direction, but probably as effectually as the old trials did. In the providence of the Lord this is all right. (Sept. 15, 1876, JI 11:210)

Satan will let no opportunity of tormenting the people of God, or of throwing obstacles in the way of the work of God, pass by without being used. His weapons are falsehood and violence. He uses falsehood in the most cunning manner, filling the hearts of the people with hatred and anger against the truth. . . .

The furnace of affliction. In the future trials may not be exactly of the same kind in all respects as they have been up to the present time; but, nevertheless, they will give the strong and the reliable, the faithful and the zealous every necessary opportunity to show the stuff they are made of and the faith which God has given them. So also with the impure and the weak, the hypocrite and the unbelieving; under the pressure of circumstances which will surround them they will exhibit the defects in their lives and characters, for God will have a tried people. He will bring us through the furnace of affliction, and if we endure the fiery trial, the dross of our natures will be burned out and the gold will appear the brighter and the purer. (Jan. 1, 1887, JI 22:3)

Must meet and resist temptations. It is liquor shops today, gambling saloons today, houses of ill-fame today. These are the evils which confront us and which furnish allurements for vice to our children. But we will overcome them and will cope with greater evils and will overcome them; and we will show the world that we have principles that can stand the test of time and can withstand all the evil influences that can be brought against us.

If we must rear our children in the midst of these, then let them rise superior to them. We cannot enclose our children in glass houses. We cannot exempt our children . . . from the temptations of the world. . . . They have to rise above them. . . .

I am looking forward for such a development of wisdom, strength and skill . . . and power that the development and training of our children will be a matter almost of perfect safety in the midst of all hostile influences. Still, we have to contend against these wicked things, the literature of the age and all the evils that abound—we have to contend against these and to teach our children to shun them. (Apr. 8, 1883, DNW 32:258)

On the watch-tower. Do not expect there will ever be a time when we can listlessly fold our arms and still progress with the truth. Every one who desires to be saved must be on the watch-tower and be prepared for the events that will transpire. . . .

We may as well make up our minds to be faithful at once and prepare ourselves for the trials that we shall have to meet, for we may rest assured that everything that can be shaken will be shaken. To avoid being shaken we must seek for and obtain the Spirit of God and gain favor with God through the practice of the principles of truth; and our prayers should be continually ascending to Him to aid us in attaining to glory with Him in the eternal world. (Dec. 31, 1863, MS 26:83-84)

It should be remembered that the evils which are seeking to obtain a foothold among us are the products of Babylon. Babylon reigns. Its fashions are popular in our nation. The determination is to make us conform to them—to make us drink of the cup of her fornications. . . . While Babylon has dominion it will have more or less influence among us; and it will require all the power we can muster to counteract its example and have the rising generation understand the disastrous consequences of adopting its follies and sins. (Nov. 1, 1889, JI 24:516)

Disobedience our greatest danger. There is only one thing that we, as a people, have to dread and that is our own weaknesses and our failure to keep the commandments of God. This alone can do us injury. If all the hosts of earth were to band together, with their wealth, their influence, and with all the power at their control, and they were to unitedly oppose this work of our God, and the Latter-day Saints were united and full of faith and integrity and determined to keep the commandments of God, I say to you this day . . . that there is no power upon earth that can injure or in any manner retard the advancement of this cause and the deliverance of this people from every peril to which they may be exposed. . . .

The only cause that will create fear in my mind—and that feeling does sometimes assail me—is the knowledge that the Latter-day Saints are not living as they should do, that there is division among them, that they are loving the world and the things of the world and that they are placing their affections upon something else more than upon the building up of the Kingdom of God. When I witness such a spirit, I confess that I am assailed with fear, not that the work of God will be endangered, not that the purposes of God will be turned aside, but I fear lest the Latter-day Saints, as a people, will be scourged because of the conduct of those who profess to be Saints and bear the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. If, however, we are living as we should do, keeping the commandments of God and walking in the straight and narrow path, then we have no need for fear. . . .

We will find as we grow in strength, as we gain influence and power, the opposing forces will also increase until . . . it will not only be a nation, but it will be the whole world that will fight against Zion and will seek her destruction. And under those circumstances what will save us? Nothing will save us but the righteousness of the Latter-day Saints and the power of God which that righteousness will bring forth. . . . (July 21, 1889, DW 39:194-95)

Keeping covenants the safe course. Whatever fate may threaten us, there is but one course for men of God to take, that is, to keep inviolate the holy covenants they have made in the presence of God and angels. For the remainder, whether it be life or death, freedom or imprisonment, prosperity or adversity, we must trust in God. We may say, however, if any man or women expects to enter into the Celestial Kingdom of our God without making sacrifices and without being tested to the very utmost, they have not understood the Gospel. If there is a weak spot in our nature, or if there is a fiber that can be made to quiver or to shrink, we may rest assured that it will be tested. Our own weaknesses will be brought fully to light, and in seeking for help the strength of our God will also be made manifest to us. (Oct. 6, 1885, MS 47:708)

In regard to our religion, or our eternal covenants, we have no compromise to make, nor principles to barter away; they emanate from God and are founded upon the rock of eternal ages; they will live and exist when empires, powers and nations shall crumble and decay; and with the help of the Almighty we will guard sacredly our covenants and maintain our interests and be true to our God while time exists or eternity endures. (Aug. 29, 1882, MS 44:613)

Blessings follow trials. After the trials there cometh the blessing. We have never yet passed through severe afflictions without there being compensation in the shape of great blessings bestowed upon us. And so it will be. Trial will follow trial; but blessings will follow trial also. Blessing will follow blessing; and the cause of truth will spread; the honest in heart will be gathered out; and the great work of God go forth, notwithstanding every effort to oppose it and to thwart it. (Oct. 5, 1890, DW 41:651)

Benefits of conflict with world. Contact with the world, while it is attended with many evils, is also attended with much good. The danger of isolation and exclusiveness is that men become narrow and prejudiced, opinionated and somewhat self-righteous. Contact with the world removes much of this feeling and teaches men that there are others who are also the children of God, who are the objects of His care and who possess many admirable qualities and many grand truths; and though they may not be open to receive the principles of the Gospel, and may have many erroneous ideas concerning the plan of salvation, they are, nevertheless, the objects of the Great Creator's care. He is their Father, and He intends to save them if they will only permit Him to do so. (Aug. 15, 1891, JI 26:510)

Praise of world a bad sign. It is no good sign for us to be beloved by the world, and to be spoken kindly of by the world, however pleasant it may be to us, and however much we may shrink from the opposite condition of affairs, and dread its manifestation, and wish that it could be otherwise—and it is natural to human nature to shrink from these trials—nevertheless, it is one of the worst signs for us as a people to be spoken well of by the world, and to be free from threatenings, from opposition and from hatred. It is not the true condition for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to be in, to be petted by the world, to be fostered by the world, to be spoken well of by the world, to be welcomed by the world, to have favor showered upon it by the world, because we ought not to be of the world, God having chosen us out of the world. . . . (Dec. 2, 1883, JD 24:360)

Godly to suffer persecution. At no time has the Lord led His people to expect that they would not have to endure trials, or not have their faith fully tested. . . .

In the providence of the Almighty persecution serves a most useful purpose. Every faithful Saint must perceive and acknowledge this. Each one feels its effect upon himself; he sees its effects upon his friends and neighbors. Persecution develops character. Under its influence we all know ourselves better than we did before we felt its pressure: and we discover traits in our brethren and sisters of the existence of which, perhaps, we were in entire ignorance. (Apr. 6, 1886, MS 48:307)

The hatred and opposition of the wicked may be considered as a compliment rather than otherwise. The Saints have no favors to ask at their hands; they do not seek their love. When they embraced the Gospel, they enlisted to forsake the ways of the world. They understood, too, what that implied—the severing in some instances of the dearest ties of kindred and affection. But they were prepared for it. They knew the Savior had said, "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me." (Matthew 10:37.)

So long as our actions are such that our enemies cannot say anything against our characters without speaking falsely, we have nothing to fear. We can afford to do our duty and leave the result with the Lord. (Feb. 1, 1882, JI 17:40)

Apostasy would end persecution. There is nothing short of complete apostasy, a complete denial of every principle we have received, a throwing away of the Holy Priesthood, that can save us from persecution. When this takes place, when all the chief features of the Gospel are obliterated, when we can float along the stream and do as the world does, then and not till then will persecution cease, or until the adversary is bound, for the day will come when Satan will be bound and then persecution will cease, but until then there will be no cessation; until then persecution will always exist in some form or other, and we shall have to meet it so that we may as well make up our minds on the subject. (May 15, 1881, JD 22:374)

Gospel causes family strife. Luke informs us that the Savior said: "Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division. . . . The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law." (Luke 12:51, 53.)

This sounds very strange, coming, as it does, from Him who is called the Prince of Peace, and whose mission was to save mankind. No one but a Latter-day Saint can understand the meaning of this language, for no one but Saints have the experience necessary to make it plain. In the days of the Savior upon the earth His doctrine brought a division between those who were obedient to it and those who were not. Instead of peace, strife, hatred and opposition were brought to the surface by it, not in the hearts of those who received His doctrine, but in the hearts of those who fought it.

This is also a most remarkable peculiarity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as we see it preached in our day. The nearer the relatives are who fight against the work and refuse to receive the Gospel, the more bitter appears to be the hostility which they manifest. They divide themselves from their obedient kindred, become their enemies and literally fulfill the words of the Savior, that "a man's foes shall be they of his own household." (Feb. 15, 1885, JI 20:56)

Hated for Jesus' name's sake. We are hated of all men and of all nations for Christ's sake. It is because of our religion. If we discarded the forms of religion, if we did not attach importance to the solemnization of the marriage ordinance, if it were done in any other name, or in any other form, or for any other purpose, it would pass, doubtless, as it does in other society without being challenged or receiving particular condemnation. . . .

Because we make this the religion of Jesus, because we profess to be the followers of Jesus, and because of being His followers, therefore, as Jesus said, "ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake" (Matthew 24:9), not for anything else, but for the sake of the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, whose religion we have espoused, whose followers we claim to be, and because of being his followers we do as we are doing. Most signally, then, has this prediction been fulfilled in our sight and hearing. (Dec. 7, 1884, JD 26:43-44)

World will not love us. If we would be like the rest of the world, we would have no opposition from the world. Jesus said to His disciples, "If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." (John 15:19.)

It is just the same today. If we were like the world, the world would love us; but because God has chosen us out of the world, therefore the world hates us; and we shall be hated as long as we preserve these virtues and contend for them, as long as we refuse to partake of the cup of fornications which the mother of abominations holds out to us; as long as we refuse to have the mark of the beast upon us, so long shall we have this opposition to contend with, until Babylon is overthrown and destroyed from the face of the earth—a consummation that is not very far distant.

If we would drink of that cup which that great mother of abominations holds in her hands, opposition would cease, for we would then be like them; we would be of them. But while we stand firm and steadfast, maintaining the principles which God has taught us, and seeking to carry out the glorious Gospel of His Son which He Himself taught when upon the earth—as long as we do this, you may depend upon it, the world will have no love for us. I am speaking now in general terms. There are men and women, not very numerous, that do have kindly feelings for us, who would not do us wrong, but their voices are unheard amid the general clamor that is raised against us. (Feb. 23, 1890, DW 40:379)

Truthfulness of Bible proven. Let a man commence to investigate the principles of the Gospel as they are taught by the servants of God—I care not what his position may be, how good a reputation he may have, what his standing in society may be—if he will turn his attention to the investigation of the principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as they are taught by His servants, he will suddenly awaken to the consciousness of the existence of a spirit in the world that is precisely like the spirit that was manifested in ancient days against Jesus and His Apostles. He will be astonished, if he has had no experience in this matter, at the spirit of persecution and opposition that will be aroused by his action in this direction, and how quickly his good name will be lost, and how quickly, also, he will be shunned and avoided by his late companions and associates and friends. . . .

Now, this treatment which Latter-day Saints have received has been confined to them. Men and women may espouse other forms of religion and not experience such consequences as these. . . . Let one who has passed through this experience read the New Testament and the treatment which the people of God received in those days, and he will see how similar is the treatment extended unto him to that which the disciples of Jesus received when He was upon the earth. If any evidence were wanted by such a person of the truth of the Bible, his own experience would furnish it to him. . . .

True Saints never persecute. You will never find a people of God who have the truth persecuting another people. If they were to do so, they would cease to be the people of God. It is the characteristic of the Church of God always that it never condescends to persecution. It does not fear the announcement of any doctrine, or any principle, or any form of belief, or any so-called revelation. Strong in the knowledge that they have the truth and that God is with them, such a people can afford to let false doctrine, when it manifests itself, have the freedom of action, the right of agency which God has given to every human being and which every human being has a right to exercise undisturbed by his fellow man so long as he does not interfere with the happiness and the lives and the liberties of his fellow man. (DEN, July 11, 1885)

Persecution an infallible evidence of truth. It is an evidence, an infallible evidence, of truth to have persecution accompany it. It is not that every one who is reviled and who is persecuted possesses the truth. That does not always follow. But there never was a Prophet of whom we have any account, raised up in the midst of the children of men to proclaim unto them divine truths, who did not receive in his life and experience these very things of which Jesus has spoken. They were hated; they were separated from the company of their fellows; they were reproached; their names were cast out as evil; they were reviled; their lives were sought. . . .

One of the greatest evidences of the bad condition of affairs now existing in Christendom is the popularity that attends what is called the preaching of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Whenever a preacher is popular in the midst of a wicked generation, or a man is popular who professes to be a minister of truth, you may set it down as a certain fact that that man does not preach the truth as it exists in Christ. . . .

Professed ministers as persecutors. There is this remarkable fact connected with the persecution of the people called Latter-day Saints—and it is the same characteristic that attended the preaching of the Gospel of the Son of God by Himself and His Apostles—the chief persecutors, and those who have stirred up strife in the hearts of the people, have been popular preachers, have been themselves, in too many instances, the professed ministers of Jesus Christ. It was the High Priests, it was the Pharisees, it was the religious people in the days of the Savior who were His chief persecutors, and I am sorry to say the chief persecutions which we as a people have had to endure have had their origin with the same class. (Oct. 6, 1879, JD 20:333-35)

Persecution our necessary discipline. Persecution! Who cares for it? Who fears it? What is there connected with it to make us tremble or to weaken us in the least degree if we are possessed of the knowledge which God has restored . . . ? That which we term persecution is only the discipline necessary for our development. There is a great destiny in store for this people, and they never can attain unto it unless they pass through just such scenes as they have passed through in the past, and such scenes as they doubtless will have to pass through of a more trying character in the future. This is the discipline that is necessary to purify us, to prepare us in every respect for the fulfilling of that high destiny that awaits us. . . .

Persecution causes greater unity. Hostile legislation and opposition have but one tendency as a rule, that is, to drive us closer together, to make the cause a common one, to cause us to feel united. . . . The more they are driven the tighter it brings the people together, solidifies them, makes them one, and it gives them a consciousness of strength because when they emerge from these trials victorious, they feel better able to cope with greater difficulties and greater and greater oppression when they are brought to bear upon them. And they are necessary, as I have said, for our development.

Worldly favor our greatest danger. But let us have ease, let us prosper in worldly things, let the world smile upon us and bid us welcome and treat us as they treat those whom they love, let the world do this, and how long should we be united? Why, the influence would be towards disintegration. Worldly influence would creep in. That is more to be dreaded than persecution. Prosperity is far more to be dreaded under circumstances such as we are placed in—what I mean by prosperity, I mean worldly prosperity, worldly sympathy, worldly favor—these are more to be dreaded than the disfavor of the world and the tyranny that may be brought to bear upon us because of our being obnoxious to them. (June 22, 1884, JD 25:239-42)

Persecution causes greater diligence. As a people, in times past we have been careless and indifferent in many directions. Neglect of duties has been too common everywhere. Hypocrisy has been indulged in to some extent, and a laxity has prevailed in many quarters concerning the keeping of the laws of God which is not in accord with the spirit of the Gospel. Under these circumstances the Lord has permitted persecutions and trials to come upon His people that have had the effect of stirring them up to greater diligence. When the Lord, for any reason, turns His face away from His people, and is slow to hear their cries, thorough repentance on their part, and a complete abandonment of their evil ways, are sure to bring back His favor, and to cause His countenance to shine upon them.

This has been the case in every age when God has had a people upon the earth. In our own day we have seen frequent illustrations of this. We have never feared for the people, nor for the prosperity of the work, when the Latter-day Saints have been fully alive to the duties and requirements of their religion. But when they have been careless and neglectful, or disobedient and hard in their hearts, then we have trembled; for when the Saints are in such a condition the displeasure of the Lord is sure to be awakened against them, and His scourges are likely to fall upon them.

The Lord does not permit his enemies, nor the enemies of His people, to prevail over them for any length of time when they are living near unto Him and complying strictly with His will. All His promises, of the brightest and most glorious character, encouraging and hopeful, are given to those who keep His commandments, and who seek earnestly to carry out in their lives the principles of salvation which He has revealed. When a people are in this condition their enemies cannot have much power over them. (Apr. 8, 1887, MS 49:290)

Persecution strengthens faith. The faith of the Latter-day Saints seems to grow stronger from these efforts to destroy it; and men, women and children who have been living in the practice of the requirements of their religion feel more determined than ever to maintain their integrity, and to do all that the Lord requires at their hands with cheerful willingness, whatever may be the consequences from a worldly point of view.

This persecution is not without its effects upon those who have made a pretense of being faithful members of the Church. Iniquity is being brought to light. The wrongdoer is being made to feel, in a most remarkable manner, that his sin will find him out; and the evidence that God is pleading with and awakening the consciences of those who have been living in sin is frequently furnished to us.

There have been many violations of the law of God practiced among us which have been hidden from the public gaze. The trials through which we are passing have the effect of causing these evils to be brought to light. It seems as though the Lord is tearing the covering, not only from the nations of the earth, but from the Latter-day Saints; and the time is not far distant—in fact, it has reached us already in part—when the sinner in Zion shall tremble, and fear shall seize upon the hypocrite. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 704-5)

God's purposes fulfilled. The Lord has numberless ways of effecting His purposes, and the slanderers of His people He uses as instruments to warn mankind. Were there no slanderers of "Mormonism," there would be nothing to attract the attention of the people. If our enemies had not reported that we were murderers, adulterers, thieves, impostors, disloyal, etc., etc., there would be no contrast; but, having heard these lies, their falsity, when they come in contact with "Mormonism," is demonstrated.

Coming in contact with "Mormonism" has different effects upon different people; but with the honest-hearted lover of truth it has but one effect, and that is to convince him that it is the system of salvation designed by the Lord for his benefit. He may not arrive at this conclusion at once, but, if he cherishes a love and regard for the principles of truth, he will be convinced of it sooner or later. (Aug. 23, 1856, WS 190)

Revelation causes persecution. It was the fact that the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Elders of this Church declared that revelation had been received from God that excited animosity in the first place. The Elders of this Church might have preached any doctrines they pleased and not said they had been taught them by revelation, nor by special divine assistance, nor by angels having come from heaven, but preached them as the speculations of men, as doctrines discovered, framed and arranged by men, by some theologians of eminent ability, and they would have had no particular difficulty. In preaching precisely the same doctrines we now preach—that is, the first principles of the Gospel—a church might have been made one of the most popular churches upon the face of the earth.

But what was it that excited animosity? It was the declaration that God had spoken from the heavens and had restored the primitive Gospel in its original purity and power, and that we had the power and authority to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel through which had been restored the gifts and blessings and powers that pertained to the Gospel in the days of Jesus. It was this declaration that excited animosity throughout the religious world against the Latter-day Saints in the beginning.

Every preacher felt that he was condemned by this declaration. If we had stood upon the same platform as they, saying that our organization was the result of man's wisdom, we should then have had some sympathy from them. But because our Elders declared that God had spoken, and that we preached that which had been revealed to us, animosity was excited and mobs rose against us, entertaining the most bitter feelings and committing the most terrible outrages. . . . The cry against us . . . was that we believed that God was a God of revelation as He was in ancient days, that He was the same God in this the 19th century that He was in the first century of the Christian era, when Jesus and the Apostles ministered among men. This was considered sufficient cause for mobs to organize themselves and drive our people from their homes and lands and to kill some of them. (June 25, 1882, JD 24:41-42)

Had Joseph Smith confined himself to the proclamation of his doctrines and views as he deduced them from the Scriptures, and had made no mention of intercourse with angels and the aid which he obtained through revelation, he would have been venerated as a great reformer, a real benefactor to his fellowmen, and his name would have been lauded to the skies as the founder of the best system of religion of the age. (Apr. 12, 1856, WS 67)

Belief in restored Priesthood causes opposition. It is because the Latter-day Saints believe that God has restored from the heavens the everlasting Priesthood—that eternal authority by which man acts upon the earth as the ambassador of God. It is because we have testified that God has restored this once more to earth and we have received it, and that by virtue of it we act as Apostles, members of the Seventies, High Priests, Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons and in the several offices God has placed in his Church. This is the secret of the opposition that is and has been waged against the Church of God. . . . If we did not have the right to exercise heaven-bestowed authority, there would be no particular opposition to us.

Of course, the nearer a man draws to God and the more he lives according to the plan which God has prescribed, the more opposition he meets with. Satan will stir up strife, animosity and hatred against him. On this account Luther, Calvin, John Wesley and other reformers have been persecuted. The nearer they came to the truth, and the more zealous they were in proclaiming it, the more opposition they met with.

Men, in reasoning upon this subject, say that every sect, at the commencement of its career, is persecuted because men are not familiar with its doctrines; but, when they become known, opposition and persecution cease. They predict this about the Latter-day Saints; but the truth of the matter is this: if every new sect is persecuted, it is because it fearlessly denounces the sins, follies and vices of the age, and so long as they continue this, so long are they persecuted; but the moment they assimilate to the world, gloss over its follies and go with the stream and float with the popular current, opposition ceases. (June 11, 1871, JD 14:165-67)

Adversary indifferent to partakers of error. For generations there has been an indifference manifested by the adversary of truth to the systems of religion which have prevailed among men. When men partake of error, when they are not accompanied by the Spirit of God, when the power and authority which God imparts to fulfill his great purposes are not in existence among them, then there is an indifference manifested by the adversary; religious organizations and religious movements are regarded by him with unconcern, because the necessity does not exist, under those circumstances, for vigilant exertion on his part.

But the moment the Holy Priesthood of God is restored, being the power and authority imparted by heaven to men, which gives them capacity to go forth and administer in the things of God, then all hell is moved; all who are under the influence of the adversary are at once in commotion, and they seek to destroy all those who have the temerity to stand up in the defense of the truth and righteousness in the power of the Holy Priesthood of the Son of God. This has been the case from the beginning until now, from the shedding of the blood of righteous Abel down to the time that the last Apostle was slain. . . .

Greatest of all warfares. It may be truthfully said respecting the warfare in which we are engaged that it is irrepressible, and it will not terminate until one power or the other succumbs to the other. Which power shall succumb? There will be no cessation to this strife and contest. One or the other has to ride triumphant and hold dominion over this earth. Truth must prevail, or error must hold sway. . . .

The contest is not with cannon or with rifles and swords and weapons of this description; but it is, nevertheless, a warfare—a warfare between the spirit of darkness and that of light—between he who attempts to usurp the dominion of this earth and the God of heaven. The war which was waged in heaven has been transferred to the earth, and it is now being waged by the hosts of error and darkness against God and truth; and the conflict will not cease until sin is vanquished and this earth is fully redeemed from the power of the adversary and from the misrule and oppression which have so long exercised power over the earth. (May 6, 1866, JD 11:227-29)

Supremacy of earth contended for. It is the supremacy of this earth that is being contended for. Satan is determined that God shall not have this earth and that He shall not reign here; he is determined in this, and if he could he would shed the blood of every man and woman on the face of the earth rather than it should go into the hands of God. All those who are connected with him would, if they could, stay every man that stands in their pathway.

The more faithful a man is in the cause of God the more the hatred of the wicked is manifested against him. . . . Hence, a people who seek to establish the cause of righteousness, to build temples, to restore the authority of God, will be hated to the death, and thus the prophecy will be fulfilled concerning them. . . .

No peace on Satan's terms. This warfare will not cease. . . . God forbid that there should be peace on such terms as our enemies would have us make; for peace means surrendering the Kingdom of God, surrendering and giving up by the servants of God that which they have undertaken to do, namely, to restore the reign of righteousness and truth upon the earth, the reign of God and of heaven. . . . When we are ready to surrender these things, then there will be peace, but it will be the peace of hell, it will be the triumph of Satan and the destruction of everything that is pure and holy and godlike upon the face of the earth. (Sept. 2, 1883, JD 24:375-76)

Satan to have greater power over world. As the nations grow harder in their hearts, persistently rejecting the message of mercy which God has sent onto them by his servants, Satan will have more power over them, because the Spirit of God will not always strive with man; and he will endeavor to rouse them to more terrible acts of violence and to the manifestation of more malignant and devilish hatred of the Work of God and those who are connected with it than he has ever done before.

The fires of persecution are now smoldering and seem to the inexperienced as though they were all but extinguished, but a blast from the foul fiend who has sought from the beginning to destroy the righteous can enkindle them again, and they would burn as fiercely as ever. For this, as Latter-day Saints and as servants of God, we must be prepared. Our only safety lies in diligently keeping the commandments of Him who has hitherto been our protector and in living such a life of holiness as will meet with His favour and approbation. (Jan. 3, 1863, MS 25:9)

Power of Satan restrained. In the very beginning of this work Joseph told the Saints, left on record the statement, as to how it would be received by the children of men—the hatred with which it would be met, the violence that would be manifested towards it, the various troubles through which it would have to pass. All these things he told, by his prophetic voice, as though their history had been written, as though they had taken place. . . .

Wonderfully has the providence of our God been exhibited in the care exercised over His growing Church and His increasing people. . . . Had Satan been permitted to wreak his vengeance upon the Church in the commencement, it could easily have been extinguished in blood. Had the same power that was exercised against the Church in the days of Nauvoo, when the blood of our Prophet and Patriarch, and our present President, drenched the soil of Illinois, had that same spirit been permitted to have wreaked its vengeance upon the Church in the early days, it could, with no more excitement than was then raised, have completely extirpated the Priesthood from the face of the earth.

But God, as I have said, in His wonderful providence, restrained the wrath of the wicked in the early days of the Church. . . .

Opposition in proportion to growth of Church. There was a limit to its exercise over the Church in its weak condition. But as power increased, as the gifts of God were manifested, as the keys of the Priesthood were revealed unto the children of men, so did the wrath of the wicked, so did the violence of mobs, so did the combinations that were formed with the object of destroying the work of God increase in their strength and in their numbers.

As the work progressed, so did the spirit of opposition progress, one keeping pace, apparently, with the other, and there is a wise purpose in this when we contemplate the great destiny that awaits this people. We can see the wisdom and the purpose of our God in permitting persecution to keep pace with the growth and the advancement of the work. It is just as necessary that we should be developed in our faith as anything else connected with the work of our God. If it were not for this, we could not become the people that God designs; we could not fulfill the destiny that He has in store for us. . . .

All nations to be arrayed against Saints. As the Church increases, so will the opposition to its increase, until it will extend itself beyond the confines of our own nation to other lands and to other nations until, in fact, the whole earth that has not received or will not receive the Gospel of the Son of God, the message of salvation, of which we are the unworthy bearers . . . will array themselves against the work of our God and exert their power to destroy it, as a township did, as a county did, as a state did, as the United States are now doing, and then the work of our God will rise in its sublimity, in its strength, in its God-like power and assume its place, its rightful position among the nations of the earth. (Oct. 5, 1884, JD 25:320-22)

Persecution retards growth of Church. The writer remembers hearing the Prophet Joseph speak upon the subject of religious liberty. He did not agree with the view which some entertain that the Church of Christ would thrive best in the midst of persecution. His view, as he expressed it, was that if the Church could be favored with full religious liberty and have a fair field for the spread of its principles, it would grow much faster than it would where severe measures were used against it and mobocracy waged war against it. (May 1, 1896, JI 31:273)

It is true that the persecutions we have endured have given us a worldwide name and have been overruled by the Almighty for our good. They have been productive of invaluable experience to the people who have endured them; but have they made a single individual love the truth and embrace it who would not have loved it without them? Has truth been rendered more attractive, or found a lodgment more willingly in the hearts of the people, because of the persecutions its adherents have endured?

Persecution, so far as the Latter-day Saints are concerned, has been attended with some good results; a more rapid spread of our principles, however, is not one of them. Had mankind been willing to have received the Gospel as it has been revealed by the Lord, without manifesting an opposition and hatred thereto, it would long ere this have covered the earth. But men choose not to have it so, and they have opposed and persecuted. This action of theirs the Lord has overruled for the benefit of those who have embraced the Gospel. (Oct. 19, 1861, MS 23:676)

The fate of our persecutors. One of the most remarkable facts connected with the history of the Latter-day Saints is the fate of those who have pitted themselves against the work and have sought to destroy the people. We have had presidents, governors, judges, and other prominent and noted men, who have undertaken the task of "solving the Mormon problem" by violence, and the framing of various devices and schemes, having in view the overthrow of the liberties of the people. But which of them has prospered? Which has achieved fame or credit? It is true that some have obtained some notoriety for the time being. This was not because of any superior merit which they possessed, but because their names have been connected with that of the Mormons. This notoriety has of course been only temporary. Everyone has sunk into dishonor and oblivion. (Feb. 17, 1890, MS 52:98-99)
