Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 28

Mormonism—The Leaven of the Earth

The Spirit of God bears witness. The Spirit of God bears testimony to the things of God, and there would be no difficulty in convincing the inhabitants of the earth of the truth of the principles believed in by the Latter-day Saints were it not for tradition and the prejudices which exist in men's minds in relation to the truth. . . .

When men hear it proclaimed that God has restored the everlasting Gospel and they have a desire in their hearts to comprehend the truth, there is a spirit accompanies the testimony of the servants of God which bears witness to their spirit that these things are true. But immediately another spirit steps in, and the reflection arises in the minds of many: "What will my parents, relatives or friends say? What will the world say if I believe this doctrine? There is ignominy associated with belief in these doctrines. There is shame to be encountered if I go forward and join a people so despised as these. What will men say of me? In what light shall I be viewed?" These reflections arise, and the testimony of the truth is extinguished in the hearts of many.

Great moral courage required. It requires, therefore, on the part of people now, as in ancient days, great strength of mind, great moral courage, and great love of the truth, an overpowering desire to obtain salvation, and the Spirit of God to aid them, in order to enable people to receive the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence it is that so few, comparatively speaking, in every age have received the truth. . . .

It has been so easy for men to reject the truth and flow with the current; it has been so easy for men to spread their sails, catch the popular breeze and glide before it; and it has been so difficult for men to stem the tide of opposition which they have always had to contend with when they have embraced the truth. (Oct. 6, 1873, JD 16:242-43)

A request for fairness. We do not expect that all men will view our faith and formulae through our eyes. Neither do we condemn or anathematize those who honestly differ with us or actively oppose our doctrines and practices. We claim religious liberty, the freedom of speech and of the press, and the right to combat what we believe to be error by all legitimate means, and we frankly accord this freedom to others. But we do object to misrepresentation and defamation of our principles and character and the lives and objects of our leading men. We do object to articles and sermons against certain views and actions attributed to us without any reason in truth. . . .

We are anxious to have "Mormonism" exposed. . . . We only ask that what they hold up to the world as our doctrines really are our doctrines, and not some ridiculous fabrication designed to deceive the public and injure us. (May 31, 1879, MS 41:387)

A social phenomenon. Our acts show that there is a power and an influence with us that the inhabitants of the earth elsewhere do not possess. We are looked upon as a social phenomenon in the earth; we are diverse from every other people; and our community is the object of attention and I may say of respect that its numbers do not entitle it to. Men from afar cannot cross the continent without coming to visit the Latter-day Saints. . . . What is it that distinguishes us from our fellows? . . . That distinction is, we believe in revelation. We profess to be guided by revelation. We are peculiar, when compared with the rest of the world, because all our movements are under divine guidance. . . .

Gospel to spread with increased rapidity. The hardest thing in building up a people is to gain a foothold. We have gained this. . . . We have achieved a position that will render our future progress more rapid than in years past and gone. I fully expect to see the progress of this work in the future more rapid than it has been in the past. I see the providence of God laboring to bring this about. Not to build up a people distinct from all the rest of the earth, not to build up some little, narrow sect or denomination, but this work and Gospel is to embrace within its fold all earth's children, every son and daughter of God on the earth. That is its mission, and it will accomplish it. But it will spread with increased rapidity from this time forth.

The foundation and corner-stones have been laid in tears, blood and in much sorrow, but they are laid firmly, cemented by the sufferings, toils, faith and endurance of this people . . . ; and I trust that they are laid so deep that they will never be torn up, shaken or disturbed, and that upon them will a superstructure be reared of such strength, beauty, and symmetry that it will be the joy and pride of the whole earth. . . .

A worldwide influence. God has given to this people qualities which, in the contest of races, must tell. There are qualities connected with the Latter-day Saints, and principles connected with their system that, persecute and crush them out as you may, as long as the men live who bear the authority, and so long as the principles have a believer and practicer in the world, must live, survive and have influence in the midst of the earth and upon the populations thereof. . . .

The people . . . will continue to rise and increase in strength and power by the practice of those qualities which God has given unto us through revelation, until their influence will be felt . . . throughout the length and breadth of the earth, and thus will the sayings of the Prophets be fulfilled. . . .

World attracted to the Saints. Do you think we could live in any spot on the earth without attracting attention? Do you think that a people such as we are could go to any land, or into the greatest desert on the earth, and live there any length of time without attracting the attention of the world as much as we do now? Why, the thing is impossible. When we came to this region, it was as much out of the way as any place on the earth could be. But after coming here we demonstrated that the soil of these valleys, by being watered artificially, would produce crops; and the result of our experiment, for experiment it may be called, is that all this interior basin, formerly looked upon as an irreclaimable desert, is a choice land. The world once convinced of this, and population came to us, and the railroad came across the continent, and we find ourselves right in the center of the great transcontinental highway. If we were to go into any other land it would be the same—we should attract population and wealth, and the eyes of mankind would be directed towards us. (Jan. 8, 1871, JD 14:28-30)

Contact with world desirable. Those who are most familiar with the people know full well that whatever our peculiarities may be, we are not opposed to progress. . . .

When we came here, we sought isolation. We were utterly sick of everything we had been brought in contact with. We had suffered and were glad of an isolated retreat such as these mountains afforded, where we could dwell in peace and quietness for a season. We occupy a different position to that which we have ever occupied before. We desire to be more known. We have no desire to secrete ourselves, or to hide ourselves, or to hide ourselves from public gaze and scrutiny, and from contact with outside influences.

There was a time when, in our weak condition, we might have feared the results, but that day is past, and I trust forever. We court contact today, if it be of the right kind. We do not court nor invite aggression; healthy contact, legitimate acquaintance we desire. We want to be better known, and when we are better known, these absurd prejudices and misapprehensions which prevail now through the public mind respecting the "Mormons" and the people of Utah will be dissipated.

We may differ from them on many points; we may have our peculiarities of religion; but there is a standpoint, or platform on which they can meet with us, a common platform on which we can stand with the rest of our fellow-citizens. . . . (June 11, 1868, MS 30:500-501)

I would not give much for a religion which would not stand contact with the world. . . . If there is anything superior to that which we believe outside of our religion, let it come; we will welcome it. We are wedded to our religion only so far as it is true. So far as it is true we are wedded to it, and as such we have espoused it, as such we maintain it, and as such we hope to die believing in its tenets and practising them; but if any one else has something better let him come along. We have sacrificed enough for truth to show that we love it. . . .

A city set on a hill. Jesus said to his ancient disciples, "Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid." (Matthew 5:14.) The eyes of the world were upon them. And in our day we behold the same effect. The Latter-day Saints and their work have been like a city set on a hill. They have attracted the gaze of the nations, and that, too, without any especial effort on their part to make themselves conspicuous.

The clamor of our enemies has greatly contributed to this. What do their attacks accomplish for us? They advertise us and give us an importance to which we could not attain otherwise. Every effort that is made to destroy this work or to embarrass its onward progress or to deprive its leaders of their lives or of their liberties only enhances its importance in the midst of the earth, gives it publicity, preaches the Gospel, attracts attention, causes men and women to think, to reason and to investigate what it is about this people that creates so much excitement. (Oct. 11, 1874, JD 17:261)

Every Latter-day Saint who is in the path of his duty, whether abroad among the people preaching the principles of "Mormonism" orally, or at home in the Valleys of Utah building cities and temples, or leaving the land of his or her nativity emigrating to the mountains, or engaged in any of the fields of labor assigned to us to fill, is disseminating a knowledge of "Mormonism" and is bearing so loud and powerful a testimony to its truth that the world will be left without excuse for rejecting it. (Aug. 3, 1856, WS 189-90)

"In" but not "of" the world. It is true that we are in the world and must have association to some extent with its people. But it is not necessary that we should break down every barrier and wall of separation which the Lord has raised between us and them and become one with them. It is not necessary we should intermarry with them—give our daughters unto their sons nor take their daughters unto our sons. It is not necessary that we should foster and support them and give the power they seek for. It is not necessary that we should bow down to their gods or worship at their shrines. They who do these things are not friends of Zion; they are its enemies. (Jan. 1, 1887, JI 22:12)

Testing the world. The mission of the Gospel, or what is commonly called "Mormonism," appears to be to test men and nations and institutions, as nothing else will. It has the effect to draw to the surface, from the hidden resources of the human heart, manifestations that would, under other circumstances, remain entirely concealed. Every Latter-day Saint who has had any experience in the world has seen this illustrated. People whom they thought very honest, very truth-loving and very sincere have proved, when the Gospel has been brought in contact with them, to be the very opposite. People who have borne a high character for loving God, for believing the Bible and for a willingness to obey the truth have often been proved to be rank hypocrites when the Gospel has been brought to them. Men who have stood high in society, and who have had a fine reputation, have shown themselves to be utterly unworthy of confidence and to be enemies of truth. The Gospel has brought to the surface the true features of every character and has shown how many professions are false and hypocritical.

This has been the case in thousands of instances in the world where the Elders have gone carrying the Gospel. Men and women who received the truth gladly when it was preached to them and who joined the Church hastened with delight to their relatives and acquaintances to carry to them the glad message and were astonished at the reception they have had from many of these. Instead of being received with favor for carrying the truth, they have often been treated with scorn and contempt, and their relatives and friends have turned their backs upon them and shown hatred towards them. In this way many thousands of the Latter-day Saints have been disappointed. But this has not been without some profit for, by the means of the Gospel, they have been able to get a knowledge of human nature and an insight into the true characters of people whom they had previously known for years or, perhaps, all their lives and whom they had supposed they knew perfectly well. (Mar. 15, 1890, JI 25:162-63)

Destined to fill whole earth. This great work which God our Eternal Father has founded is destined—hear it all ye Latter-day Saints; hear it all ye ends of the earth—this great work is destined to fill the whole earth. It is the work that the Prophets spoke about. It is the work that they described in glorious language. The predictions of the holy Prophets upon this subject are the most glorious to be found in the volume of Scripture—we refer to the work of the last days—small as it is in the beginning, insignificant, destitute of influence, destitute of worldly advantages, it is a power, nevertheless, that will continue to grow; it will continue to increase; it will continue to spread, until from pole to pole, from the center to the circumference of our globe, in every land, the power and influence of this great work which our Father in heaven has laid the foundation of, will be felt. (Feb. 24, 1889, MS 51:194)

Our strength must be proven. We are bound to be lifted up. You cannot conceal us; it is impossible. We have got to stand contact with the world, and if our religion will not stand such contact, then it must succumb. But it will not. It will stand the test; it will pass through the ordeal purer and better, and men will recognize its beauty. Our destiny is to be brought in contact with the world. God has predicted it. We may hide ourselves in a corner, but God will bring us out to the light; we have to come in contact with the world to prove our strength, to prove what is in us and to learn many things, the knowledge of which we need. (June 12, 1881, JD 22:179-83)

Shall we be overthrown? There is nothing plainer to my mind than this, that if the Latter-day Saints become luxurious and extravagant, if they love the world and forsake their former purity, if they forsake their frugality and temperance, and the principles which God has revealed unto them, and by the practice of which they are today the people that they are, we shall be overthrown as others have been overthrown. But I do not took for any such result, for I believe firmly in the prediction of Daniel that this work, when established shall not be given into the hands of another people; it shall stand forever, and there will be means and agencies used and brought to bear on the minds of the people to prevent such a catastrophe as that to which I have alluded—to prevent the downfall of the system and the overthrow of those connected with it and to prevent the victory of that which is evil over that which is good, holy and pure. (Oct. 8, 1872, JD 15:206)

The leavening effect of the Gospel. The ideas that have been propagated by the Latter-day Saints, though they have not converted as many to our faith as they should have done, have had a most wonderful influence upon the religious, the philosophic and the scientific world. Ideas that men now believe in and receive readily, Joseph Smith was persecuted and denounced for proclaiming. And while there are millions who do not believe that he was a Prophet of God, or that the principles he taught were revealed from God, there is no mistaking the fact that his teachings, that the truths he advanced, and the ideas which he disseminated, have had a wonderful effect upon the human mind throughout Christendom. . . .

Although men and women have not become Latter-day Saints, nor have the mass of mankind received the religious truths in their entirety, as they were taught by Joseph, and as they have been taught by those who succeeded him, yet there has been a very visible and a marked advancement by men and women all over the world wherever the Elders of this Church have traveled.

So, it is not in the baptism of people; it is not in the gathering of the people together alone that we are accomplishing great results; but it is in teaching the world the principles that God has revealed to us and gradually indoctrinating the mind of mankind, to some extent at least, uplifting them from the prejudices and the darkness and the ignorance in which they have been enshrouded to a higher plane, to breathe a purer and a freer spirit of inquiry in religious and scientific thought. (Apr. 7, 1878, JD 20:2)

Gospel truths being accepted. Simple, unadorned truth will win its way. Its onward march, as long as its believers and advocates live, is irresistible. Misrepresentation, falsehood and error flee from before its majestic presence and hide themselves in the recesses where it has not penetrated. . . .

By the revelations of the Lord through His Prophets a flood of light has poured forth. As men reason upon these things and become familiar with them, prejudice melts and the truth prevails. Men accept the new and truthful ideas but will not acknowledge the source whence it comes. . . .

Elders of the Church will yet be told that the bestowal of the gifts upon those who repent and are baptized as Latter-day Saints is no evidence that this is the Church of Christ, for miracles are wrought by people of other churches. By this the hearts of the people will be hardened against the truth. The Prophet Joseph said that the devil, in order to deceive the people and to cause them to reject the work of God, would work many miracles, and his followers would even cause fire to apparently come down from heaven.

It is very remarkable that the people of Christendom are gradually adopting the truths which the Prophet Joseph was inspired of the Lord to teach. Yet they will not acknowledge that he was a Prophet. . . . There were very many truths taught by the Prophet Joseph that the world kicked against and persecuted him and the Church for believing. But, wonderful to tell, there is scarcely one of these that is not believed in now in some form by thousands of people outside of this Church. They still reject the means by which they were obtained, and will not acknowledge the Priesthood, but they believe, in a certain way, the principles. And those which they do not believe are gradually working their way into notice and favor. The world is following the track of this Church. Slowly, perhaps, but surely it is adopting our thoughts and views. They are not conscious of this themselves, and the Latter-day Saints only perceive it when they compare the present with the past and see the progress that has been made. (Feb. 15, 1883, JI 18:56-57)

To revolutionize the world. "Mormonism" is destined to revolutionize the world. But how many are there who realize the truth of this saying? Some, no doubt, but not nearly all who have heard it, and yet that very revolution is going on, and they are helping to promote it; it commenced many years ago—the very moment the first revelation was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

But to revolutionize a world, with religions, political and social systems, the outgrowth of nearly six thousand years' experience is a slow process, and though "Mormonism" possesses a power belonging to nothing else on earth, and that nothing of merely human origin ever can possess, still its Almighty Author acts on natural and rational principles and does not seek by means alone of thunder, lightning, famine, earthquake, or other dread manifestations of superhuman power, to force or arouse His creatures to accept His institutions or to obey His laws.

For this reason the Kingdom of God upon the earth will not be characterized by a wonderfully rapid growth, like a mushroom; but, grappling ever with, and never ceasing the strife until it is victor over, error and evil of every kind, its foundations will be securely laid in the hearts and affections of those who love and live by truth and righteousness only. (Oct. 26, 1872, JI 7:172)

A marvelous work and wonder. It has been said very truthfully that God and one man are a great majority. God is doing a marvelous work and a wonder. He interposes and confounds the schemes of the wicked and controls by His invisible and irresistible agencies in such a manner as to accomplish His purposes. . . . There are powers unseen by mortal eye engaged in this contest. Behind this handful of people there stands, like a wall of living fire, the power of God. His command has gone forth. He has made promises. All heaven with its glorious array of mighty angels and just men made perfect are engaged in carrying out His purposes.

On the other side are the powers of darkness. They cannot withstand the almighty power of God. They are the weaker side, though according to mortal vision they are infinitely the stronger. Step by step, they must retreat until finally they will be overwhelmed and destroyed. Latter-day Saints, therefore, can take courage and press forward. They are the winning side and must eventually triumph. (Aug. 15, 1883, JI 18:246)
