Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 29

The Church of God—The Kingdom of God

Only two churches. After The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, there were only two churches upon the earth. They were known respectively as the Church of the Lamb of God and Babylon. The various organizations which are called churches throughout Christendom, though differing in their creeds and organizations, have one common origin. They all belong to Babylon. God is not the founder of them, yet there are many sincere people who belong to them. These the Elders of the Church are commanded to warn, and they are commanded to gather out. The Spirit of the Lord moves upon the people who will listen to His servants to leave Babylon and join the Church of the Lamb. (Apr. 1, 1882, JI 17:104)

The Kingdom of God—a distinction. We are asked, "Is the Church of God and the Kingdom of God the same organization?". . . The Kingdom of God is a separate organization from the Church of God. There may be men acting as officers in the Kingdom of God who will not be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. . . .

The Kingdom of God when established will not be for the protection of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints alone but for the protection of all men, whatever their religious views or opinions may be. Under its rule no one will be permitted to overstep the proper bounds or to interfere with the rights of others. (Mar. 1, 1896, JI 31:140)

We have been taught from the beginning this important principle that the Church of God is distinct from the Kingdom of God. Joseph gave us the pattern before he died. He gave his brethren an example that has not been forgotten up to this day. He impressed it upon them that men, not members of the Church, could be members of the Kingdom that the Lord will set up when He reigns. He picked out the youngest among them and told them to be sure and remember this. In the minds of all of us who understand this matter there is a clear distinction between the Church in its ecclesiastical capacity and that which may be termed the government of God in its political capacity. (Apr. 5, 1897, DW 54:675)

You well-informed Latter-day Saints know that there are two powers which God has restored in these the last days. One is the Church of God; the other is the Kingdom of God. A man may belong to the Kingdom of God and yet not be a member of the Church of God. In the Kingdom of God, using it in a political sense, there may be heathens and Pagans and Mohammedans and Latter-day Saints and Presbyterians and Episcopalians and Catholics and men of every creed. Will they legislate for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints alone? Will the laws that they enact protect us alone and not protect others? No! Why? Because God is the Father of the Latter-day Saints as well as of every human being. . . .

To protect all with equal rights. When He establishes His Kingdom, it will protect all in their equal rights; I as a Latter-day Saint will not have power to trample on my fellow-man who may not be orthodox in my opinion because I am a Latter-day Saint; nor will my fellow-man to whom I am heterodox have the power to trample upon me. Does not that look right? That is the kind of kingdom we have to contend for; that is the kind of kingdom we have to establish, and it is already provided for in the Constitution given unto us by God. (Apr. 6, 1879, JD 20:204)

A cardinal doctrine of the Church. We have always looked upon civil government as entirely distinct from church government; and our views upon this subject ought to be so well known as not to leave room for accusation even. It has been proclaimed by Joseph Smith; it has been proclaimed by Brigham Young; it has been proclaimed by John Taylor; it has been proclaimed by Wilford Woodruff, and all the leading Elders associated with them, that God intended to organize a Kingdom on the earth that should not be composed of Latter-day Saints alone, but that members of that Kingdom should belong to other religious denominations, as well as to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This has been a cardinal doctrine of this Church—that is, with the Elders who have had experience and knowledge concerning that which is to come and that which the Prophet Joseph believed in and taught. . . . (Oct. 6, 1889, DW 39:592-93)

Separation of church and state. There is no necessity that there should be a blending of church and state. There is no necessity for this; it is not wise to blend church and state. I do not believe that as members of the Church we should pass decrees or laws that would bind other people. I have no such belief, never did have. I do not think I ever shall have. But, because a man is a member of a church and because a man is a servant of God and because a man bears the Priesthood of the Son of God, he should not be prevented because of that from acting in any civil capacity, from taking part in civil matters and executing the laws that are enacted by civil authority.

Kingdom of God a civil power. The province of the Kingdom of God that Daniel saw, the Kingdom that would be established in the last days, is to be as a shield to the Latter-day Saints, to be as a bulwark around about that Church. . . . The Kingdom of God when it shall prevail in the earth—as it will do—will be the civil power which will shield and protect the Church of Christ against every attack, against every unlawful aggression, against every attempt to deprive it of its legitimate rights. (Nov. 20, 1884, JD 26:12)

Ambassadors to nations. The Elders of Israel are now ambassadors to the nations from the court of heaven bearing the Gospel of salvation to the children of men; but the time will come when they will be called to act in a different ambassadorial capacity. The nations are not going to be all destroyed at once, as many have imagined, but they are going to stand and continue to some extent with their governments; the Kingdom of God is not all the time to continue its present theological character alone, but it is to become a political power, known and recognized by the powers of the earth; and you, my brethren, may have to be sent forth to represent that power as its accredited agents . . . and it is necessary that you should understand how to deport yourselves in every circle you might be called to move in. (Jan. 3, 1862, MS 24:103)

Kingdom of God to assume leadership. The Kingdom of God will not always occupy the humble position which it now does; neither will it continue to be confined to its present circumscribed limits. Many years will not pass away before it will take its place among the nations of the earth and assume a leading position in and exert a predominating influence upon the social, religious and political affairs of the world and when its disciples and ministers and representatives will not be treated with that contumely and contempt with which they are at present received.

In order that they may be prepared for this state of things and keep pace with the gradual but steady progress of the Kingdom, the Lord has said to his servants, "Seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) And again, "study and learn, and become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." (D&C 90:15.)

We can readily perceive from these brief quotations, as well as from many other instructions which we have received upon this subject, that although the Lord has called "upon the weak things of the world, those who are unlearned and despised, to thrash the nations by the power of [His] Spirit" (D&C 35:13), yet, he does not design them to continue weak and unlearned and despised; but, on the contrary, He has commanded them to seek wisdom and knowledge and to study to make themselves acquainted with the manners, customs, languages and laws of the inhabitants of the different countries of the earth.

Elders to represent Kingdom of God. The wisdom of pursuing such a course as this is already apparent to those Elders who have been sent abroad to proclaim the Gospel to the various nations of the earth; and it will be made still more evident, in a few years, when the Elders of Israel are called to go forth as the accredited representatives of the Kingdom of God and will necessarily have to move in what are called "the higher circles" of society. That time will certainly come; and it is easy to perceive how necessary it will be, for all who may be called upon to fill those responsible positions, to be possessed of general intelligence and cultivated minds, combined with a familiar acquaintance with the laws and customs of the people among whom they may be sojourning, in order that they may fill their appointed missions with honor to the government they represent and with pleasure and credit to themselves.

Besides, the time will also come when the servants of God, in possession of the Holy Priesthood, will be called upon to go forth and preside over the various communities, tribes and nations of the earth, and to administer the laws of Zion in their midst, in righteousness, justice and mercy. This they could not do if destitute of a knowledge of the past history, laws, customs, habits, etc., of the people; all these things must necessarily be taken into account in judging and governing a people righteously and wisely. (Sept. 26, 1863, MS 25:616-17)

Building the Kingdom of God. We have not come out of our present location for purely spiritual performances but to lay the foundation of a system that should stand forever, that should be connected with man's existence here upon the earth, both his spiritual and his temporal existence, a work that should affect everything connected with man and his relationship to his fellow-man. . . .

The Lord is gathering out from every nation, kindred, tongue and people a community out of which He intends to form for Himself a Kingdom, not an earthly kingdom but a Kingdom over which He will preside in the heavens, a Kingdom that should be based upon purely republican principles upon the earth and, therefore, not a kingdom in the strict sense of the word, so far as its earthly location is concerned, but a republic. And for this purpose, as the Latter-day Saints have believed from the beginning, the Lord raised up the founders of our nation and inspired them—George Washington and others—to do the work that they accomplished in laying the foundation of a form of government upon this land under which that Kingdom that He should establish should grow and flourish and extend itself without interfering in the least degree with the genius of the government. (Apr. 6, 1878, JD 20:81)

Working to further the Kingdom. It does not matter what we are doing or where we are labouring—in the adobe yard, in the canyons, preaching the Gospel or doing anything else that God through his servants directs us to perform—if we labour faithfully, we are contributing to the accomplishment of a great and good work and are really doing much more than we think and labouring to bring to pass all those predictions that have been delivered respecting the generation in which we live. . . .

If we labour in the way and in the position in which the authorities have put us and directed us, we may rest assured that we are labouring for the accomplishment of all that which is required to be done by our Heavenly Father, and we are laying up treasures in heaven; and although we may not do as much here as we suppose we ought, there is an eternity before us in which we can labour . . . and we are to press forward until we attain the fulness of our desire.

It is so with the wicked in one sense—with the enemies of truth. All that they do contributes to the rolling forth of this great and mighty work. (Sept. 9, 1860, JD 8:303)

Wrong-doing builds Satan's kingdom. Many do not think, even after they have obtained a knowledge in regard to the work of God, that every time they give way to the suggestions of Satan, and hearken not to the still small voice of the Spirit of the Lord, they virtually array themselves on the side of Satan, the arch-enemy of God. They do not think, when they disobey the counsel of the officers whom God has placed in His Kingdom, that they encourage, build up and give comfort to the rebel against God, the prince and power of darkness, and become his aiders and abettors in endeavoring to pull down the Kingdom of God. Yet this is the case.

Every man who giveth place to the adversary or his suggestions in his heart, or who giveth heed to him in any way, helps the usurper to perpetuate his power and prevents, in proportion to his disobedience, the consummation which God, angels and all holy and just men, both in heaven and on earth, are laboring to bring about. He is Satan's subject, because he is governed by him; and if he should not expel him with his influences from his heart, he will have power over him, not only here but hereafter. (June 5, 1857, WS 425-26)

All good actions to bear fruit. There never was a man who did a good action from the time of Adam down to the present time but that good action and its effects have lived, and they have contributed to the great work of human redemption. There is nothing, my brethren, that you have done or said, if directed aright, and in the discharge of your duties in the Priesthood, but has tended to the accomplishment of God's purpose. Whether you speak, write, or do anything else for the building up of the Kingdom, all will result, at some time, in the accomplishment of that which you desire. The seed you have sown will grow and blossom.

There is no Elder in this Church—no matter where he is, nor how small or limited his sphere of labor may be—but what all he does, if properly directed, will tend to consummate the purposes of God. How many of you have preached over and over again and, comparatively speaking, have done but little in the way of bringing souls to the knowledge of the Truth. But the time will come, my brethren, when every word of truth, every testimony for the Truth you have uttered will be vividly remembered by those to whom you have spoken. You sow the seed, and, being eternal truth, it is imperishable and as undying as the men themselves are. People may reject the offer of salvation you make to them and may disregard your warnings, but every word you have uttered will be distinctly remembered at some future day by them. . . . In the depths of sorrow, misery, and, it may be, despair in which they may be involved hereafter, their minds will range over everything they have ever heard, and the words and testimonies of the truth you have declared, and probably thought fruitlessly because they fell unheeded, may be the means of bringing them forth to life, liberty and light.

We poor mortals are entirely too narrow in our conceptions of the nature of the Gospel. You have never given utterance to an expression but what will have an influence upon your lives; and the testimonies you bear concerning Joseph and the Work of God will be recorded in heaven and live eternally—coeval with ourselves—and those who hear your words will, themselves, be judged by them. . . .

All carry a spirit and influence. As every good thing we do tends to promote the cause of God, so everything that we perform that is unworthy of our positions and callings will go in the opposite direction. If you could see yourselves, you would find that there is not one of you but what carry a spirit and influence with you—a spirit and influence, whether good or evil, which can be sensibly felt by all who come in contact with you, especially if they have the gift of discernment. Did you ever feel, when you were in the presence of people who possessed a bad spirit, uncomfortable and an unwillingness to associate with such? And have you not felt how much more in accordance with your feelings and your own influence was the society of those who possessed a good spirit? The spirits are just as palpable to the understanding as men's words. (Dec. 31, 1863, MS 26:114-16)

Gospel worthy of our undivided attention. It is literally impossible for any man to remain a member of the Church of Christ who does not continually regard his religion and its requirements as matters of paramount importance. They may cling to it for a while; but sooner or later, unless they repent, they will be shaken off and left behind. If the Saints, therefore, wish to continue to be identified with the people of God and to progress as they progress, they must live in strict obedience to all the commandments of the Lord. . . .

The Gospel of the Son of God is either worthy of our sole and undivided devotion, or it is not worthy of a thought. If the Saints have the knowledge they ought to have relative to it, there will be no half-hearted feelings about it; they will feel like engaging in it with every faculty of their mind. (Nov. 22, 1856, WS 253-54)

Membership in Church should be valued. A standing in the Church is not viewed as of very great moment by many people. They think too lightly of it, and the line of distinction between those who are members of the Church and those who have lost their fellowship is not drawn with sufficient plainness to impress the people concerning it. This is especially the case with many young people. They cannot perceive as they should do the great difference between a membership in the Church and being outside of the Church. Where this state of feeling exists and men and women, or boys and girls, are indifferent concerning their standing, they are liable to take steps that may endanger their fellowship and be a means of losing their connection with the Church. It is this indifference that frequently causes young people to lose their standing, and they take no particular pains to avoid the evil consequences which follow a course of life that is improper.

Apostasy a dreadful crime. Ought not the lesson to be impressed upon every heart, so that all will shun the commission of acts that will endanger their standing in the Church of Christ? Apostasy is a dreadful crime. No matter who it is that apostatizes from the truth, breaks the commandments of God, violates the covenants that he or she has made with the Almighty and denies the faith, it is a dreadful crime. It cannot be glossed over; it cannot be made light of; it is a serious offense, upon which God has set the seal of His condemnation. Children should be taught this in their early life. The mother, when she gathers her children around her knee and teaches them to pray, should teach them to pray that they may be preserved in the truth, that they may be kept from sin, that they may be enabled to maintain the faith; and she should impress upon them the greatness of the blessing they enjoy in being permitted to be members of the Church and to be in covenant with their Father in Heaven.

If proper pains were taken in teaching the rising generation these truths, our children would dread apostasy; they would shun the commission of sin and would view with horror anything that would be likely to endanger their standing in the Church of Christ. They would avoid quarrels; they would suffer wrong rather than to do wrong, because in so doing they would be more likely to preserve the fellowship of their brethren and sisters. This feeling would grow with their growth and strengthen with their strength; and if it ever should become necessary for them to face death for their religion, they would do so, if not gladly, at least with resolute determination rather than deny the faith.

Our greatest honor. Every member of the Church—young and old—should be taught to appreciate the fact that to be admitted to covenant with God, to have communion of the Holy Ghost, to have the fellowship of the Saints, is the greatest honor and blessing that can be bestowed upon mortal man; and their daily prayers should contain thanksgiving to God that they have been permitted to enjoy this exalted privilege. (Jan. 15, 1895, JI 30:55-56)

Transgressors to be cut off. Men who are doing wrong, by being dealt with, may sometimes see their folly and repent of it; but if they are left to themselves, they may go from bad to worse until they have gone too far for repentance. Besides, the example of such characters may lead others astray. . . .

We know that many are tender-hearted about their relatives, their friends and their acquaintances. They dislike to deal with them and to expose them; but this is mistaken kindness and always results badly. If the man who drinks liquor and gets drunk be taken in hand in time, he may be induced to repent and lead a new life; but if permitted to go on, he may go until he indulges in acts of violence and perhaps becomes a murderer. Then which of the shepherds will be responsible for permitting him to remain with the flock and be called by the holy name of our Master? What a reflection for a Teacher! What a reflection for a Bishop, if a man, through his neglect of duty, goes step by step on the downward road until he stains his hands in innocent blood and stands a murderer before God! Every Teacher and every Bishop and every President of Stake and every Apostle should take warning. . . .

The officer who permits these things to exist in the Church, God will not hold guiltless. (July 1, 1886, JI 21:200)

Excommunicated members lose blessings. Those who are severed from the Church lose all the rights and privileges which they enjoyed as members of the Church. . . .

He has forfeited, by his misconduct and suffering himself to be severed from the body of Christ, all the blessings pronounced upon him in holy places and can lay no claim to any promises of that character. . . . Every blessing, every promise, every power that is made unto the faithful is withdrawn from and forfeited by the transgressor who loses his standing in the Church. . . .

Any man whose case has been acted upon in that way by the legal authority of the Church can only obtain restoration of those promises and blessings by doing his first works over again—by repenting truly and sincerely, confessing his sins, being baptized and confirmed a member of the Church; and to have the blessings of the temple and the promises which he may have received through its ordinances in full force upon him, he should have them confirmed again upon him by one having the authority. (Oct. 15, 1891, JI 26:622-23)
