Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 30

True and False Religion

Morality and religion. Occasionally we find people who disclaim having anything to do with religion; at the same time they profess to believe in the practice of what are known as good moral principles. Such people do not seem to understand that morality is religion—that the Gospel is but a system for the development of moral principles. Without morality religion is but a useless form, and without the aid of the ordinances of the Gospel morality cannot be brought to perfection. There is no dividing line between the laws of morality and the laws of the Gospel. The Gospel includes them all, and any system of morality which does not embrace all the principles of true religion is imperfect or incomplete.

It may be supposed that obedience to the Gospel requires the observance of practices that have no connection with morality. It is true that the Gospel inculcates ordinances and duties that seemingly are not necessary to the practice of moral principles. They appear to be arbitrary requirements. But when the philosophy of these Gospel ordinances is understood, it will be discovered that they are but necessary aids to the practice of moral principles.

Prayer for example may be regarded by some to be strictly a religious duty, having no connection with moral obligations. If prayer were only a form, this might be true. But prayer is for the purpose of obtaining Divine aid in order to more fully perform moral duties. Without the assistance of the Lord a person cannot live a strictly moral life; hence, prayer is as much a part of morality as of religion. One who lives a moral life cannot be otherwise than a religious person, at least to the extent of his obedience to what he regards as moral laws. As long as he rejects the Gospel ordinances that to him may appear to be unnecessary for moral development he will never reach that moral perfection which may be attained by those who render obedience to all the Gospel requirements. (Oct. 15, 1898, JI 33:699-700)

Religion and authority. Morality in and of itself, however skillfully and beautifully taught, is not sufficient to save mankind. . . . It is apparent that something more than a knowledge of moral precepts is necessary to save the world and to unite the people to make them one. . . . The Lord has revealed that the presence of the Holy Priesthood is necessary to accomplish this; without authority the words and ordinances of life and salvation cannot be rightfully administered, neither can mankind attain to the fullness of His Glory.

The Christian ministers of today have no more authority in this respect than the heathen teachers. . . . Belief in God and in the Savior lies at the foundation of true religion, and in that respect those who have this belief are nearer to God and to the truth than those who do not have it. But belief in God and in the Lord Jesus Christ does not alone give men the authority to officiate in the ordinances of the Gospel. That authority must come from God. It cannot be self-assumed.

Now, this is the great deficiency among these teachers of morality of which we have spoken. Many of their views are grand and, when carried out practically, ennoble men and women and help them to live comparatively pure lives. This is admirable and attended with excellent effects as far as it goes. To progress, however, in true righteousness, to be united, to have the soul filled with the light of heaven and to grow to the stature of men and women in Christ Jesus, there must be ordinances administered by those having the authority from God to administer them. (Mar. 1, 1890, JI 25:146-47)

True and false religion. The religion of Jesus is one of mercy, love and kindness. Where it prevails, the people are meek, lowly and gentle. They suffer wrong rather than do wrong. They never oppress. They never bind heavy yokes upon their fellows. Hence, in the history of our world that religion has never stood a fair chance. Its followers have always been driven to the wall. It would be so in this age also had not God promised that His Kingdom should be established and prevail over the whole earth.

In the case of false religions the very opposite of this picture is the true one. Where false religion prevails, men persecute and oppress those who are not of their own faith; they are frequently fierce, cruel, pitiless and do not feel content unless they are waging war against those who possess pure religion or who are striving to obtain a knowledge of it. The history of false religion is the history of crime and the most dreadful and shocking persecutions of men by their fellows.

Man has tried to do what God never did; God gives every man the right to worship according to the dictates of his own conscience; he is free to worship the Lord or not. But men, when filled with false religion, have not been content with this; they have sought to prescribe rules and frame religion for their fellow men, and in many instances have killed them because they would not accept them. (Apr. 1, 1871, JI 6:52)

Freedom of worship. If our belief and practice are erroneous, will they not fall before light, intelligence and truth? Truth has the Creator for its support. It is eternal as He is eternal. Give it a fair field and it will prevail. It is only error which needs the support of the Government, which requires to be bolstered up by the strong arm of power. . . .

If our doctrines are false and our practices are not what we think they are—according to the will of heaven—we shall be the sufferers and not those who do not believe or indulge in them. So long as we do not intrude upon our fellow-men or interfere with their rights and happiness, it is not their right to punish us. The punishment of false doctrines is the prerogative of the Great Creator. He has reserved that to Himself, for such deeds are an offense against His majesty, and for them He has reserved the proper punishment. . . .

The Latter-day Saints have positive views respecting the Gospel of the Son of God. They are satisfied that many doctrines taught by popular sects are false, that many practices flowing from those doctrines are contrary to the will of heaven; but what of that? Have they the right to interfere to prevent such acts of worship upon the part of their fellow-men? Certainly not. If they were vastly in the majority, and full of strong convictions upon those subjects, as they are, they would not have any such right. They might reason and teach, use moral suasion and Biblical argument, but beyond that they could not go without an offense to the great Creator, neither can others be justified in going beyond this with them.

If, as all who receive the Bible as the word of God believe, the Lord will hereafter reward and punish men and women for the deeds done in the body, is it not plain that man trenches upon His domain, when, for entertaining religious opinions and the practice of acts of worship which do not interfere with his enjoyment or his rights, he attempts to anticipate the Almighty and rewards and punishes these things at his pleasure here?

One would think that those who believe that sinners against heaven will be plunged into the lake of fire and brimstone, never by any possibility to be extricated therefrom, would be satisfied to wait until the offender died and not attempt to give him a foretaste of that torment here. But many, while loudly avowing their belief in the horrible sufferings which they describe as awaiting those who do not worship as they do, are not content to let the few short years allotted to man on the earth pass away without making those who, in their eyes, are sinners, feel their vengeance. They act as though they were afraid that, without excessive watchfulness on their part, those wicked wretches might escape the knowledge of the Lord. (1879, Review 43-46)

Extremes—the error of mankind. There is, perhaps, no error which the Saints, in common with the rest of mankind, are more liable to fall into than that of running from one extreme to the other. From the hypocritical sanctimoniousness or ignorant bigotry and fanaticism which characterize the various sects of the religious world too many are inclined to fly to the opposite extreme of irreverence and profanity of feeling if not of expression and of treating with lightness and levity the most sacred subjects connected with man's present and future happiness and exaltation—from that man-worshipping spirit, which has been the fruitful cause of so much evil in this and other countries, to one no less fraught with direful consequences, that of undervaluing, if not despising, the authority, power and dignity of the Priesthood—and from a profuse and unwise liberality to its opposite, a mean and contracted penuriousness. (Oct. 25, 1862, MS 24:680)

Necessity of spiritual nourishment. I often remark that our spiritual wants need to be supplied just as much as our physical wants. There are many even among the Latter-day Saints who undergo a species of starvation through neglect in attending meetings and availing themselves of the opportunities which God has given unto us. They do not get that spiritual nourishment which is as necessary to make the man or the woman in Christ Jesus perfect as it is that we should partake of earthly food to sustain our bodies. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:833)

Spiritual decline of world. It is one of the duties of our mission to establish faith in the earth and also to set examples to the children of men. Through the lack of faith on the part of our fathers and the traditions which have come down to us from them, we today occupy a very low plane, so far as God and Godliness is concerned. The world has made great progress in many directions, but the spiritual decline of the world is perhaps more apparent than its growth in other matters. There has been a complete decadence spiritually. Faith has declined, spiritual growth has ceased and God's power is not recognized among men. Men have grown into the belief that there is no necessity for His power. The spiritual part of man in this age is dwarfed, stunted, stifled, and the growth of mankind is altogether one-sided.

Now, this is not right, and God will correct it. He will be acknowledged in the earth. The day will come when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess Him. The cause of this decay in spiritual matters is due to false doctrines, to false teachers, to men professing to be ministers of Jesus Christ and yet denying the power of God. Instead of stirring the people up to seek for the gifts and graces that adorned the Church in ancient days and for the power that the members of the Church possessed, the effort has been apparently to stifle every aspiration of the human soul after higher things and after greater faith. (July 5, 1896, DW 53:162)

The unbelief of the age. We attribute a great deal of the skepticism of the age to the unauthorized utterances of self-constituted representatives of Deity. Their conflicting opinions as to divine truth, their contradictory explanations of sacred scripture, and their clashing, contending organizations, each claiming to be the Church of Christ, and each denying many of the doctrines and ordinances incorporated in the Church established by the Savior and his Apostles, have the effect of creating more doubt than faith, and of driving people to the conclusion that, as there is no evidence of God's power or presence in those religious institutions, there is no Church of God at all and that religion altogether is a humbug and delusion. . . .

Between the fanatics who insist upon the verbal inspiration of every word of the Bible, and the clerical infidels, in the disguise of "Reverends," who turn its history and facts into metaphor, its doctrines into sentiment and its ordinances into non-essential customs, the anxious inquirer falls to the ground of total unbelief, and becomes a scoffer of all that pretends to be divine.

Between true science and true religion there can be no conflict. All truth emanates from the same source. The light that reveals a fact in science is from the same Spirit of intelligence which unfolds the principles of religion. Its communications must necessarily be in harmony. But the speculations and theories of scientists ought not to be taken for science, neither should the opinions and fancies or rhapsodies of religious ministers be mistaken for religion. The truths of religion and the rules which govern spiritual things are just as positive as the facts of science and the laws which control the physical universe. True theology is as exact a science as chemistry, and cause and effect are as sure in one as the other. But the necessary conditions must be complied with in the practice of either, or the desired result will not follow.

Faith, repentance and baptism, properly administered and received, are as sure to bring remission of sins as the combination of certain substances, in fixed proportions, to produce certain chemical changes; and the Holy Ghost is as sure to be imparted by the laying on of the hands of authorized servants of God, if the foregoing requirements precede it, as the production of electricity is to follow the manipulation of the correct process. So much in illustration of doctrine. And it will be found that when God reveals anything in relation to the method or order of creation, or in regard to the earth, the starry worlds or any principle that pertains to their organizations, progress or destiny, it will be in perfect harmony with everything which is developed through patient investigation, or flashed upon the mind by the natural inspiration that is open to all mankind according to their organic powers of conception and their efforts to receive it.

But "religious" men add their notions to God's revelations and cover up the divine truth by their human imaginings; and "scientific" men weave in their own deductions and conclusions with the weft of actual demonstrations, and thus, in both instances, the eyes of the general multitude become blinded and confused, skepticism is the consequence, and God himself is doubted and denied, while the evidences of His Being and the marks of His wisdom, power, love and Fatherhood, are spread all around the pathway of humanity, glittering in the firmament on high and pressing close to the soul of every breathing mortal.

The unbelief of the age is great and deplorable. But so are its sins. Faith and licentiousness do not run together. Dishonesty and divine inspiration are not companions. Lying and prayer do not harmonize. An age of fraud is sure to be an age of infidelity. And an evil and adulterous generation may seek for signs, but they do not appear, because eyes filled with lust cannot discern spiritual things. (Dec. 3, 1877, MS 39:804-5)

Persecutions led by religious leaders. Among the first persecutors of this Church, when its members were few, were those who were themselves religious teachers. The earliest persecutors of Joseph Smith were religious teachers, and the mobs in Missouri and the mobs in Illinois were led by religious teachers. Even the mob that murdered our beloved Prophet and Patriarch and wounded our revered President [John Taylor] was led by a local Baptist preacher, and our people were driven from Nauvoo . . . by a mob headed by a preacher.

And today, those who are inciting mobs against this people, those who go to Congress and incite persecutions against us, those who fulminate threats and frame petitions, those who meet together in conventions, those who gather together in conferences, are those who belong to this "mother of abominations," this "whore of all the earth" (1 Nephi 14:10), and it is through the influence of that accursed whore that they gather together and marshal their forces in every land and against the Latter-day Saints, the Church of the living God. . . .

Here in this city, who has done as much or more than any one else? The religious teachers, men who came here to preach what they call the Gospel. They are stirring up strife continually, instead of making peace, going back to other religious associations in the east and telling the most abominable falsehoods about us, exciting the public mind, in order that they may get money with which to come here and accomplish their wicked designs. They tell lies without number about us.

Falsehoods exposed. Our newspapers have exposed such people time and time again, and yet they shamelessly go forth and repeat those lies about the wickedness of this people, about the intolerance of this people, about the dangers they run when here in this country, when they know, as we all know, . . . that they have never been molested and that we have never injured them, nor interfered with them in any form but that we have always treated them with that respect and kindness with which we desire to be treated ourselves. (Apr. 6, 1884, JD 25:127-28)
