Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 31

Preaching the Gospel to the World

A duty to preach the Gospel. The duty which devolves upon us as a people is to patiently labor in disseminating the Gospel of Jesus Christ throughout the nations of the earth. . . . This is our duty; and this Gospel of the Kingdom, as we have been told, must be preached as a witness unto all nations before the end comes. It is a labor devolving upon us as a people; and though it may cost many precious lives to do this, the obligation rests upon us nevertheless, and we cannot be freed from it only by the discharge of the duty. (Aug. 31, 1884, JD 25:270)

World influenced by missionaries. The world is being benefited by the preaching of these young men who are going out continually to the various missions throughout the earth. They may think themselves that they are not doing much good; but no man can teach these divine principles that the Lord has revealed without their having their effect upon the human family. I am a great believer in the idea that no seed of truth is ever sown unsuccessfully. It will find a lodgment in some heart, and it will remain there. It may not germinate immediately, but the time will come, either in this life or in the life to come, when it will sprout and bring forth fruit.

I believe, therefore, that the Elders, in going forth and bearing testimony that this is a divine work and that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of God, though they may think they do not accomplish very much, they do, in my opinion, do a great work, and some time in the great future it will be seen that their labors have not been fruitless. Although men and women may not have been converted or baptized, nevertheless the labors of the Elders will contribute to their salvation and their redemption. (Jan. 22, 1898, MS 61:115)

Nations left without excuse. We have been told that all the nations of the earth will have to be warned. This Gospel will be preached as a witness, Jesus said, unto all nations; then the end shall come. I have felt that some of our folks sometimes have been considerably exercised at the thought that every creature would have to hear the sound of the Gospel. But God has ways of warning the inhabitants of the earth as well as by the voice of His servants. The nations of the earth have received very great and powerful testimonies that will leave them without excuse, although they may never have had an Elder visit them.

It has been thought that a great many thousands of people that ought to hear the Gospel were left in ignorance and that we have not done our full duty in warning the rich and the learned and those who were outside of the circle which our Elders generally reach. Now the facts are these, when we look at it properly: It seems to me that the inhabitants of the earth are left without excuse because of the knowledge of this work that has gone forth among this nation and among all the nations of the earth. It is true, there have been a great many falsehoods told about it, and a great many honest people have been deceived by these falsehoods. But, nevertheless, the sound of this Gospel has gone to the remotest ends of the earth, and the character of this work is such that the inhabitants of the earth are left without an excuse—at least, in many of the nations. They are held without excuse, if not for rejecting us, at least for not investigating the principles of the Gospel. . . .

Gathering viewed by world. I remember myself, on one occasion, chartering a ship in Liverpool that carried some nine hundred Latter-day Saints, and in that ship's company there [were] no less than eleven nationalities represented. But if you had asked those persons, in their own language, where they were going, they would have told you they were going to Zion; they were going to the House of God that was being reared in the tops of the mountains. If you had asked them what they were going there for, they would have replied, each in his own language: "I am going to be taught in the ways of God and walk in his paths" (see Isaiah 2:2-3)—just as the Prophet declared thousands of years ago. And this has been going on in sight of all Christendom.

Here is this great people in the tops of these mountains—different from any other people that are now on the face of the earth. And who has not heard, among the various nations, concerning our persecutions and the strangeness of our union? Is there any educated man in Christendom that has not read about this? And if he has had the Spirit of God at all—and all men do have a portion of it—and has been honest, he must have felt in his heart that there was something more about this than usual.

The persecutions that we have endured . . . have been published throughout the entire civilized world. There is scarcely an ear that has not heard something concerning us and the attacks that have been made upon us. We have been advertised as no other people have been, and every reading man in the country has known something about us. In this way I believe the civilized nations of the earth have been warned, and they will be judged according to the knowledge that they have had concerning these events which have been of so striking a character. (Aug. 3, 1890, DW 41:485-86)

A message such as the Latter-day Saints profess to be the bearers of is of such extreme importance to the whole family of man that they cannot be justified in passing it by unnoticed. Even if the people should have no cause to think it true, it becomes a duty, situated as they are, the moment they hear the message to investigate and give heed to it. (Feb. 21, 1857, WS 346-47)

Our missionaries. One of the remarkable features of the work o God in the last days has been that uneducated and sometimes illiterate men have gone out as ministers of Christ. They have had to meet and discuss with the learned men of the world, whose lives have been devoted to the study of religious questions, and who have been supposed to be thoroughly familiar with theology. Looking at the Elders of this Church from the standpoint of the world, it would seem to be impossible for them to meet with any success while opposed by such ability and odds. The only advantage that they possessed—and it has been a most stupendous advantage—has been that they have been called of God and ordained as His servants. Like the humble fishermen of Galilee, this has been their only strength.

But what extraordinary results have attended their labors! Wherever they have gone, those who have listened to them have been pierced to the heart by the truths which they taught. In simple and unadorned language they have told the message of which they were bearers, and no music that ever saluted mortal ears has been sweeter to the ears of honest lovers of truth than have been their words and testimonies. Gladness and joy have attended their footsteps. They have carried peace and light and knowledge to the abodes of men, where uncertainty and doubt and darkness reigned before. (June 25, 1892, JI 27:373)

Don't apologize for weaknesses. I do hope that, as soon as you get into your fields of labor, you will not apologize to the people for your weaknesses, and tell them how incapable and unfitted you are for such positions as you may hold. . . . Go into your fields of labor as men of God, appointed by Him to minister unto them the things pertaining to their salvation, and they will find that you have power which no other men, devoid of the authority you have, possess.

The people will realize, my young brethren, if you will pursue a course that becomes the servants of God, that, although young in years, you have a power superior to that possessed by the generality of men—a power which comes, alone, from our Father and God. There is a power and an influence with Elders from Zion which are very much felt. . . . Do not, therefore, go and tell the people how inadequate you are for the responsibilities which rest upon you. Do not say, when you arise to address a congregation upon the principles of the Gospel, "unaccustomed as I am to public speaking," etc., or anything bearing the same idea. There is no necessity for you to mourn over your weakness and want of that ability which is possessed by men of the world. Go to work and do the best you can. (Jan. 5, 1864, MS 26:196)

How to preach. It is right that the Elders should "treasure up in [their] minds continually the words of life. . . . " (D&C 84:85.) It is proper that they should ponder upon the things of the Kingdom and the principles of life and salvation. They should store their minds with all knowledge, for the Lord has, in several revelations, given commands to this effect. It is evident that it is His wish that His servants should be fully informed concerning principle, doctrine, the laws of the Gospel and all things that pertain unto the Kingdom of God, and also that they should "obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries, and of kingdoms, of laws of God and man." (D&C 93:53.)

In bestowing time and thought in studying the principles of intelligence and truth the Elders obey the command of God. It is evident, however, the Lord designs that His servants should trust in Him to give them His Spirit to bring forth the principles and instructions best adapted to the condition of the people whom they address. No man, by his own wisdom and knowledge, can judge correctly concerning the spiritual wants of his fellow-man. It is the Lord alone who knows the hearts of His children, and when His Elders stand up before a congregation and put their trust in Him, He will, through His Holy Spirit, suggest to them and lead their minds to speak upon those points of doctrine and to give that counsel that shall be best adapted to the condition of the listeners. . . . It is the Spirit of God that reaches the hearts of the honest. A few words accompanied by that Spirit, though they may be awkwardly expressed, will have more effect upon the people than the most eloquent discourses which are not sealed upon the hearts of the listeners by the Holy Spirit. . . .

Undoubtedly the Lord knows that which is best for His Elders and people. It is for Him to dictate how His Gospel shall be preached, and His Elders have no right to depart from His instructions upon this point. . . .

The experience of all men who have had any knowledge of or practice in public speaking is that the man who is trained to speak extemporaneously is a far more ready and effective speaker than one who has been accustomed to rely upon notes or to write out his discourses or lectures in full. The man most ready in off hand speaking, or in answering a sudden call, is one who has never depended upon notes, but who has stored his mind with truth and knowledge in the manner that the Lord has suggested to His Elders. . . . That which they do say, though it may not be so elegantly framed as it might be if time were taken to write it, reaches the hearts of the hearers and has a much better effect upon them than a speech would be that had been carefully prepared and written. (Apr. 1, 1890, JI 25:210-11)

Good speakers in danger of falling. The danger of the young brethren being overcome was not now when they feel their weakness but after they came to rely more on their own individual ability and ceased to trust in the arm of God. There is little fear of Elders failing so long as they call upon God and depend entirely on him. But when Elders become accustomed to speaking in public and they begin to imagine that it is their own ability that accomplishes the labors in which they are engaged, and they rely upon their own strength, they have commenced to transgress the laws of God, and they are in danger of falling. If you will peruse the history of the Church, you will find that the greatest speakers have in this manner fallen. You will find they have been unable to stand in the Church while they have indulged in these feelings.

The man who is endowed with natural ability to speak in public must be exceedingly careful. The devil is ever ready to whisper in his ear that he has talent. This reminds me of an instance which occurred in the experience of one of our leading Elders. He was on a mission to the Eastern States and was considered to be a very gifted speaker. He had been speaking on one occasion to a very attentive congregation, and at the conclusion of the meeting one of the brethren stepped up to him, apparently well satisfied with the remarks that he had made; and he said, "Brother, you have preached an excellent discourse." "Brother," replied he, "the devil told me that before you did."

The rebuke was truthful and well-timed, for the devil is ever ready to tell an Elder when he has preached an "excellent discourse" and that he is a very wonderful and effective speaker, without having the aid of his brethren and sisters to tell him such things. If you allow such insinuations to have weight with you and allow men and women to tell you how able you are and what excellent speakers, etc., you are, the result will be, my brethren, that you will be overcome. When you preach under such circumstances, your words will not give that degree of instruction and satisfaction that the broken remarks of a more humble brother will. If your words do not savor of the Spirit of God, they will not profit those to whom you speak.

Get the spirit before speaking. I speak to the young men, and what I say to them on these points will suit the old men as well. Seek for the Spirit of God, and when you rise to proclaim the words of life and salvation, let them be accompanied by that Spirit. If you rise devoid of that Spirit, it will be far better for you to sit down, although in doing so you may be mortified and your vanity wounded; but, brethren, sit down rather than attempt to address a congregation without this Spirit. Have it with you constantly that its influence may, in all your preaching, accompany the words you utter that they may prove beneficial and saving. I know that the man who cultivates the Spirit of God is the most calculated to do good and to move forward this work. (Dec. 31, 1863, MS 26:113-14)

Controversy to be avoided. Controversy is a thing which, in a general way, had better be refrained from by the Elders. Their special duty is to preach the Gospel and administer its ordinances; and although they may at times have to face unsought opposition in various forms, it is not for them to stoop from their high and holy calling as ministers of the Gospel of peace to . . . take the challenge of any petty antagonist who may audaciously confront them to dispute their testimony and teachings. They have something better to do—a higher and holier work to perform—than engaging in . . . encounters with those who seek, by polemic warfare, to waste the time of the Elders and gain at their expense the inglorious fame of "Anti-Mormon" champions. (Apr. 19, 1862, MS 24:249)

Don't ridicule other churches. In proclaiming the principles of the Gospel the Elders should remember that it is not necessary to indulge in the denunciation of any sect or belief. Errors of doctrine and practice may be exposed and the truth be plainly taught without calling to your aid sarcasm or ridicule. We know that it is a gratification to some of the Elders to denounce the fallacies of sectarianism and demolish the feeble defenses of its advocates, and whenever an opportunity of this kind offers, the temptation is almost too strong to be resisted. But a practice of this kind is rarely, if ever, attended by good results. Men are not won, generally, by such a style of reasoning.

There are very few who cannot—after hearing the truth preached in simplicity and tasting of the Spirit of Truth—draw their own contrasts between truth and error, the Gospel of Jesus and the systems of men, and arrive at correct conclusions upon the subject. The great duty which devolves upon the Elders is to teach the truth and render the children of men all the assistance in their power in comprehending it, and this certainly can be done without our descending to abuse opposite systems of their advocates. (July 11, 1863, MS 25:440-41)

Assailing a man's belief or exposing the weakness of his religion is not the best plan to adopt to convince him of his errors or to convert him to the truth. Arouse a man's combativeness and make him angry, and he will fight; he will regard neither reason nor argument under such circumstances but will cling to and defend his opinions, right or wrong, to the extent of his ability and power against every assailant.

If men are to be convinced, it must be done by showing them the truth and setting before them its beauties in a simple, mild, kind manner. . . .

As a people, we should be most kind in all our intercourse with those who do not believe as we do. The knowledge which we now possess of the truth, contrasted with our former ignorance of its saving principles, should fill us with charity for those who are in the position we were in when the Gospel found us. (Feb. 1, 1862, MS 27:74)

Honest in heart will accept Gospel. Those who sincerely, humbly and honestly desire to know God will know that the Elders of Israel are His servants the moment they hear the testimony of the Elders, for the Spirit of God will bear witness to them of its truth; and I am not afraid to say that all the honest in heart among the nations will, sooner or later, obey the Gospel and receive a testimony of the truth. There is no man or woman who is honest and sincerely and truly humble before God but will, sooner or later, receive the testimony of the truth.

There is a power in testimony—one that is irresistible to the honest soul; and where there is a man or woman who desires to know the foundation on which their faith is based, they seek unto God for it, and when they hear the truth and the testimony of men who have the principles of salvation to proclaim unto the people, they are ready to receive them, because they take the right course to obtain a knowledge of the truth for themselves. (Apr. 12, 1863, MS 25:307)

Preach only first principles. It is advisable that the Elders, when preaching to the world, should confine themselves as much as practicable to the first principles and leading doctrines of the Church. Such subjects as . . . the second advent of Christ, the resurrection, the millennial reign, the nature of the Godhead, etc., although interesting and important matters in their place to those concerned, are sadly out of place when unnecessarily dragged before the attention of a mixed audience, who more particularly need establishing in those principles and doctrines which pertain to their immediate salvation and present requirements.

There are many subjects that can be advantageously discussed privately which it would be unwise to dilate upon publicly, except when circumstances render it specialty advisable. When an enquirer after truth clearly understands and embraces the first principles of the Gospel, he is then prepared for a consideration of those which are more advanced. But to crowd upon him matters for which he is unprepared is like attempting to erect the walls and compartments of a building which has no sure foundation upon which to rest them. (Apr. 12, 1862, MS 24:234)

A tendency to stray. It requires constant watching on the part of those whom God chooses to be His servants to keep out of the Church of Christ false doctrines, false practices and false conceptions concerning duty. Well did the Apostle say that the Lord had placed certain officers in His Church "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ" (Ephesians 4:12), because a very little experience with mankind will show how necessary it is that there should be men inspired of God in charge of His Church—shepherds who are under the guidance of the Great Shepherd in caring for the flock. Errors are liable at all times to creep in—errors in doctrine, errors in practice, errors which lead the people astray and would result, if not checked, in great injury to the Church, if not its overthrow.

It was in this way, doubtless, that the primitive Church fell into darkness and became apostate. The Apostles were slain; others who bore the Priesthood and enjoyed revelation from God were also destroyed. But the Church did not immediately fall into utter darkness. It was by degrees, yielding a little in one direction and yielding a little in another, until there was a complete departure from many of the pure principles of the Gospel of the Son of God.

In our own day we can see the tendency there is to stray from the exact path. . . . (Nov. 1, 1893, JI 28:668)

Many great nations yet to warn. We have a large portion of the world yet to warn. Instead of crowding into English-speaking countries, it seems to me that our Elders must begin to crowd into lands where the English language is not spoken and to exercise faith for the gift of tongues and for the gift of interpretation. These gifts have been given for this purpose. Elders will have to exercise faith before God in acquiring foreign languages so that they can go and warn the people of the earth and carry the glad tidings of salvation to them, because God has said that from every land under heaven there shall be people gathered to swell the hosts of Zion. Every nationality must be visited; and when we cannot go, as the Lord has told us, we must send His word. . . .

God has commanded us that we must preach the Gospel to every land, to every people; and where we have men join the Church belonging to a foreign nation, as soon as they are able and qualified they should be sent to their land to bear testimony of what God has revealed to them. . . . The preaching of the Gospel now is like the gleaning of grapes after the vintage is over. That is the comparison used by the Prophet, and a most striking one it is. . . .

We do not expect to convert all the inhabitants of the earth—but we expect to warn them. We expect to gather out every honest soul, and the Lord will deal with the rest. We have to do our duty so that no people will be able to say that they never heard of the work God is doing in the earth. (DEN, Aug. 18, 1900)
