Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 32

God's Covenant Peoples

The elect and the chosen. We find in the writings of the Apostles mention frequently made of the "elect" and of the "chosen." Well, we could do the same thing, writing in our day. How strange it is, and how it gives rise to this view, the experience that we have in the world in preaching the Gospel! We go into a neighborhood, and we gather in a few. The great masses of the people pay no attention to the message of salvation that we declare. Now, who are those that listen? Why, we might call them very truthfully the " elect, " the " chosen, " according to the grace of God as the Apostles so frequently did.

Yes, we are chosen, but it is not because the others are not chosen. It is because we, in the providence and mercy of God, have had our hearts softened so that we have believed the truth when we heard it; we have received it and rejoiced in it. Therefore, we can be rightfully called the elect. But it is not because others are debarred from these privileges, but because we have chosen to accept the message of salvation.

In this way the Lord inspired His servants in ancient days to speak and write as they did. They spoke about foreordination, about the blest and the chosen. But Paul . . . tells us who they are plainly, that "they are not all Israel, which are of Israel." (Romans 9:6.) There are a great many that inherit the blessings of the covenant, who are of the seed of Abraham, who do not prove themselves worthy of it, and therefore they are not all Israel. If they had obeyed the commandments of God, they would have been; they would have received all the promises made to the fathers. For be it known unto you that God makes covenants with men, and He blesses men, and He will bless their posterity.

This ought to be an incentive to every man to live as he should do, not only for his own sake but for the sake of his posterity. But are there not good men that have wicked children? Certainly. Nevertheless, God makes promises to His faithful children. He did to Abraham, yet Abraham had descendants who were wicked and who did not live to inherit the blessings that God had promised to their great ancestor. But others received these promises; and all the families of the earth are blessed through faithful Abraham, so we are told, and they are adopted into his family. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:837)

Children of the covenant. In restoring the Priesthood to the earth the Lord made a new and everlasting covenant with the people who would listen to and obey His voice. A people with whom the Lord makes a covenant are greatly favored, and they ought to be the most humble and grateful of any people on the face of the earth, for it is a great honor and distinction and means of glory to men to be in covenant with the Almighty. The men with whom the Lord made covenant in ancient days are the men whose names come down to us in sacred history. We honor and revere their memories. The people who are descended from them are peculiar objects of God's care, for this is according to the promises which He has made, and when God makes a covenant or gives a promise, He never forgets to fulfill it to the very letter. . . .

The Lord has again made covenant with man, and those with whom the covenant is made are greatly favored, and they and their children will feel the blessed effects which accompany such a covenant. We have now thousands upon thousands of children who have been born in the covenant. Those who have not been thus born can have the privilege, if faithful, to become sealed or adopted and thus receive the benefits of the covenant, the same as if they had been born in it. In this way the entire Church of Christ, where the members have not been born in the covenant, can enter into the covenant by adoption.

In this way all will receive the benefits and blessings which flow therefrom and will receive, not only in their own persons but in their posterity, the fulfillment of the promises. The children of the Latter-day Saints through this covenant enjoy many advantages. Many blessings are promised unto them, and they become a favored race. This will be more and more apparent as time rolls on. The distinction between them and the people who are not of the covenant will be more and more marked, for God will not forget His promises to His servants. A faithful man and woman, by means of their diligence and faith, can secure blessings for their children. They will find favor in the sight of the Lord, and He will exercise His wonderful Providence in their behalf.

A nobler class of spirits. Without doubt a nobler class of spirits are permitted to come forth as children in the covenant because of the advantages which they have when born in this way. There are differences in spirits, as there are differences in men and women. Some spirits are more capable than others because of past faithfulness in times of trial. When Lucifer, who was once a mighty angel before the Lord and held great power, became rebellious and sought to lead away the children of God, he was followed by one-third of the hosts of heaven. Of the remaining two-thirds some were, doubtless, more valiant than others. In the exercise of their agency there would be a great difference in the conduct of the spirits thus left to choose for themselves. Take any number of human beings and place them in a position where there is a division between two leaders and great decision is required, and it will be found that some are more decided and positive and determined than others. There will be some who will scarcely know which side to take, and they will be greatly influenced by the opinions and actions of others.

Doubtless this was the case with the spirits in heaven. There were some who were valiant, decided and full of integrity, who did not waver nor doubt, while there were others who, while they did not take sides with Lucifer, were fearful and uncertain and probably stood aloof, watching which side would win. This being the case, is it any wonder that there should be differences in the spirits who come here?

Some are chosen to occupy prominent positions and seem to be favored, and many wonder why this is so. They do not understand that there may be causes for these differences which reach back into eternity before our spirits had taken tabernacles. Hence, as it is a great advantage to be born in the covenant, it is but reasonable to suppose that noble spirits will seek the opportunity to come into families where they will have all the blessings and promises which pertain to the covenant. The Latter-day Saints will undoubtedly become a great people, for God has made promises to them, and this will be one of the means by which their greatness will be developed. (Nov. 1, 1890, JI 25:690-91)

Blessings from promises to fathers. It is through the promise that God made to our fathers that we are here today and that we have received the Gospel. The fathers and mothers of many who are here received it; their hearts were touched; God poured His Spirit upon them, and they came "one of a city, and two of a family" (Jeremiah 3:14) to Zion, while the rest of the kindred rejected the Gospel. It is because of the promises that God made to our fathers that we have received the truth; and if we are faithful, we can obtain the same blessings for our posterity.

When my boys go out on a mission, I say to them, "Boys, God is your father's friend; He has always been his friend; you can trust Him and can call upon Him with confidence; for I tell you that while I live and keep His commandments, God will watch over my children and will preserve and bless them." And He has done it. So it will be with every faithful man and woman; God will remember them and their seed after them; and He will see that they will have representatives in His Church at the very last when Jesus shall come. (Feb. 16, 1896, DW 52:387)

Importance of a faithful posterity. Our future as a Church and as families depends upon our children being trained in righteousness. . . . All the records that have come to us from righteous men convey with plainness the great importance of having a faithful posterity. . . . Men of God have always endeavored to exercise faith in behalf of their posterity. The Lord made covenants with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and with the sons of Jacob, concerning their posterity, and these covenants the Lord holds in great esteem and has promised that in the last days they shall be fulfilled. It is the same in our day; the posterity of faithful men may stray from the Church, but the Lord will feel after some branch of their family and bring it back in days to come to the covenant people.

At times it has been a matter of surprise to some individuals that they have been enabled to join the Church and receive the truth while so many around them have turned deaf ears to it. But, if we understood the past as we do the present, we would doubtless see that there are reasons for this which have existed long before we were born. There is no doubt in my mind that the gathering together of this people from the various nations of the earth and the manner in which they have received the Gospel is due to the promises made to their fathers. (Apr. 5, 1897, DW 54:673)

Born through a noble lineage. Our lineage is not known to all of us. We may not know our origin; but this we may be assured of, that we who have received the truth are choice spirits. . . .

Where do you think this nobility of character has come from? It has come from ancestors who obtained promises from God, through their faithfulness, in regard to their posterity. Our ancestors may have come through poverty and obscure channels, and some of them may not have possessed any noted characteristics; but when our ancestry is known, it will be found that the noblest men and women of God have been the progenitors of this people. (Apr. 8, 1894, DW 48:701)

Our lineage prearranged. It was arranged before we came here how we should come and through what lineage we should come. . . . As the Lord has taught us, . . . our Priesthood has been hid with God. He says:

Therefore, thus saith the Lord unto you, with whom the priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your fathers—

For ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh, and have been hid from the world with Christ in God—

Therefore your life and the priesthood have remained, and must needs remain through you and your lineage until the restoration of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began. (D&C 86:8-10.)

I am as convinced that it was predestined before I was born that I should come through my father as I am that I stand here. (Apr. 8, 1894, DW 48:545)

A work of gleaning. We have gathered the people, through the blessing of God, from the various nations of the earth; but we have gathered them by small handfuls, as it were. There has been no great influx into the Church from these nations; but . . . it has been exactly like a gleaning of grapes after the vintage is over. And it is a remarkable fact that the great bulk of the people who form this Church—that is, those who were adults when they became members of this Church—were anxiously waiting arrival of some such message as the Elders brought. . . .

Israel easily converted. It is a remarkable fact . . . that, wherever we have gone among those people whom the Book of Mormon tells us are the descendants of the house of Israel, we have had no trouble in converting them by hundreds, and it may be said by thousands, to the truth. They were ready to receive it without any difficulty whatever. It seemed as though their hearts had been prepared by the God of heaven; all that has been necessary has been to tell them the truth, and they were natural Latter-day Saints, natural believers in the Gospel of the Son of God.

Gentiles naturally unbelievers. I myself went as a missionary . . . to the Sandwich Islands, the natives of which I believe to be either a branch of the Indians of this continent or of some other portion of the House of Israel. There was no trouble in baptizing them, and there is no trouble in baptizing any of the Polynesian races. They are ready to receive the Gospel, ready to be baptized, very different in this respect from us Gentiles. There is a spirit of unbelief among the Gentile race; there is a hardness of heart; there is a want of faith that prevents the blessings of God from descending as they did in ancient days upon His covenant people. Gentiles are naturally unbelievers. It is difficult to convert them, difficult to control them, difficult for them to receive the truth in plainness and simplicity. (May 25, 1884, JD 25:171-72)

The Gentiles and apostasy. We are a nation of Gentiles. We who have come here, what are we? We are called from the Gentile nations. The promises are not made to us that are made to people who are the unmixed descendants of Israel. In many respects, when they come into the covenant and are baptized, and the power of God rests upon them, you will see a different work than you see at the present time. It is just as much as we, with our Gentile traditions—an inheritance we have received from our fathers, which have come down through generations—it is as much as many of us can do, with all the power we can exercise, to remain in the Church. . . .

During my experience among that people, a red skinned race, I never knew a man, because of transgression or anything else, after he received the truth—I never knew one of them to turn around and fight this cause in the manner that we witness men doing among our race. How is it with the Gentiles, the race of which we are a part? When a man gets a testimony from God and falls into transgression, he is almost immediately seized with the spirit of murder. He wants to shed the blood of innocence. He wants to kill the servants of God, is full of bitterness and hatred and seeks to find vent for his wicked passions. (Nov. 2, 1897, JD 21:271)

Blood of Israel accepts Gospel. No doubt many of you have been led to wonder in your experience how it was that you should receive the Gospel and that others who had equal opportunities with you, probably belonging to the same household and numbered among your friends and acquaintances . . . could see nothing desirable or attractive about it, while your hearts were kindled into a glow and felt like fire within you when you heard the testimony of the servants of God concerning the Gospel that He has revealed.

Nothing that I know of more plainly demonstrates the fact that this is the blood of Israel that has been gathered out, that we are of the chosen seed, though we have been mixed, or our fathers have been mixed, among the Gentiles. God has saved to Himself a seed among all nations; and when the Gospel came to the lands where this seed dwelt, there was, on their part, a natural affinity, a natural attraction to the principles of righteousness, and they received them gladly and were gathered out by the wonderful power of God to this land and are numbered now among His Saints. . . . (Nov. 16, 1884, JD 25:361)

Peculiarity of Polynesians. There is this peculiarity about them—every one of them is a natural Latter-day Saint. I never yet knew a native with whom I could converse for any length of time but what would admit that the doctrines we believed in and taught were of God; and in every instance nearly where access could be obtained to them they were ready for baptism. However, there are other influences at work among them as there are among the Gentile races.

But they are a people ready to believe the Gospel and render obedience to it; there is this peculiarity about them that is not about our race, when they become convinced of the truth, if they commit sin and have to be excommunicated from the Church, I never knew them to become an enemy to the work and to be bitter in their feelings against it.

With our race it is different. When Gentiles turn away from the truth, when they commit sin after receiving the truth and the light, it seems as though the adversary has great power over them, and they become bitter enemies to the work of God and to the servants of God. . . .

House of Israel naturally receptive. It is a remarkable peculiarity that wherever the Elders of this Church go carrying the Gospel among the descendants of the house of Israel, they find friends; they find those who are ready to do everything for them they can, to receive them just as the seed of Israel scattered among the nations has done. When the Elders first went to Great Britain, there was a certain class of the English people who were ready to open their doors to entertain them and do all they could for them to prosecute their ministerial labors. All such were natural Latter-day Saints. It seemed to them when they heard the Gospel first as though it was something they had almost known but which had faded from their memory. It was as natural for them to believe the Gospel as it was for them to believe anything they knew absolutely.

This was the case throughout Great Britain and Ireland, and it has been the case throughout the Scandinavian nations; it has been the case among the Germanic races that have heard the preaching of the Gospel by our Elders. It has been the case in every land and among every people wherever the Elders of this Church have gone carrying this message of life and salvation, this Gospel of the Son of God; they have been recognized as Gentiles, but their readiness to receive the Gospel when it saluted their ears bears witness of the fact that they are of Israel. (Jan. 12, 1890, DW 40:159)

Jerusalem for Judah. These are the "times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:4.) The purposes of Jehovah cannot be frustrated. The descendants of His ancient covenant people will reap the fruits of the promises planted in the hearts of the fathers. The signs of the times point to the speedy redemption of Jerusalem, and the spirit of the great gathering is beginning to take hold of the Jewish heart. The war now waging will be one of the instruments in the hand of the Omnipotent to prepare the way before the feet of the sons of Jacob, and the Hebrew, not the Latin, will come in upon the land like a flood.

There are no people who watch the events transpiring in the old world with greater interest than do the Latter-day Saints. The gathering of the Jews to Palestine is one of the important incidents of the work to which their lives are devoted. Their destiny is associated with the ultimate triumph of Judah. And the fulfillment of the predictions of ancient Prophet and modern Seer is taking place so rapidly and significantly, that they are almost ready to proclaim, "Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the Lord's hand double for all her sins." (Isaiah 40:3.) The soil is reserved for Judah, and the "Mighty God of Jacob" (D&C 109:68) will turn and overturn until the dominion is established. The dispersion of the House of Israel was clearly predicted by their Prophets, and they literally became "a hiss and a by-word . . . among all nations." (1 Nephi 19:14.) "He that scattered Israel will gather him." (Jeremiah 31:10.)

The prophecies concerning the restoration are just as clear and definite as those in relation to the dispersion. If the latter have been fulfilled, have we not good reason for expecting the accomplishment of the former? The great theme of the inspired Jewish bards and seers was the latter-day glory of their nation. The events which they associated with the restoration and the re-building of their ancient capital are now transpiring, and we therefore look for the complete fulfillment of their sayings concerning the triumph of Judah.

This re-establishment of an old and once powerful nation upon the site of its former splendor and dominion is one of the important scenes in the great drama of the last days, and a precursor of the "restitution of all things." (Acts 3:21.) It will surely be accomplished, and will aid in the vast revolution that is about to be inaugurated by the powers on high, which will result in the "end of the world" (D&C 45:22), or, in other words, the destruction of man's misrule, and the setting up of His Kingdom whose right it is to reign, whose dominion shall be everlasting, and whose sway shall be "from the rivers even unto the ends of the earth." He is the "Lion of the tribe of Judah" (Revelation 5:5); He will sit upon the throne of his father David, and all nations and kingdoms will serve and obey Him. (Oct. 29, 1877, MS 39:707-8)

The gathering of the Jews. After the Church was driven out of Missouri, two of the Twelve Apostles, Orson Hyde and John E. Page, were appointed by the Prophet Joseph to take a mission to Jerusalem. John E. Page did not fulfill his mission. Brother Orson Hyde did go there and dedicate the land, as he had been instructed to do, to the gathering of the House of Israel.

Subsequently, two other Apostles, George A. Smith and Lorenzo Snow, also visited the land of Jerusalem, and they too prayed to the Lord and invoked His blessing upon the land that it might be so blessed that fertility should be restored to it and that the curses that had rested upon it might be removed by the power of God.

It is very remarkable that since that time the work of gathering the Jews has gone on with considerable rapidity and in such a manner as to attract attention and fill the hearts of believers with great delight at seeing such a plain fulfillment of the word of the Lord.

The Jews are undoubtedly turning their attention to the land of their fathers. Circumstances are being so shaped by the Almighty as to favor the colonization of the Jews on their ancient heritage. It is an easy thing for the Lord to cause His word to be fulfilled respecting that land and its people; and He will use the nations of the earth as His instruments. They will think, doubtless, that they are accomplishing their own ends in making combinations that will favor the settlement of the Jews and give them the liberty which has heretofore, to a great extent, been denied them. . . .

The Lord Jesus when He was upon the earth said that Jerusalem should "be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" (Luke 21:24)—that is, the Jews should remain in their scattered condition until then. The Lord further says that in that generation shall "the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." (Luke 21:24.) The gathering of the Jews, then, was to be a sign that the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. To the Latter-day Saints this event is full of great importance. We are looking forward to the coming of the Lord Jesus, according to the promise that He should again descend from heaven, this time in power and in great glory. But before that awful day a remnant of the Jews will be gathered to Jerusalem, and the ancient city will be rebuilt; the land of Palestine will be re-peopled by the descendants of the covenant people of the Lord.

Many of the Jews will gather in unbelief; but the Prophets in the Book of Mormon convey the idea that they will gather in belief. "The Jews . . . shall begin to believe in Christ . . . and to gather." (2 Nephi 30:7.) Then shall they know their Redeemer and be gathered from the four quarters of the earth. It seems from their words that belief in the Savior will precede the gathering of the Jews together again. Heretofore the Jews have been apparently impenetrable to the Gospel, and many will doubtless still remain in this condition of unbelief; but on the other hand, we are told, when "they shall be restored to the true church," they "shall be established in all their lands of promise." (2 Nephi 9:2.) And again it is said, "When they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer, they shall be gathered together again to the lands of their inheritance." (2 Nephi 6:11.)

There will doubtless be a mighty work performed in the gathering of this race, whose fathers the Lord entered into covenant with. His word cannot fail; and although it may seem an almost impossible thing to be accomplished, yet the Jews will be gathered to their own land, and they will build up the waste places, and they will be prepared for the events that are to come. (Sept. 15, 1896, JI 31:558-59)

A sign of approaching end. We have always been led to expect that Russia would figure very prominently in the events of the last days connected with the Jews and the holy land. . . .

Every power that has been unfavorable to the gathering of the Jews and their re-establishment in the land of their fathers will sooner or later be removed so that no serious and certainly no insurmountable obstacle will be in the way of the fulfillment of the words of the Lord. . . .

The fulfillment of prophecy is dependent upon these movements of the nations. We can see how one nation finds it necessary for the furtherance of its policy to checkmate another nation. In doing this the nations appear to know nothing about what the Lord has promised, but they are prompted entirely by self-interest. They make moves for the preservation of their power and for the bringing to pass of that which they desire; and the Lord overrules these for the fulfillment of His purposes. They are really blind instruments of doing that which He has foretold many centuries ago. But to us these movements are full of meaning. The gathering of the Jews is one of the signs that the end is approaching. The Jews will be gathered to Jerusalem, when the Lord will appear in power and great glory. (Nov. 1, 1896, JI 31:642-44)

Stakes of Zion in Palestine. It appears that the time must soon come when a gathering place for those who obey the Gospel in those regions must be appointed so that they can be taught the principles of righteousness in a body and not be left in their scattered condition. . . .

It is probable . . . that when the converts in the Orient become sufficiently numerous to make it necessary for them to gather together, a place will have to be selected, probably in Palestine itself, that will be suitable for this grand purpose, and a Stake or Stakes of Zion be organized there. It may be necessary, in the progress of events, for experienced Elders with their families to go from Zion to the land of Jerusalem to help lay the foundation of the work there in teaching these people the arts of true civilization from which they have fallen through the transgressions of their fathers. (Aug. 15, 1889, JI 24:391)

Future fate of the red man. Improbable as it may seem, it is nevertheless true that the Indians . . . are not destined to be crowded off the face of the land by the whites; neither will the whites ever witness their utter extermination. In ancient days the Lord made covenants with various individuals in relation to their descendants—that he would bless them, etc., and would not suffer them to perish from the face of the earth, but would remember them in the last days, and would reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth. . . . The Book of Mormon, the record containing the ancient history of America, plainly states that the Lord did also make such a covenant with the ancestors of the present American Indians, and with other holy men who formerly inhabited this continent. . . .

Instead, therefore, of there being any likelihood of the Indians being exterminated, or meeting the fate many imagine to be inevitable, there is much more danger that the whites themselves will be the people who will experience this fate, or something approximating thereto. The only way they can avoid it is by receiving and obeying the fullness of the Gospel. Yet, this they as a nation have rejected. (Dec. 13, 1856, WS 270-71)

Indians receptive to Gospel. Strange to say—if anything can be said to be strange connected with the work of God—the descendants of those ancient covenant people of the Lord have gladly received the testimony of the servants of God. Wherever we have gone and mingled with those people, with those Red Men, and been able to communicate to them the truths of which we are in possession, which God has revealed to us, they have received the same gladly, not only upon this continent but upon the islands of the sea; . . . everywhere where those men with red skins dwell, they have gladly received the testimony of God's servants concerning the Gospel, and they rejoice in its fullness and in the knowledge that their fathers once possessed and of the redemption that Jesus Christ has wrought out for them. Most wonderful has this prediction been fulfilled in this respect. (Apr. 6, 1884, JD 25:123-24)

The Indians to build New Jerusalem. The Latter-day Saints should remember who these red men are and the predictions which have been made concerning them. They are our brethren, being of the house of Israel and containing a purer strain of Israelitish blood than many members of the Church. It has been predicted, and the word of the Lord will no more fail in this respect than in any other, that they will yet become a white and delightsome people, possessed of a very high degree of cultivation.

They are to build the New Jerusalem, and we, who are of the Gentile nations, are to assist them in the work. The prospect of such a condition of things may humble our pride, but we may as well look squarely at the destiny which is before [them] . . . in the due time of the Lord they will be redeemed. . . . (Feb. 1, 1895, JI 30:75-76)

Ten tribes to receive blessings from Ephraim. It is written that the ten tribes will come forth from the north country, and they will come here to those who hold the keys in this dispensation, to receive the blessings they do not have themselves. Here is Ephraim, and Ephraim holds the keys. The ten tribes are there, but the authority to hold the keys is here.

God is doing a mighty work among the nations of the earth, unknown to us to a great extent. Powerful agencies are operating under His direction in all the nations to bring to pass the fulfillment of His designs. While this is all going on, and we may seem only like a little handful in the midst of the millions of the earth, here in the midst of this people the authority is held which God recognizes, and here are the keys by which the purposes of God will be fulfilled.

All that has been spoken by the mouths of the holy Prophets will be accomplished. There will be a highway cast up; the ten tribes will return, and they will come to the children of Ephraim to receive their blessings. (Oct. 6, 1897, CR 56)
