Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 33

Salvation for the Dead

Plan of salvation for all. We must remember that God's work is not confined to this life; that God's plan of salvation extends throughout eternity; that according to our belief it began to operate in eternity, if it ever began at all. It never really in truth began; it always operated, operated from eternity and will operate to eternity, for all the children of men, for every human soul.

The plan of salvation devised by our Father and God is intended to save every human being that will be saved, to reach them all unless, during this probation, they commit what is termed the unpardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost, and become sons of perdition, in which event salvation ceases (so far as they are concerned) to operate; they put themselves outside of the pale of salvation. (Nov. 9, 1884, JD 26:79-80)

All to hear voice of salvation. Those heathen nations, like our ancestors who died in ignorance of the Gospel of Christ, will yet hear the voice of salvation. Jesus and those associated with Him will minister to them, for we are all the sons and daughters of God. . . .

The little space of time we live here upon the earth, important as it is to us, compared with the eternities of our God, is only like one grain of sand out of the immensities of grains that are upon the sea shore. Our God is endless and eternal. His Gospel is endless and eternal, and as long as there is a soul to be saved, He, and Jesus, Who died for all, and all associated with Them who have the same Priesthood, will labor anxiously until every soul will be brought back, who can be brought back, who has not committed the unpardonable sin by sinning against light and knowledge. . . . Every soul other than these will be felt after throughout the eternities of our God.

Hell itself will be sought; every crevice of it, every part of it will be penetrated by Jesus, and by the Saints of God, in search of the souls of the children of men, until from every crevice and from every recess in the regions of the damned they will be brought forth to light and glory, if they will obey the glorious Gospel of the Son of God, if they will bow in submission to the sceptre of King Immanuel. That is all they have to do, repent of their sins, repent of them whether in this life or in the life to come, and put them away far from them. (May 25, 1884, JD 25:174-75)

Judgment in accordance with law. We as a people . . . do not believe that God our Heavenly Father will condemn any human being unless he has been made acquainted with the law which He has revealed; in other words, to use the expression of one of the Apostles, "Where no law is, there is no transgression." (Romans 4:15.) Unless a law is proclaimed unto men, that they may understand it, there can be no transgression of that law, and consequently no condemnation following its transgression; and if condemnation follow, there must be a knowledge of law. There must be a comprehension of a law and wilful violation of it before condemnation can come.

There is no room for the exercise of pity to a person who, knowing a law, violates it. We do not have any feelings of pity to men who violate our laws when they understand them. We may regret their course, but when we know that they understood the law and had power to live above it, and that through yielding to their weaknesses and to their propensities they have violated the law, we feel to say, "Let justice take its course, the punishment is a just one, and they must abide by it."

So it is in the Gospel, you will not be condemned for that which you do not understand, neither will any other people that ever lived, that now live or ever will live in the future. They will be condemned according to their knowledge; every man will be judged according to the deeds done in the body. (Jan. 12, 1873, JD 15:293-94)

Gospel to the dead. The Apostle Peter sets forth in great plainness this doctrine when he said: "By which also he [Jesus] went and preached to the spirits in prison; which sometimes were disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah." (1 Peter 3:19-20.)

Noah had declared to them how they could be saved, but they had rejected his words, and they were destroyed. Their spirits were committed to a prison which the Lord had prepared for them, and there they remained in torment, being punished for their great wickedness, until the crucifixion of the Savior. After His Spirit left His body, He went and opened the prison doors to them and declared to them the Gospel of salvation. They then had the opportunity of repenting.

And thus it is, as we are taught in this dispensation, the Elders of this Church are engaged, while in the spirit world awaiting their resurrection, in preaching to the millions of human beings who once lived upon this earth, but who died in ignorance of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. They preach to them as living Elders now preach to living people upon the earth, declaring to them that they must believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Redeemer of mankind. They must also repent of all their sins and all their wicked thoughts and deeds, and bring forth an acceptable offering of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.

No doubt thousands, yea millions, of men and women who have lived upon the earth listen to these tidings with joy, these words of hope, this heavenly message which comes to them freighted with so many glorious promises, and feeling humble and contrite they receive the truths which they are taught and live as best they can according to the light given to them. (May 15, 1893, JI 28:318)

All in spirit world hear Gospel. The Gospel shall be preached to them that are dead; the Savior shall carry the glad tidings of salvation to them, and not only to those who were disobedient in the days of Noah, but to all the spirit world, to every soul of Adam's race that had up to that time died who had not received the Gospel in the flesh. He commenced the work there just as He did here.

He commenced by preaching the Gospel, by revealing it to His disciples, by giving them the authority to preach it, and then He descended into Hades or hell, and He there, doubtless, chose His ministers, the men who had the authority of the Holy Priesthood, and set them to the same labor that was commenced on the earth, the labor of preaching His everlasting Gospel to all the spirit world, to the millions of spirits who had died either in disobedience to the Gospel of Christ or in ignorance of that Gospel, never having heard the sound of it. The Gospel was sent to the entire spirit world, except to those sons of perdition who had committed the unpardonable sin, or the sin against the Holy Ghost, and the labor has doubtless continued from that day until the present time in the spirit world. . . .

Various grades of spirits. In the spirit world there are grades of punishment just as there are grades of spirits. Some are ignorant. Some men who never heard the name of Jesus have lived according to the light that God gave them; for God has given to every man that is born into the world, according to the revelations we have received, His Spirit. He has given unto every man and woman His Spirit, not the gift of the Holy Ghost, but His Spirit by which they are led and guided. (Nov. 9, 1884, JD 26:82-85)

Redemption for those without law. The words of Mormon recorded in the 22nd verse of the 8th chapter of Moroni . . . read as follows: "For behold that all little children are alive in Christ, and also they that are without the law. For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law; wherefore, he that is not condemned, or he that is under no condemnation, cannot repent; and unto such baptism availeth nothing."

. . . There are two classes referred to in this verse, namely, little children and they that are without the law. Upon both of these classes redemption cometh, so far as the consequences of the fall are concerned. Upon little children because they are not accountable and upon those that are without the law because they are ignorant. . . . The Prophet Mormon says, "Little children cannot repent." (Moroni 8:19.) This being the case, baptism would be of no avail to them.

But the question remains, how about those "that are without the law"? Why cannot they repent? And why is baptism of no avail to them? They cannot repent because they are not under condemnation, and the reason they are not under condemnation is, they are ignorant. And being ignorant of the law, and therefore not under condemnation, the law of baptism does not apply unto them any more than it does to little children. It requires knowledge of the law to bring men under condemnation. When they possess that knowledge, they become accountable and are in a condition to repent; and when they repent, or are capable of repentance, they can then be baptized.

This is the meaning of the Prophet Mormon's teaching in the verse referred to. He does not mean that this class will never be under condemnation, that there never will be a time when they cannot repent and never be a time when baptism will be of any avail to them. But while they remain ignorant of the law or, to use his own language, while "they are without the law," they are under no condemnation and, therefore, cannot repent and be baptized.

This is in precise agreement with all the teachings of the Prophets recorded in the Book of Mormon. King Benjamin . . . says: "And moreover, I say unto you, that the time shall come when the knowledge of a Savior shall spread throughout every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. And behold, when that time cometh, none shall be found blameless before God, except it be little children, only through repentance and faith on the name of the Lord God Omnipotent." (Mosiah 3:20-21.)

This is the law as this Prophet and king clearly sets it forth. Men are no longer blameless before God when this knowledge, of which the angel speaks to King Benjamin, comes to them. . . . The angel in the next verse told King Benjamin that even his own people would be found no more blameless in the sight of God, after he had declared these things unto them, only on the conditions which the angel had declared—"repentance and faith on the name of the Lord God Omnipotent."

Now, it is pertinent to ask at this point, if this is the case with men in the flesh, will not the declaration of this law, or the imparting of this knowledge, to men in the spirit world be followed by the same consequences? It is the making known of the law of the Gospel—the conditions of salvation—that brings mankind under condemnation, that requires from them faith and repentance and that brings to them remission of sins through the ordinance of baptism.

Before the knowledge of a Savior had spread, men were blameless for not obeying His law. They were not under condemnation. They did not know the will of God concerning them, and if they broke any of His laws, they did so ignorantly.

Alma . . . asks very pertinently:

Now, how could a man repent except he should sin? How could he sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there was a punishment? . . .

Now, if there was no law given—if a man murdered he should die—would he be afraid he would die if he should murder?

And also, if there was no law given against sin men would not be afraid to sin.

And if there was no law given, if men sinned what could justice do, or mercy either, for they would have no claim upon the creature? (Alma 42; 17, 19-21.)

This agrees with what the Apostle Paul says: "Where no law is, there is no transgression." And, of course, where there is no transgression there is no condemnation. Again he says: "Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law." (Romans 7:7.)

According to the words of Jacob . . .:

Wherefore, he has given a law; and where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation; and where there is no condemnation the mercies of the Holy One of Israel have claim upon them, because of the atonement; for they are delivered by the power of him.

For the atonement satisfieth the demands of his justice upon all those who have not the law given to them, that they are delivered from that awful monster, death and hell, and the devil, and the lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment; and they are restored to that God who gave them breath, which is the Holy One of Israel. (2 Nephi 9:25-26.)

In the next line says, "But woe unto him that has the law given, yea, that has all the commandments of God."

The atonement of Jesus brings to pass the deliverance of all those who have died without the law, both those who died before the coming of Jesus and after His coming. It is declared by Abinadi that these, "not having salvation declared unto them . . . have a part in the first resurrection, or have eternal life, being redeemed by the Lord." (Mosiah 15:24.) He puts little children also in the same class. . . .

After examining these passages, let us return to the words of Mormon, as recorded by Moroni, and let us read those words in the light of the sayings of the Prophets which we have quoted. He says, "For the power of redemption cometh on all them that have no law."

Why is that? Because they are not under condemnation, not having violated any law knowingly, and, therefore, they cannot repent. How can a man repent of that which is not sin? For, as Alma says, "how could he sin if there was no law?" Therefore, until the law is declared, such people are not sinners; and if they cannot repent, of what avail would baptism be? We would not baptize a man that had not repented. He must be convicted of sin. He must see that he must obey the laws of God. He must know that it is his duty to believe in Jesus, to repent of his sins, and to be baptized in His name.

This is the salvation which Abinadi speaks of. It was not declared unto those who died in ignorance of the plan of salvation. But when it was declared unto them, then sin began. They then needed to repent and to be baptized.

There is this distinction between children and adults: children are not accountable and are not sinners until they reach the age of accountability, which the Lord has said is eight years; and, therefore, they cannot repent, neither is baptism necessary for them. But it is different with adults who died in ignorance of the law of God. The time will come when every creature, both those who are living now and those who have lived and those who will live, will hear the law of salvation declared unto them, and when they hear that law, they come under condemnation, if they do not obey it. Those who are in the spirit world will hear it, and when they do hear it, they will become amenable to the law of God; and though they themselves cannot be baptized, they can believe in Jesus and repent of their sins, and others in the flesh can be baptized for them, so that the whole law will be maintained. Unto such baptism will be of avail, because they are in a condition to repent, and the law has force upon them. (Feb. 15, 1892, JI 27:122-24)

The work of the Millennium. There will be a thousand years' rest, during which period Satan will be bound, and when the seed of the righteous will increase and cover the land. In that glorious period everything on the face of the earth will be beautiful; disease and crime and all the evils that attend our present state of existence will be banished; and during that period, as God has revealed, the occupation of his people will be to lay a foundation for the redemption of the dead, the unnumbered millions who lived and died an the earth without hearing and obeying the plan of salvation. (Dec. 3, 1871, JD 14:321-22)

A never-ending missionary labor. When this life is ended, when this mortal is laid aside, we shall go into the spirit world, endowed with the same Priesthood and authority of the Son of God; clothed with that authority, enveloped with it, even the fullness of it, we shall go into the spirit world and continue this glorious labor of warning our brethren and sisters who once were in the flesh, until throughout the spirit world the Gospel of salvation shall be heard from one end of it to the other.

It is a never-ending work that we have taken upon ourselves. It will never terminate until this earth shall be redeemed, until the power of Satan shall be subdued, until wickedness shall be banished from the earth, until He reigns whose right it is to reign, and every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God. Then will this labor cease so far as the family of man is concerned; but it will never cease until all who belong to this earth, who ever were born upon it—no matter in what age, no matter what time, no matter what nationality—shall be redeemed who can be redeemed. (Nov. 9, 1884, JD 26:86)

Representatives of all nations. God has chosen us from the various nations for this purpose. There are men in this Church from almost every race of men, and if representatives from all the races are not now, they will be in. God scattered the seed of Israel through all of the nations of the earth so that in the great gathering of the last days He might be able to get representatives of all the families of men. And we are chosen for this purpose.

The seed has been scattered among the nations; and when the descendants of Israel here heard the sound of the Gospel, it was indeed the glad tidings of salvation to them. They knew the voice of the Shepherd; it was like telling them something they had been waiting for; the sound thereof was most delightful to the soul.

The reason that the sound of the Gospel had such an effect upon us was because we were chosen from before the foundation of the world for the express purpose of coming forth in this day to receive it, and well may it be said that your lives have been hid with Christ. You have come forth in these last days to be instruments in His hands of bringing souls to a knowledge of the truth as it is in Christ Jesus. . . .

A duty to trace genealogies. It is your duty now to rise up, all of you, and trace your genealogies and begin to exercise the powers which belong to saviors of men, and when you do this in earnest, you will begin to comprehend how widespread, how numerous your ancestors are, for whom temple work has to be performed, in order that they may be brought into the fold; and when you get stopped, the Lord will reveal further information to you; and in this way the work of salvation and redemption will be accomplished. . . .

It is true we have been scattered among Gentile nations and are called Gentiles, but, nevertheless, we are of the pure seed, having come through Gentile lineage that we may be the means of saving them, and through our faithfulness we shall stand at their head. This is the blessing which rests upon us as descendants of Abraham. . . .

Prayers from world of spirits. When you think that you are chosen to be saviors to the children of men, to stand as a medium through whom salvation shall flow unto unnumbered thousands, what manner of people ought we to be? They pray for you today in the spirit world, as they have been no doubt from the beginning praying for their descendants that they may be faithful to the truth. You cannot tell the interest felt in eternity for you by those of our dead who have gone before us. Their hearts yearn after us, their constant desire being that we may be faithful and maintain our integrity and be prepared to bring salvation to them and redeem them by going forth and obeying every ordinance which God has established in the Church for the salvation of the living and the dead. (Oct. 31, 1880, JD 22:129-31)

Representatives of thousands of souls. A people like this, gathered from all nations of the earth, will comprehend in our labors entire nations. There are but few of us, but we represent a vast number of the families of the earth. Hence the anxiety there is on the other side of the veil in regard to us. Streams of blood from a thousand different sources may concentrate in one man or one woman, and that man or woman be the representative of thousands of souls. . . . There is no sweeter joy ever received by a human soul than that experienced in the labor for the redemption of the dead. . . .

God has taught us that there is hope for every soul that has not committed the unpardonable sin. . . . There is not as much difficulty in getting the inhabitants of the spirit world to accept the Gospel as we have here on earth. . . . We will administer punishment to the men who mock and deride us, and what will be our revenge? We will be baptized for them and redeem them. We will heap coals of fire upon their heads. (Apr. 1893, quoted in Era 34:479 [1931])

Ordinance of adoption or sealing. Marriages of the children of men are only binding as between themselves while the covenant lasts. Our fathers made their covenants with our mothers for time, and when time ended, of course, the covenant and the union ended also. Now, the Holy Spirit revealed that this being the case, every man and woman and every child born as the offspring of these unions would stand separately, unless a new bond were formed. Without this should be done, there would be no binding link to unite woman to man and children to parents, for all the obligations and all the covenants had terminated; therefore, members of families would each stand separately, without any connection of a binding character between themselves.

Of course, there was what we call the bond of blood existing (there is no blood, however, in resurrected beings) or, in other words, there was the bond that arose through kindred. That would remain. The Lord has taught us, however, that this is not all that is required; there must be an authority exercised by which parents should be bound together, and then their children bound to them.

We have been taught also that through the revelation of the Priesthood and its bestowal upon men, and the exercise of that Priesthood in sealing wives to husbands, the children begotten in these marriages are born, as we phrase it, in the covenant; that is, they are recognized by the Lord as legitimate children of the covenant, He having recognized the marriage of their parents, having given the authority to man on the earth to bind on earth, and that bond should be sealed in heaven. In this way the Latter-day Saints are being bound together in the new and everlasting covenant, wives being sealed to their husbands, and children, the offspring of these marriages, being born in the covenant under the blessing and the recognition by the Almighty of the bond that exists between their parents.

Thus, you see that there is a new order of things growing up among us. It is not necessary, where parents are thus sealed together by the authority of the Holy Priesthood for time and for eternity, that their children should be adopted or be sealed to them. They are legitimate heirs of the Priesthood and of the blessings of the new and everlasting covenant. But not so with those who have been born outside of this covenant. There has to be some ordinance performed in order to make them legitimate; and that ordinance, the Prophet Joseph revealed, was the ordinance of adoption; that is, that word covers the ordinance or law, although we do not use the word adoption when we seal children to parents; we call that sealing. But to illustrate the principle and explain the law the word "adoption" is used. ( Apr. 8, 1894, DW 48:544)

The effect of genealogical work. The effect of temple labors upon the Latter-day Saints will become very marked. The researches which they will make to obtain knowledge of their ancestors will broaden their minds and enlarge their sympathies and make them more cosmopolitan than other people. They will feel a bond of sympathy as well as of blood for mankind in general. There has been such an intermingling of the races in times that are past, and the blood of Ephraim has been so widely scattered throughout the nations of the earth, that the tracing of genealogy will establish a kinship between the Latter day Saints and a great many races and nations. This will have the effect to remove narrowness and those sectional feelings that are too apt to grow up in the minds of individuals and communities. And as these causes continue to operate, every generation will exhibit more distinctively the traits that the belief and practices of the Latter-day Saints develop.

One effect will be that young men and young women who come of honorable ancestry will feel that it depends upon them to maintain its reputation and do nothing unworthy of their lineage. While our Church is too democratic in its teachings and organization and all its views to permit pride of birth to grow up to any extent, yet there will be what may be . . . termed pride of character and a disposition to maintain the honorable reputation which the family may have; and it is to be hoped that this will have an elevating effect upon the people. Marriages will be contracted with more care. Young men and women of good families, whose attention will be directed to their lineage, will naturally be more careful respecting alliances that they may form, and they will not be nearly so likely to form hasty and ill-considered connections. (June 1, 1895, JI 30:354)

The Lord to reveal genealogies. We need not be in such a hurry as to create confusion. The Lord will give us time enough to do it all; and when we have gone as far as appears possible, He will give to us opportunities that, at the present time, we are ignorant of; we will find that everything will be made plain, and each man will trace his genealogy clear back; we will know our connection and what to do in relation to these matters, for the Lord will reveal it to us. (Apr. 8, 1894, DW 48:545)

A temple-building people. God did not permit David, a man after His own heart, to build the temple at Jerusalem, because he was a man of war, but He gave unto His peaceful son Solomon, who was a peaceful ruler and had no occasion to fight, the privilege of building His holy temple. We are a temple building people, God has given unto us a mission of this kind, to build temples in which we shall perform the ordinances of life and salvation, and it seems to be meet in His providence that we should refrain from everything that would unfit us for the discharge of this high and holy calling. (Aug. 31, 1884, JD 25:272)

Temple building is one of the most prominent and important features of this latter-day dispensation. The Saints are aware of the stupendous issues that hang upon the earnestness of the teeming millions of the dead, as well as of those of the living who will give ear to the voice of invitation and warning that is now resounding. They are consequently interested in every thing pertaining to the progress and prospects of the rearing of structures that are to be used for the sacred purposes of salvation. (Dec. 24, 1877, MS 39:836)

Temple building brings increased power. Every foundation stone that is laid for a temple, and every Temple completed according to the order the Lord has revealed for His Holy Priesthood, lessens the power of Satan on the earth and increases the power of God and Godliness, moves the heavens in mighty power in our behalf, invokes and calls down upon us the blessings of the Eternal Gods and those who reside in Their presence. There is no doubt whatever of this in my mind. (Sept. 17, 1877, MS 39:743)

I fully believe that when that temple is once finished there will be a power and manifestations of the goodness of God unto this people such as they have never before experienced. Every work of this kind that we have accomplished has been attended with increased and wonderful results unto us as a people—an increase of power and of God's blessings upon us. It was so in Kirtland and at Nauvoo; at both places the Elders had an increase of power, and the Saints, since the completion of and the administration of ordinances in those buildings, have had a power they never possessed previously. . . .

I fully believe . . . that when this and other temples are completed there will be an increase of power bestowed upon the people of God and that they will thereby be better fitted to go forth and cope with the powers of darkness and with the evils that exist in the world and to establish the Zion of God never more to be thrown down. (Apr. 18, 1871, JD 14:125-26)

Satan enraged by temple building. Every temple that we build excites additional hatred, increases the volume of opposition, the volume of hostility and the threatenings of the wicked. Every temple that we have thus far completed—and every temple of which we lay the foundation—has been another testimony in favor of God and has brought strength to the people of God in enlisting the hosts in the eternal world upon our side; but at the same time there has been stirred up, from the very depths of hell, all the damned.

Satan and his legions unite with their agents upon the earth in an endeavor to destroy this work and to do everything in their power to obliterate it from the face of the earth; hell is enraged at the work we are doing; hell is stirred up at that which we are accomplishing. Satan sees that which he dreads, . . . and seeing this he is determined to exert every power, every influence that he can muster for the purpose of preventing the spread and growth of this work. (Oct. 5, 1884, JD 25:326)

What is there connected with baptism for the dead that should cause feelings of opposition? All the Christian world believe that Jesus died for us and that through His vicarious atonement and sufferings we are redeemed. This principle of vicarious action lies at the very foundation of the whole Christian religion. (Jan. 28, 1900, MS 62:162)

Satan rages as he views his domain trenched upon, his captives delivered, and the souls of men wrenched from his grasp by the labors of the living for the dead in and through those sacred ordinances that belong alone to the Gospel of the Son of God, administered in holy places by His chosen servants and handmaidens. And it must not surprise us if the rage of the arch-enemy of mankind increases and his emissaries grow more relentless and cruel, more brutal and inhuman in their efforts to stay this work, as the number of temples increases and the thousands of Israel go in thereto to minister the ordinances of salvation for their ancestors and departed friends. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 48:715)

He [Satan] understands very well that if the children of men will enter into such holy buildings and receive the ordinances there administered and be faithful thereto, his power over them is lost forever, and his kingdom must go down. The struggle with him is a desperate one. He wishes to retain his supremacy on the earth—the territory which he has usurped and over which he held dominion, by all the trickery and violence of which he is capable, for so many generations. God designs to overthrow him, to break his power and to have His children live for one thousand years free from his domination. Great issues are involved in this struggle; but God's Kingdom will triumph, and His people will be freed from the thraldom which Satan seeks to impose.

Houses of learning. There is another use to which temples are put that will prove of great benefit to the rising generation of the Latter-day Saints. The Lord has commanded His people to "seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.) He has commanded us to make our temples houses of learning in which His people may receive instruction in every useful science. In the temple in Kirtland much valuable instruction was given to the Elders. The Prophet Joseph himself, through instruction received there, made considerable progress, especially in a knowledge of languages. Others of the Elders also studied diligently there and acquired much useful knowledge. (Aug. 15, 1884, JI 19:248)
