Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

SECTION 5

LIVING THE GOSPEL

Every Latter-day Saint who is in the path of his duty, whether abroad among the people preaching the principles of "Mormonism " orally, or at home building cities and temples, or leaving the land of his or her nativity emigrating to the mountains, or engaged in any of the fields of labor assigned to us to fill, is disseminating a knowledge of "Mormonism, " and is bearing so loud and powerful a testimony to its truth that the world will be left without excuse for rejecting it.] —GEORGE Q. CANNON Western Standard August 23, 1856

CHAPTER 34

Courtship and Marriage—Home and Family

Marriage not to be postponed. Young men make a great mistake to postpone marriage when they reach the proper age. It is a groundless fear for any young man of industrious habits to think that he cannot support a wife. A healthy, industrious young fellow has no reason to fear about making a living in this country. If he is intelligent and energetic, he will find plenty of opportunities to make a living for himself and for a wife.

There is a blessing attends marriage when rightly entered upon. The experience of the world, in all societies, is that married people do better, even in a worldly sense, than the unmarried. A young man finds that he can support himself and wife as easily as he supported himself. When a child is born, the married couple find it no harder to live than they did before. And as the family increases, their ability increases in proportion. There is a providence over every human being, and our Father, Who provides for the wants of the sparrows, does not forget His children.

Shall I be pardoned if I quote my own case? When I went on my first mission, I was engaged to a young lady. After a lengthy absence, I came back as poor as missionaries generally do. But I got married twelve days after my return. I tried to get employment; but up to the day of my marriage had not obtained it. The next day after marriage I secured employment. I had only been home five months when I went on another mission; and though it was in the winter time I made means so fast that when I started on this mission, having been called to take my wife with me, I left Salt Lake City with a very excellent outfit—mules and wagon, provisions, etc.

My own experience, therefore, warrants me in saying to young men: Do not be afraid of marriage, even though you may be poor. Select for yourself a good partner—a faithful, honest, industrious girl—and get married. If you are energetic yourself, and not afraid of work, you will have no trouble in making a living, and you will increase your happiness very much by doing so. The fact of your having a wife and the prospect of children will arouse your energies and make you think and exercise your brains. This of itself will have a beneficial effect. . . .

A generation who marry reasonably early is a happier, a stronger and purer generation than one in which marriage is deferred till later in life. Frequently a remark which I once publicly made concerning marriage is quoted to me. I said that any large element of unmarried young men in a community after they are twenty-four years of age is a dangerous element. Some, in speaking of it, have supposed that I referred to individual young men. Of course, this was not so. I did not refer to individuals; for there are many young men of twenty-four who, through being on missions or for other causes, are not married; but I referred to the danger to society of any considerable element of unmarried men over that age in a community. Does not the experience of mankind prove that this is correct? I certainly think so. I should deplore the increase of unmarried young men beyond twenty-three or twenty-four years of age in any of our communities, as I am satisfied that the effect on society would not be good. (Jan. 15, 1898, JI 33:66-67)

Laws of nature require young marriages. To marry and to marry rightly is part of the religion of the true servant and handmaiden of the Lord. In our eyes it is far more than a mere civil contract; it is a command of God, just as binding as though it were one of the ten written by the finger of Jehovah on the two tables of stone amidst the thunderings and lightnings of Sinai. Many, however, are inclined to treat this relationship far too lightly, as though it were something with which religion had no concern. . . .

The laws of nature and the word of God require that mankind should marry in their youth. The longer this union is put off the more opportunity for evil and, as a rule, with increasing years the less inclination to enter into it. The postponement of marriage has, all through the world's history from the very beginning, been a sign of the decline of any nation where it prevailed. It generally follows the increase of riches and consequent growth of luxury and is itself followed by corruption and decay. Such was the history of Greece and Rome and other rulers of antiquity, and such is the growing story of some of the nations of modern Christendom. It is not a good sign among the Latter-day Saints. (Jan. 15, 1901, JI 36:49-50)

Marriage is a duty. Every young man of proper age should be taught that it is his duty to take to himself one of the other sex as a wife. It should be enforced upon men as a duty which they owe to themselves, to their parents and to society at large. It should not be left as a matter of personal convenience or inconvenience alone but should be made to appear in their minds as something of far greater and higher importance. . . .

In view of these things, parents cannot be too careful in training their daughters, so that they will have correct feelings upon this subject. They should be made to understand that happiness does not consist in fine clothing nor in fine furnishings nor in elegant surroundings but that where true love exists between husband and wife a humble cottage may be made the abode of a purer happiness than can be found many times in the richest habitations in the land.

Our girls should be taught that if they obtain a suitable companion, however poor he may be, if he be a man of good habits, full of faith in the Lord, he can by industry, with his wife's help, lay the foundation for future reasonable comfort, and perhaps wealth. (May 15, 1892, JI 27:304-5)

But, girls, remain maids until you are a hundred years old if you cannot get men who are men of God. Better to remain unmarried all your lives than to connect yourselves with unworthy men and afterwards have to be divorced. (May 19, 1889, DW 39:18)

Cultivation of mutual respect. Young people of the right character who enter into the married condition do not get bored by being together; they arrange their lives so that the society of one will always be agreeable to the other. Marriages are sure to be unhappy where the parties become tired of each other, and prefer the society of others to that of their companions. Mutual respect must be cultivated, for without this, love cannot exist. The polite attentions which lovers show to each other should be kept up through life, and not be confined to the honeymoon. Where married people maintain this conduct in their treatment of each other, they are very likely to lead happy lives.

It is a beautiful sight to see a family where these amenities are maintained. The children partake of the spirit of their parents, and they live in love and harmony. The parents respect each other, and the children respect the parents. The influence of the example of the parents is plainly visible in the demeanor of the children. Even in poor circumstances, families who live in this manner are happy. Poverty may sometimes be painful, but the pain and irritation are wonderfully eased where the domestic virtues are cultivated.

Husbands to be good providers. I have already given my views on the advantages of early marriages. As a rule, people assimilate in their dispositions and manners much better when they are young then when they are beyond middle age. They can adapt themselves easier to each other's ways and are more likely to become congenial. The absence of money may prevent the procuring of some comforts and conveniences in the outset, but the common exertion and toil to obtain these have an enduring effect on both husband and wife.

Every young man should seek to qualify himself to become a good provider for a wife and children. Skill should be cultivated. Industry should be a fixed habit of life. Time should be valued as more than gold. The young man who values his minutes and his hours, and permits none to pass in idleness, is sure—all other things being equal—to become a useful citizen and to make a good provider for a family. There ought to be no trouble in this country for any industrious young man to make a reasonably good living for himself and family.

Wives to be good housekeepers. On the other hand, the girls should qualify themselves to be good housewives. Every girl, when she marries, should seek to make her home attractive. The contrast in the mind of her husband between her abode and that of others of her class should always be in her favor. The husband should always have reason to praise his wife's qualities as a housekeeper. Especially should the art of cooking food be cultivated, for though some may think that a matter of but little importance, experience will prove that it enters largely into domestic happiness. One of the poets says:

We may live without poetry, music, and art; We may live without conscience, and live without heart; We may live without friends, we may live without books, But civilized man cannot live without cooks . . .

A tactful wife will not fail to perceive the effect of a good, well-cooked meal upon her husband. If she have any troubles, she will not obtrude them upon him before he has had his meal. She will watch her opportunity to present a disagreeable subject at a time when she knows her husband is in the best mood to hear it. The husband also, on his part, if he be a man of good sense, will not come into his house, when his wife is perhaps tired and fretful through overwork or the annoyances which the children may give her, and throw in sight the cares and perplexities under which he labors. He should let all these slip off his shoulders when he crosses his threshold.

Domestic peace and tranquillity in the family are most desirable. People who live such lives are likely to live to advanced age. Care and worry attendant upon earthly existence ought to be softened and overcome by the sweet rest and entire absence from friction in the family circle. (Mar. 1, 1898, JI 33:195-96)

Build a home by united labor. A properly constituted young woman, if she finds a partner of her choice, will be content to struggle with him in obtaining the comforts of life. Every addition to the furnishings of their home or of their surroundings obtained by their joint exertions forms another link in their happiness and binds them closer together. . . .

Young people marrying in this manner and building themselves a home by their united labor, enjoy that home as they could not possibly a home that might be furnished for them beforehand. Everything in it brings to remembrance the pleasures of the past. It represents hopes and exertions, recalls incidents that are pleasant to reflect upon, and they learn to appreciate the value of that which they possess because of the exertions they have made to obtain it.

Have congenial marriages. Parents, and others who have influence with the young, should be careful to have marriages congenial. No true happiness can result from an ill-assorted marriage. . . .

The marriage of an ignorant person with an intelligent one is not always attended with happy results. There should be some similarity of taste, of disposition, of training, and certainly of belief, to make a couple congenial. A young man, therefore, in seeking for a partner—and the same may be said of young women—should bear in mind that to live happily through life in the wedded condition they should have partners of congenial tastes and of similar training. An intelligent, educated girl who marries an ignorant man must either lift him to her level, if she would lead a pleasant life and maintain her self-respect, or she must descend to his level. It is seldom that a woman can lift her husband in this way; she is more likely either to become discouraged and alienated from him, and separated from him, or descend to his level. If she does the latter, she cannot escape the feeling that she is lowering herself and descending from the station she might have occupied. The young man who marries a girl who is not his equal in education or in intelligence is more likely to lift her up to his level, and to inspire her with noble thoughts, and to develop her higher attributes, than in the other case. (May 15, 1891, JI 26:316-17)

A strict marriage command. When Latter-day Saints marry those who are not of their faith, I look upon it as a great misfortune to those who do so. If those barriers were to be broken down which ought to exist between us and the world, I should view it as a great calamity. One of the strictest commands that the Lord gave to Israel in olden times was that they should not marry with the nations surrounding them; this law is equally binding on us, and we should do everything in our power to maintain it inviolate. (Oct. 31, 1881, JD 22:284)

Many of the evils that fell upon Israel were due to inter-marriage on their part with women who were not of their faith, and who were from nations who did not have the same worship that Israel had. Marriages of this nature are contrary to the command of God.

We are commanded not to marry with those who are not of our faith, and no woman ever did it, no girl ever did it that has not sooner or later had sorrow because of this. God is not pleased with such marriages, and it is not in the nature of things to expect blessings to follow such intermarriages. (Aug. 26, 1883, JD 26:319)

Marry those strong in the faith. Many girls have supposed that the husband's love for them would be the means of bringing them into the Church; but the experience of our many years . . . has proved the fallacy of that hope. There have been exceptions, it is true, but they are very rare. The most frequent result has been that the girls have lost their faith and succumbed to the influence of the husband, and they and their children are aliens to the covenant. . . .

For a marriage to be a truly happy one among us, a young man or young woman in seeking a partner should make it a matter of the first consideration to find one who is strong in the faith which he or she possesses. This forms the principal foundation for future concord and happiness. Following this care should be taken upon the point of good habits, good temper, industry and agreeable tastes.

A man that is not of the right character before marriage ought not to be trusted to reform after marriage. It is seldom that such changes occur. The girl deceives herself who trusts to have such a result follow her marriage with a man of this kind. Her love for him should not blind her to his defects; in fact, if she would take the right course, she would never allow herself to become entangled in such a way as to place her affections upon an unworthy person. The society of such should be shunned; and if care be taken in this direction, there is but little danger of improper attachments springing up.

Marriage is the most important step in a young woman's life. It should be entered upon with the greatest care. Both sexes should earnestly seek the guidance of heaven in a matter so momentous as the forming of a contract as husband and wife. It ought not to be formed for a day, or for a few years, but with a view to being continued as long as life shall last, and then throughout eternity. (Nov. 1, 1891, JI 26:664-65)

It should be the aim of every father in Israel to have his daughters married to those who are of the right lineage, who have a claim upon the blessings of God, through their descent, added to their own faithfulness in keeping the commandments of God. I deem it of great importance to us as a people that we should look to this. . . .

Marriage to Gentiles causes unbelieving offspring. There are some men who have so much Gentile blood in them that their offspring partake of it and of the unbelief of the father, and in such cases it is impossible for a mother who has such a husband and children, with all her faith, with all her zeal, with all the pains that she takes, to instil into the minds of her children faith in the God of Israel and faith in the covenant that He has restored. They seem to belong to another flock. It seems as though they have no susceptibility for the truth. There is no good soil in their hearts to receive the seeds of truth, the Gospel of the Son of God. . . .

A girl of our faith may marry a Gentile, and he may be a pretty good man as far as his conduct is concerned; he may be a good citizen, a truthful man, but there will be a lack of susceptibility to the truth about his offspring. There will be a lack of faith there. Some of the children may have a little faith in the truth, but many of them, probably, will have no faith whatever and will give the mother uneasiness and trouble and sorrow, and she will have no satisfaction whatever in her children. . . . When women make alliances of this kind, they are not sure, in the least degree, as to the character of their posterity. They may have faithful children, but as likely as not . . . they will go back to their old element and to their old associations, and it seems impossible to prevent them from doing so.

Joseph Smith yet to have a faithful posterity. There may be faithful men who will have unfaithful sons, who may not be as faithful as they might be; but faithful posterity will come, just as I believe it will be the case with the Prophet Joseph's seed. Today he has not a soul descended from him personally in this Church. There is not a man bearing the Holy Priesthood to stand before our God in the Church that Joseph was the means in the hands of God of founding—not a man today of his own blood, that is, by descent—to stand before the Lord and represent him among these Latter-day Saints. But will this always be the case? No.

Just as sure as God lives, just as sure as God has made promises, so sure will some one of Joseph Smith's posterity rise up and be numbered with this Church and bear the everlasting Priesthood that Joseph himself had. It may be delayed in the wise providence of our God. There are many things that we cannot understand, cannot see the reason why they should be so, but these promises are unalterable; God made them to Joseph during his lifetime, and they will be fulfilled just as sure as God made them. He [Joseph] will have among this people some one descended from his own loins who will bear the everlasting Priesthood and who will honor and magnify that Priesthood among the Latter-day Saints.

Therefore, it is a blessing from God for a woman to bear children to such a man, or to any man who bears or holds the everlasting Priesthood of the Son of God, and who magnifies his calling, and through magnifying it, receives promises from God to himself and his posterity after him. . . .

Revelation needed for proper marriages. Out of all the sons of God there are comparatively few, I say, who are capable through their faith and faithfulness, and through their keeping the commandments of God, of leading the daughters of Zion in the path of exaltation and leading them into the Celestial Kingdom of our God; therefore, it is of the utmost importance in these matters we should be exceedingly careful.

We should seek by revelation to obtain a knowledge for ourselves respecting these matters. Our daughters should be taught to control their feelings and affections and not let them go out without any regard to these circumstances to which I have alluded. A woman should be exceedingly careful, a girl should be exceedingly careful, and parents should be exceedingly careful in instilling into her mind the principles that must be observed by her and by her husband to obtain exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom of God. . . .

Marry into faithful families. According to our faith no woman should be connected with a man who cannot save her in the Celestial Kingdom of God. What I mean by this is that if a man apostatizes and breaks covenants and loses his standing in the Church of Christ, he is not in a fit condition to save himself, much less to lead his wife aright. He cannot lead her in the path of exaltation, because he has turned aside from that path; he has gone into another path. If she follows him, she will follow him to destruction; she will take the downward road. She will never find, while following him, and he in that condition, the path of salvation. Therefore, how carefully men should be that in marrying they should marry into good families and not marry into apostate families. . . .

Marriage by authority of Priesthood. Our people are commanded to marry in their own Church. We are commanded to marry those of our own faith and not to go outside of our Church for partners. Instead of being married by Justices of the Peace, or by other civil authorities, God has placed in His Church a Priesthood, and one of the offices and functions of that Priesthood is to marry the sons and daughters of God—to marry them one to another in the new and everlasting covenant and to seal upon them and their posterity the blessings that pertain to that new and everlasting covenant; and any man who desires to be a happy husband and to have a happy home, and any woman who desires to be a happy wife and a happy mother, and to have joy in their associations, will never permit themselves to be drawn aside to be married by any authority except that which God has instituted, namely, the authority of the Holy Priesthood. (Nov. 16, 1884, JD 25:365-69)

Sacredness of family relations. The life of a Saint is not simply a personal perfecting, it is also a factor in the entire scheme of earth's redemption. No one can be saved alone, by himself, or herself, unassisted by . . . others. The weight of our influence must be either for good or harm, be an aid or an injury to the work of human regeneration, and as we assume responsibilities, form ties, enter into covenants, beget children, accumulate families, so does the weight of our influence increase, so does its extent broaden and deepen.

The Scriptures inform us that God created this earth as a habitation for man, and He placed man on it that he might have joy, a joy that is to be eternal. To accomplish these purposes, the preparatory one of peopling the earth, and the ultimate one of man's eternal happiness, He, the Creator, established marriage, and commanded those He first placed here on earth to be fruitful and multiply. This institution He regulated by strict laws given through His servants to His people in their various dispensations; and His son, our Savior, emphasized these commandments by most unequivocal teachings with regard to the sacredness of the marriage covenant, and of the sinfulness of divorce for other than the most grave departures from the spirit and intent of that covenant.

In this is wisdom, for the experience of the world, in all its ages, proves that where lax ideas exist with regard to marriages and divorce, more especially where those ideas find expression in lax legislation, there we discover peoples and nations whose code of morals is inferior, and where sexual irregularities and sins increase, until that righteousness, which has been so truthfully said "exalteth a nation" (Proverbs 14:34), ceases to have an existence in their midst.

To a people who believe as we do, that true marriage was divinely instituted for the multiplication of mankind, and is not a union for time alone, but reaches into the eternities, the disruption of families by divorce is an evil of no ordinary character, not only bearing a harvest of sorrow and suffering in this life, but also having a far reaching influence into the world beyond the grave, and possibly involving others in the ruin who had no voice in the separation or power to avert its occurrence. For this reason the Latter-day Saints of all people should be most loath to sunder sacred ties once formed, and most determinedly opposed to the severance of unions made in holy places in God's appointed way, for light and trivial causes. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 48:716)

Birth control—a great sin. From what we have heard we are led to believe that the spirit is abroad in the earth, and is making some headway among the Latter-day Saints, to look with reproach upon women with large families, and the desire seems to be growing among some of the younger population, to desire only one or two, and not to exceed three, children. We have heard that many of the diabolical practices of the world have been introduced . . . among some who profess to be Latter-day Saints, to prevent the bearing of children. No sin, unless it be that of murder, will meet with a greater condemnation from God than this evil of tampering with the fountains of life. Such sins will destroy the strength of any people that practices them, and the nation whose people yield to such vices is in great danger of destruction. No Saint can practice or encourage such corruption without incurring the displeasure of an offended God. (July 15, 1895, JI 30:451)

I refer to the practice of preventing the birth of children. I want to lift my voice in solemn warning against this, and I say to you that the woman who practices such devilish arts, or the man who consents to them, will be cursed of God. Such persons will be cursed in their bodies, cursed in their minds, cursed in their property, cursed in their offspring. God will wipe them out from the midst of this people and nation. Remember it.

Mothers, teach this to your daughters, for I tell you it is true. I need not pronounce any curse, whatever my authority may be, but I say to you that women who take this course, and men who consent to it, will be cursed of God Almighty, and it will rest upon them until their generation shall be blotted out, and their name shall be lost from the midst of the Saints of God unless, as I have said, there is deep, thorough and heartfelt repentance. (Oct. 7, 1894, DW 49:739)

Abortion—an unforgiveable sin. I say to you, my sisters, you teach your daughters against this accursed practice, or they will go to hell; they will be damned, they will be murderers, and the blood of innocence will be found upon them. A man that would sanction such a thing in his family, or that would live with a woman guilty of such acts, shares in the crime of murder. I would no more perform the ordinance of laying on of hands on a woman who is guilty of that crime, if I knew it, than I would put my hands on the head of a rattlesnake.

We must set our faces like flint against such acts. These dreadful practices are coming up like a tidal wave and washing against our walls. . . . Now just as sure as it is done, and people yield to it, so sure will they be damned, they will be damned with the deepest damnation; because it will be the damnation of shedding innocent blood, for which there is no forgiveness; and I would no more, as I say, administer to such women, baptize them, or perform any ordinance of the Gospel for them, than I would for a reptile. They are outside the pale of salvation. They are in a position that nothing can be done for them. They cut themselves off by such acts from all hopes of salvation. (Nov. 20, 1884, JD 26:14-15)

Great power bestowed on woman. A great glory is bestowed on woman, for she is permitted to bring forth the souls of men. You have the opportunity of training children who shall bear the Holy Priesthood and go forth and magnify it in the midst of the earth. It is a glorious mission which God has assigned to His daughters, and they should be correspondingly proud of it, and should realize its importance and seek to be missionaries in their own families, training up their children in the fear of God.

It is an established fact . . . that scarcely any great men ever had a poor weak-minded mother. If you read of the great men of antiquity, or of modern times, you will find that in almost every instance they have had great mothers, who have molded and fashioned the plastic minds of their sons according to their own notions of greatness and sent them forth to battle with the circumstances of life, like gods almost.

Great interests are in the hands of mothers. God has reposed in them great power; if they wield that power for good, it will be productive of peace and happiness and exaltation to them. They will be blessed in seeing the greatness of their posterity. Their hearts will be gratified in having a posterity who will rise up and call them blessed. (Mar. 3, 1867, JD 11:338-39)

God pleased with women of Church. The women in this Church are worthy of all praise. They are more attentive to their meetings, more faithful in the observance of the duties that devolve upon them and have proved stauncher advocates of the truth and shown less treachery . . . than the men have. I know that God is exceedingly pleased with the women of this Church, for they have shown characteristics that are worthy of the angels in heaven. I know that God will bless the mothers and the daughters of Zion for their fidelity to the Gospel and for the devotion that they manifest. And the men of this Church might take lessons from the sisters in the way they attend to meetings and perform the other duties that devolve upon them. (June 20, 1882, DW 45:257)

The influence of mothers. I have noticed in my experience that where girls are indifferent about whom they marry, and with whom they associate, it is very frequently traceable to the influence of the mother. A mother may have a careless husband; she may have a man that is indifferent to the duties of his religion; but if she be a faithful woman herself and exercise proper control, and does have control over her children, she can bring up her children to be faithful men and women in the Church.

Go where you will and examine the households of the people, and you will find that the mother's influence is a very wonderful influence, not only upon the children but upon her husband, but particularly so with her children. She can teach her children to pray in early life, and she can instill into them feelings and desires that remain with them throughout their life. (Jan. 1, 1897, DW 54:289-90)

Women can wield a most potent influence, and it would be folly to ignore the fact. With women to aid in the great cause of reform what wonderful changes can be effected! Without her aid how slow the progress! Give her responsibility, and she will prove that she is capable of great things; but deprive her of opportunities, make a doll of her, leave her nothing to occupy her mind but the reading of novels, gossip, the fashions and all the frivolity of this frivolous age, and her influence is lost, and instead of being a helpmeet to man, as originally intended, she becomes a drag and an encumbrance. Such women may answer in other places and among other people, but they would be out of place here. . . .

Necessity of good cooking. He who said that "cleanliness was next to godliness" might with truth have said that it was a part of godliness. Cleanliness among the Latter-day Saints should be universal, for no man or woman who are uncleanly in their persons and their houses can be Saints in the true sense of the word. And we firmly believe that a man who is habitually compelled to eat badly-cooked food, served up in slovenly style, cannot be so faithful a man, so pleasant a companion, so good tempered a husband as he would be if his victuals were property cooked and served up tastefully. He is apt to become dyspeptic. Every woman in our community, whatever her station, should possess the art of making food wholesome, palatable and nutritious. She should be able to compete with the physician in cures, and surpass him in the prevention of disease. A good, well-cooked meal—not a gluttonous feast—is a mighty civilizer; it brightens the faculties, helps the health and produces good temper. . . .

If women knew how much of human health and happiness depend on good digestion, they would never rest until they had acquired the art of rendering food tender, wholesome and easy of digestion. Young ladies who are in possession of this art are far more likely to secure and retain the respect and love of husbands, when they get them, than if they were fully conversant with the round of fashionable accomplishments, and yet incapable of serving up a good meal. Before marriage love answers very well as food, in some cases; but, after that happy event, something more substantial has to be provided—the heart has had its turn, and the stomach steps forward and asserts its claims, and it will not be disregarded. (June 19, 1869, MS 31:400)

The foundation of society. The family organization is the foundation of all society, and the character of a community or nation will correspond with the general character of the families that compose it. It is amongst the latter that we must look for the germs of those virtues or vices that distinguish the former, and either exalt them in the scale of mental and moral worth, or sink them into degradation and contempt. It is from the home circle that must radiate those benign and purifying influences which are destined yet to effect a mighty revolution in the world, to reform, moralize and re-organize its inhabitants, and to banish from their midst every cause of crime and misery, when of course their effects will disappear also. . . .

Teach children the Gospel. In the Gospel we have a scheme of education which is applicable to all classes of society and all grades of intellect, and is calculated, as we progress in the knowledge of its principles, to ensure a better and more perfect development of the faculties of our minds and the energies of our bodies and through which there is, or should be, even now, a universal and uniform course of instruction going on in the family of every Latter-day Saint, in whatever quarter of the world they may reside. The Lord has wisely made it obligatory upon every head of a family to instruct his children in the principles of the Gospel of Jesus so soon as they are capable of understanding them, and when the Government of God is established upon the earth, those who neglect so plain and natural a duty will, according to one of the established laws of that kingdom, "be had in remembrance before the judge of my people." (D&C 68:33.) . . .

We are not merely required to teach our families the truth, but to teach it in such a way as shall render it attractive instead of repulsive to them. . . . Now, the truth may be presented in such a way as to repel instead of attracting and to leave disagreeable instead of pleasing impressions; and as children are very susceptible to these feelings, and very quick to observe, they will of course prefer to associate with those who, though they have less truth, or even a great deal of error, are more agreeable; and as a natural consequence they imbibe the views and feelings, the prejudices and errors of those they associate with, and thus the influence and power we might have gained over their minds and used for their present and future good are lost forever. . . .

It is the bounden duty of every parent, and the pleasure of every one who is fit to be a parent, to present the truth in as attractive a garb as possible to his children. We should clothe it in the habiliments of beauty and cheerfulness, and as we shall of course be regarded by our children as the embodiment and exemplification of the effects of the principles we teach, we should be careful to let our own life be a practical illustration of the cheerful and happifying results of obedience to the truth. . . .

Love should prevail in homes. Home should be the center of attraction to young people. It is there that all the beautiful effects of the truth should be practically exemplified in the lives and actions of its possessors, and those sweet and cheering influences should be felt which radiate like a halo of glory and happiness around the family altar and the domestic hearth and make home the dearest and most cherished spot on earth. It is the duty of parents to make home attractive and the fireside cheerful; every cause of discord, contention and bitterness should, so far as possible, be banished from the hallowed precincts of the family circle, and love and kindness alone should predominate in their midst. Neither is this so difficult to accomplish as it may at first appear, for if the head of the household is governed by the principle of love and a desire to make others happy, the same spirit will be sooner or later diffused through every member of his family. No parent should ever play the part of a tyrant in his family and rule with harshness or correct in anger. If we cannot control ourselves, we cannot control our children and are consequently not fit to have any. Love is the only correct governing principle. (Nov. 1, 1862, MS 24:696-98)

Example of parents. Where parents set proper examples to their children, and with those examples join good precepts, the influence is felt throughout the lives of their children. There may be some who will forget or disregard that which is shown and taught them, but they will be the exceptions. As the children grow in years, they will think about the examples and precepts of their parents. Increasing years will add weight to all that they have said and done. (Jan. 1, 1892, JI 27:28)

Children should respect parents. The Apostle Paul, in writing to Timothy, foretold many things concerning the last days. He said "perilous times shall come," and he predicted that men should be very selfish or, to use his own language, "lovers of their own selves" (2 Timothy 3:1-2); they should be covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers. He also said they should be disobedient to parents and without natural affection.

Certainly, his words have been and are being fulfilled. Disobedience to parents is one of the sins of the age. The want of natural affection is also a prominent feature of our times. Is it possible that the children of the Latter-day Saints partake of this spirit which the Apostle Paul, through the gift of prophecy, said should be seen in the last days?

Whatever other people may do, certainly Latter-day Saints should not be guilty of this wickedness. Their children should be taught to avoid disobedience and to cultivate natural affection. Parents should respect and love their children. Children should respect and love their parents.

How gratifying it is to affectionate parents to have their children manifest interest in their health and welfare! It is a beautiful feature in family life, when children and parents separate for the night, to have them shake hands and exchange the kiss of affection, and express one to the other their good wishes for their safety through the night; also, in the morning when they meet, to exchange salutations in like manner, and loving enquiries concerning the condition of their health. (Dec. 1, 1891, JI 26:729-30)

Obedience to parents. To a person who understands the value of obedience it is painful to be where it is neglected, to hear a mother request a child to do or not to do a certain thing and see the child pay no regard to it, to hear a father request that certain things should be done and find that his request is entirely unheeded. Such carelessness is ruinous to the character of the child, and produces a most injurious effect upon it that will be felt throughout its future life.

Too much stress cannot be laid upon the importance of teaching children to obey. The parent should be exceedingly careful not to make an improper request of the child; but when the request is made it should be enforced, and the child should be taught that its will should be subject to the will of the parent, and that the parent's wish should not be contradicted nor departed from but be carried out exactly as stated. In this way the habit of obeying without question is formed; and it adds greatly to the happiness of both parents and children when this kind of obedience is established.

Children should be taught to take pleasure in submitting to and carrying out the wishes of their parents, and not to murmur when they are told to do anything, or to ask why someone else could not do it better than they. (Jan. 15, 1893, JI 28:58-59)

A loving, well-trained child takes delight in complying with the wishes of its parents. It is its highest pleasure to do that which they require. Such children obey their parents with alacrity. If they know their parents' wishes, they do not wait to have them told to them. Where such children dwell, there are no frowns; there are no expressions of a wish not to do as they are told. Such children are not heard making the reply to their mothers or to their fathers, "Why cannot someone else do this?" Neither are they heard saying, "I don't want to," in reply to a request that is made of them to do something. Such remarks are evidence of bad training, and every sensible boy and girl should be too ashamed to ever give utterance to such replies.

If children only knew the pains that their parents have taken with them, how they have cared for them in infancy and watched over them night and day, frequently exhausting themselves to render them assistance, their hearts would overflow with gratitude to their parents, and they would feel that they could not do them sufficient kindness to repay them for all that they had done for them in their childhood and youth. (Aug. 15, 1888, JI 23:248)

Correct family government. There is such a thing as governing too much. This is attended with as grave evils as laxity in governing. Too many exactions and too great severity of treatment lead to rebellion, and if they be continued, children, when they grow older, are apt to break away from proper restraints and pursue their own course, regardless of the wishes of their parents.

The best family government is that in which the judgment of the children is appealed to and they are shown, by kind words, that the requests made of them are for their benefit and happiness. Parental authority can be built up in this way in the minds of children to such an extent that disobedience would be one of the last things children would think of. There is this advantage which attends correct family government, the children grow up to be good members of society. They honor all lawful authority. As members of the Church they are obedient in their sphere, and there is no difficulty in controlling them. Young men who are properly brought up, when they are sent into the missionary field, become faithful, industrious, counsel-obeying Elders. They reverence the authority which God has given to His servants, and they have no difficulty in submitting to all proper requirements. As husbands they make the best of companions.

Girls brought up in this manner gladden the household of which they form a part. They make their husbands' lives happy ones, for they have been taught to restrain themselves and not carry out every whim or caprice that may suggest itself to their minds. They have been taught self-control, and this of itself is an important lesson. (July 15, 1891, JI 26:442)

Obedience to parental authority. While few individuals who have carefully noted the spirit of the press . . . can doubt that its teachings have had much to do in promoting the lawless and revolutionary tendencies of the people, the real source of such tendencies must be sought in a very different direction—namely, in the family circle, where every bias is given to the human mind, and where the germ of every evil as of every good principle is planted and developed. Disregard of law and authority under the parental roof leads inevitably to utter disregard and contempt for all law, authority and restraint; and when was there an age in the whole history of the world more notorious for this one thing, than the present? It is one of the crying sins of the age! Why, the fifth commandment is almost entirely disregarded.

It is decidedly unfashionable for children now-a-days, except of very tender years, to submit to parental restraint; and instead of being a blessing and an honor to parents, children too often are almost a life-long source of trouble and anxiety; and home, instead of being, as it ought to be, the very commencement and foundation of an eternal heaven, is, alas! in innumerable instances a scene of discord and turmoil, and an embryotic hell. This spirit and disposition influencing the home circle, affects communities in a corresponding ratio, and here is the real and only source and foundation of that spirit of lawlessness and defiance now so general.

Among the Latter-day Saints, whose aim and whose mission is to restore true principle, and re-establish the order of heaven through all the ramifications of human affairs, respect for and obedience to all legitimate authority is the invariable rule. In their midst, and forming a part of their religious faith, the father is the Lord and head of his family, and implicit, unquestioning obedience to parental authority, when judiciously exercised, is strenuously insisted upon. We do not wish to be understood that this desirable consummation has been fully or nearly reached; but the foundation is laid. This is the end kept in view, and it will never be relinquished until obedience to parental authority even unto death, if necessary, as manifested of old by Abraham's son and Jephthah's daughter, will be willingly rendered.

This line of policy commenced in the family circle, as it most assuredly has been, its happifying influences will gradually unfold and develop themselves, until the whole community will eventually reap the inestimable blessings and benefits arising from its full consummation. Thus will the principles of true government be established, legitimate authority be unmurmuringly and implicitly obeyed, until peace and concord become the rule, and finally the dreams of Prophets and poets will be realized in universal peace on earth and good will to men. (Apr. 25, 1868, MS 30:257-58)

A Saint of God. Is it a man's duty, or right, or privilege, to carry his cares into his family and disturb the peace and serenity existing there by relating his troubles? Certainly not. When his foot rests upon the threshold of his door, no matter what his difficulties or perplexities may be, he should enter with the spirit of peace in his heart and with the love of God burning within him. If there is irritability existing, his presence should be soothing to every member of his household, and particularly in talking with his children they should feel the influence of his presence; if there should be any improper feelings existing, they should be calmed. . . .

A Latter-day Saint! Think of the nature of the name. A Saint of God! Why, he should be next to an angel the most perfect of the human family. He should be perfect in his sphere, as God is perfect in His sphere, He should be free from fault. If he has a fault, he should seek daily and hourly to correct it and not rest satisfied as long as he is aware of the existence of a fault until he conquers it, pleading with the Father in the name of Jesus for strength to overcome his weakness, for power to put it away, carrying with him the spirit of love, the spirit of serenity, the spirit of peace, that when he appears in society, no matter where he may be, all who come in contact with him may feel his influence and feel purified and strengthened by his example and by his words and by his very presence. And this is what God designs we should be as Latter-day Saints. (July 27, 1879, JD 20:290)

Female culture and training. Too great care cannot be taken in educating our young ladies. Great responsibilities will devolve upon them. To their hands will be mainly committed the formation of the moral and intellectual character of the young. Let the women of our country be made intelligent, and their children will certainly be the same. The proper education of a man decides his welfare; but the interests of a whole family are secured by the correct education of a woman. It is a noticeable fact in the history of mankind that men who have attained to distinction among their fellow-men have been the sons of wise, judicious mothers. Their mothers' influence has, in the most instances, had more to do with the formation of their characters than their fathers'.

But to have a race of capable women, they must be healthy. . . . If the choice must be made between the mind and the body, and only one of these can receive the proper training, we would say, much as we would deplore the absence of mental cultivation, let it be the body. It would be better for posterity and the future of the world for the physical portion of woman's nature to receive the proper care than for the mind to be developed at the expense of everything else. . . .

Many of our families who now complain of a want of health and vigor could bring about a wonderful change in themselves and their feelings by changing their habits. Instead of remaining immured in their houses from one week's end to another, they should spend more time in the open air. They should exercise their bodies in outdoor exercises and employments—walking, riding, and gardening. The excuse now frequently made for not taking this course is the want of time. But if a certain amount of outdoor employment and exercise were to be viewed as of primary importance, and were to be strictly attended to, the in-door labors would suffer but little, if any, for the physical energy to perform them would be so much greater that they would be accomplished with pleasure. Regular exercise in the open air should be required by mothers of their daughters as a part of their daily duty.

Another point of great importance in the education of young ladies in our community is to impart to them a thorough, practical knowledge of all kinds of domestic employments. Mothers who have an idea that labor is degrading and unbecoming, and do not give their daughters a thorough training in household employments, are not true friends to their children. If they could see all the anxieties, vexations, and perplexities which their daughters would have to endure, after they become wives and mothers, in consequence for their lack of training, they would see their mistake. It may cost mothers more care to teach their daughters to be excellent cooks and thorough housewives; but the time and pains will be spent, and in days to come their daughters will bless them for such training. Every woman, however wealthy, should understand everything connected with the care of a house and family to be able to teach her help whenever necessary. By such a training poverty itself is deprived of many of its inconveniences. (June 13, 1868, MS 30:369-70)

Teach children how to do things. It is a great deal easier, as many of us know by experience, to do a large proportion of household and other tasks than to teach children how to do them. Through ignorance, lack of judgment, want of skill, they waste time and material and tax our patience sadly. They always want to do the very best things they cannot do, and such tasks as are suited to their capacity they complain of as drudgery. Far too many parents, rather than assume the labor of teaching their boys and girls how to do the more difficult tasks of daily life, prefer to do the work themselves and keep the child at the same routine of petty choring. This is altogether bad policy for both parties. It discourages the child and effectually prevents the parent from reaping the full benefit of the child's capacity.

If the mother cannot have patience to teach her daughter how to make bread and cake, how to sew and how to manage the niceties of housekeeping, who will teach her? And what unkindness it is to let her grow up in practical ignorance of these things, and then suffer the bitter consequences of such ignorance when she goes to housekeeping on her own account. As a reward for drudgery faithfully done the growing girl should be allowed to attempt tasks even a little beyond her ability. . . .

The same is true of boys. Those boys who are taken into companionship and fellowship with their fathers and gradually initiated into ways of doing business, entrusted according to their capability with the management of important transactions and instructed how to achieve results, will almost certainly pass, with no unpleasant transition, from boyhood to manhood. (July 15, 1895, JI 30:433)

Don't hide things from parents. Another thing, I wish to say to you, boys and girls, never do anything in secret that you would be ashamed of your parents knowing about. Never use language, say words or be guilty of actions you would be ashamed of your father or mother learning of. Always remember this. If any of you, boys or girls, ever feel inclined to do anything which you would not like your father to know of or your mother to see, avoid it, shun it, and never keep the company of those who would do such acts, for associating with such boys and girls would have an evil influence upon you; better quit their society than be guilty of things you would be ashamed to have known to your parents. There are a great many wrongs committed through boys and girls doing things in secret which they would be ashamed of their fathers or mothers knowing about. (Aug. 2, 1873, JI 8:124)

The courtesies of home. The happiness of human life can be greatly increased by paying attention to those little courtesies which belong to our daily associations. It is an important lesson to teach children to observe these details so that the observance may become habitual to them. When the habit is once acquired, it is not easily forgotten. Children should be taught to be respectful and courteous to their parents, to pay them the honor that is due to them, to listen attentively to their instructions and requests and to always manifest a spirit of cheerful obedience. . . .

It is not only in the intercourse that children have with their parents that they should observe civility and courtesy, but it is in their association with their brothers and sisters and, in fact, with all with whom they are brought in contact. Boys should be taught to treat their sisters with as much kindness, respect and courtesy as they do girls who are not related to them; and girls should be taught to treat their brothers with as much affability and sweetness as they do boys who are not their kindred. . . .

There should be no shadow of displeasure or anger enter into the habitation of any family in Zion; if the parents dwell together in love and affection and exhibit that feeling in their daily association, the children will partake of that influence and will grow up under it, and it will always be in their minds the proper way to live. . . .

There can be no true happiness maintained in a household where these things are neglected. Men should be as much disposed to be attentive to and careful of their wives after marriage as they were when they were endeavoring to secure their love before marriage. Women should understand that to maintain the affection and devotion of their husbands after marriage they should take as much pains to please them and to make them have a good opinion of them as they did before they entered into covenant with each other. . . .

It should be made a constant rule in every household to enforce the observance of proper respect between parents and children, children and parents and brothers and sisters. Children thus brought up will find their pathway in life, all other things being equal, much smoother than if they should be left to neglect these things. They will be beloved wherever they go, and they will always have friends, because it is by such conduct that friendship is secured and preserved. (July 1, 1891, JI 26:410-11)

Qualities that promote happiness. Men should never treat their wives with disrespect. They should manifest a feeling of love for them, and more especially when they become advanced in years. There is nothing that will excite love in a man's heart so much as to see a wife as willing, even in her advanced years, to sacrifice her own comfort to his sake as she was when they were first married; and I am sure it must have the same effect upon a woman—to have the husband, when her charms are fading and she is growing old, and perhaps not so attractive as she was—to have the husband tender and kind and loving, not forgetting her good qualities nor what she has done. When a woman sees a husband manifest that feeling towards her, she in return will manifest her kindness and love for his thoughtful attentions.

Treat children with respect. These are little things, but how much they contribute to our happiness and to our peace. We should therefore cultivate these qualities ourselves and teach them to our children. Our children should be made to feel that we love them and that we are disposed to treat them with proper respect. When we ask a child to do a favor, we should ask it as though he were a gentleman, or if a girl, as though she were a lady. A man should never talk to his children as though he were a tyrant. He should address them in kindness and as though they were gentlemen and ladies, and they will grow up with that feeling and treat others with the same respect. . . .

Women should talk to their children in kindness, not harshly and not in a spirit of scolding. . . . A man or a woman who is always scolding loses influence with children and with everybody else. (June 20, 1883, JD 24:226)
