Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 35

The Sabbath—The Lord's Day

The Lord's Day. The reason why The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints keeps Sunday as the day of rest and worship, instead of Saturday as observed by devout Jews and Seventh Day Adventists, is because the Saints have been commanded of God by revelation to keep "the Lord's Day" as the Sabbath. This law was given on Sunday, August 7, 1831, as follows:

And that thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world, thou shalt go to the house of prayer and offer up thy sacraments upon my holy day; for verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions to the Most High;

Nevertheless thy vows shall be offered up in righteousness on all days and at all times; but remember that on this the Lord's Day, thou shalt offer thy oblations and thy sacraments unto the Most High, confessing thy sins unto thy brethren, and before the Lord. (D&C 59:9-12.)

"The Lord's Day" (Revelation 1:10) is the day on which He rose from the dead and on which His disciples at that period assembled to worship and break bread in His name. That was the "first day of the week" (John 20:1; Acts 20:7), as they counted time. This custom was observed in the primitive Christian Church, and the Seventh Day was also observed by the Jewish disciples for a time. But Paul and other leading Elders of the Church set themselves against the observance of the rites and rules of the Mosaic law and proclaimed the liberty of the Gospel, the law having been fulfilled in Christ. He chided those who were sticklers for special days as required by the law but himself observed the Lord's Day—the first day of the week.

It is the spirit of Sabbath observance that is acceptable to God rather than its letter. One day out of seven is to be a day of rest and worship. It would not matter which day of the week that was but for the sake of order and uniformity. So the Lord has designated for the Saints which day they should keep holy, and that is the "Lord's Day," commonly called "the first day of the week."

Respecting the seventh day and the first day of the week, it should be remembered that that which is the seventh day in one part of the earth may be the sixth day, or the first, in another part of the earth. (Aug. 15, 1896, JI 31:481-82)

The children of Israel observed the seventh day as a day of rest—the day known to us as Saturday. But the Lord was crucified on Friday and arose from the dead on the first day of the week. It was therefore called "The Lord's Day." It seems that the day of Pentecost that year fell on the first day of the week, when the disciples "were all with one accord in one place." (Acts 2: 1.)

In the Acts of the Apostles it is recorded that St. Paul and his companions arrived at Troas and "abode seven days. And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them." (Acts 20:6-7.)

Paul himself also alludes to it: "Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye. Upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come." (1 Corinthians 16:1-2.) The Apostle John describes himself as being in the spirit on the "Lord's Day." (Revelation 1:10.)

It would seem from these allusions that the disciples, after the death of the Savior, made a practice of meeting together on the Lord's Day. This was not the Jewish Sabbath, neither was it recognized by law as a Sabbath until the time of Constantine. He prohibited judicial proceedings on the Lord's Day, and after that it was probably observed as a Sabbath in the place of Saturday, the old Jewish Sabbath, and grew into use as a day of rest and worship. We now observe it because it is sanctioned by law, and it seems to make but little, if any difference, whether we call it Saturday or Sunday. It happens that the day we observe is called Sunday. But the great point is to observe one day in seven and have it kept as a day of worship, a day of rest, a day when worldly thoughts and business shall be banished from our minds and from our habitations. It is in this spirit that Latter-day Saints should observe this day. (May 1, 1892, JI 27:286-87)

Observance of the Sabbath. If there was in every breast a strong desire and determination to keep the Sabbath Day holy, other times could be found sufficiently ample to gratify the taste for amusements. . . . If the lives of those who keep the Sabbath Day holy be observed, it will be found that they have quite as much enjoyment, and certainly a greater feeling of satisfaction, than those do who break the Sabbath day to gratify their inclinations for amusement or other enjoyment, for those who keep the Sabbath day holy have an approval of conscience that gives them greater pleasure, because they are doing that which the Lord has commanded.

There should be a feeling of reverence for the Lord's Day taught to our children and cultivated in all their minds. The force of such teaching and cultivation has a strong effect upon all men and women. Boys and girls who have been taught in their childhood to keep holy the Sabbath Day grow up with that feeling so strong that it is painful to them to be compelled, as sometimes all of us are, to do anything that can be construed into a violation of that day.

There have been times in the history of our people when work had to be done on the Sabbath Day. We refer to times in crossing the plains and on other occasions when it seemed absolutely necessary to travel or move from one camp to another or from one place where grass and water were scarce or very poor to a better camping place. It is true, as we have been taught by the Lord, that man was not made for the Sabbath but the Sabbath for man. At the same time it is our duty to observe the Sabbath and refrain from all kinds of work and amusements that would be considered a desecration of the day. It should be made a day of worship and a day of rest.

Children who are brought up in this way, and in whom this feeling is instilled, will not willingly break the Sabbath; they will not go skating nor swimming nor fishing nor hunting nor pleasure seeking; but they will use the day in the manner in which the Lord has commanded.

It is a great mistake to suppose that the man who goes off riding on Sunday obtains more rest than the man who goes to meeting. There is a refreshing influence connected with the Spirit of the Lord that brings health and strength and ease to those who receive it, and time spent in meeting, listening to the word of God and partaking of the sacrament is well spent, and both body and spirit are refreshed. Men and women who thus observe the Sabbath day are prepared on Monday morning, with invigorated bodies, enlightened and comforted minds, to enter upon the serious labors of the week and to perform them with ease and pleasure. While in meeting and under the influence of the Spirit of the Lord troubles and perplexities are cast away, burdens are lifted, anxieties are removed and peace and joy fill the soul.

We know whereof we speak when we thus write, and we sincerely trust that all . . . will do everything in their power to impress upon the children . . . the great importance of observing the Sabbath Day. This observance lies at the foundation of all true character. Children who observe the Sabbath Day grow to be men and women who observe the Sabbath Day. (Feb. 1, 1891, JI 26:86-87)

Sabbath breakers to lose spirit. Children should not be permitted to attend public gatherings without older persons accompanying to guard them from accident and from the contamination of the ungodly. The responsibility for the evils attending violations of these instructions will rest upon parents, guardians and the local Priesthood in the various wards and settlements.

Persons who habitually desecrate the Lord's day cannot be held in fellowship, and members of the Church who neglect public worship and the partaking of the Sacrament and do not remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy will become weak in the faith and spiritually sickly and will lose the Spirit and favor of God and ultimately forfeit their standing in the Church and their exaltation with the obedient and faithful. (Apr. 8, 1887, MS 49:298)

Recreation and the Sabbath. Among the sins into which some who are called Saints have been betrayed is Sabbath-breaking and over indulgence in useless pleasure. "The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath." (Mark 2:27.) But it is the Lord's Day and should be spent as He directs. We are not left to the doubts and queries which enter into the polemics of sectaries on this important matter. We have the word of the Lord upon it, direct. . . . (See D&C 68:29; 59:9-13.)

These commandments of the Lord do not admit of Sunday excursions to the lake or the canyons or other places any more than manual labor. That day will be held sacred to the service and worship of God by every true Latter-day Saint. Those who desecrate it reject the word of the Lord and will not be held guiltless. We admonish all members of the Church to obey this commandment and the officers of the Church to see that it is not broken with impunity.

The mania for recreations of various kinds which has seized upon many of the people is harmful in several ways. It unfits them for the regular duties of life. It renders them restless and impatient of proper restraint. It obstructs business. It tends to contract habits of dissipation. It throws our young folks into the company of persons whose society should be shunned. It cultivates worldliness. It conduces to many evils, and the spirit of purity, temperance, holiness and peace will not abide in resorts such as have been established for the purpose of enticing the Saints into folly. . . .

We have no disposition to deprive either young or old of proper amusement. It is necessary to perfect health and rational enjoyment. It should be provided by those who have the watchcare of the people, especially for the young, and conducted without sinfulness and without excess. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 48:714-15)

Light-mindedness to be avoided. The Sabbath is ordained as a day of rest and a day on which the Saints should specially devote their attention and turn their thoughts to spiritual matters. It is expected that the Saints will refrain from seeking amusement, as well as to avoid work at this time, and it is not right for young people to spend their time in games of any kind on the Lord's Day, though meeting together and engaging in elevating, interesting and instructive conversation is not at all improper.

The Saints should not put on a sanctimonious air and long face, which at one time were thought to be necessary to the proper worship of God, nor should they be more anxious on the Sabbath to serve God than they are upon any other day. But there is an appropriateness of conduct and of action which all Latter-day Saints should adopt on Sunday which will cause them to refrain from light-mindedness and folly and prompt them to make it indeed a day of worship and of rest. (Feb. 1, 1894, JI 29:79)

Sabbath Day labor unprofitable. A man deceives himself when he thinks that by working on Sunday he advances his labor or his interests. So also with those who take that day for excursions and pleasure hunting. A man who strictly confines his labors to six days, and will not work himself, not suffer his animals to work on Sunday, will perform more labor during the year and be prospered to a far greater extent than the man who is careless upon this point.

So also with those who seek pleasure; they lose by using the Sabbath for that purpose. If they would select some other day, they would find themselves better off at the end of the year than they would be in using Sunday for this purpose. It should be an inflexible rule with every man, woman and child in the Church to hold Sunday sacred for the worship of the Lord and never to perform any labor on that day if it can possibly be avoided. (Sept. 2, 1871, JI 6:140)

Attendance at meetings restful. I have always felt (as soon as I reached an age to reflect upon this subject) that our spiritual natures require as much care as our physical natures need nourishment. I believe that we can starve our spirits, impoverish them and dwarf ourselves by so doing.

I have found in my own experience—although I have labored a good deal mentally—that by attending meetings regularly on the Sabbath Day it has been a day of rest to me; yet many persons might be disposed to excuse themselves by saying that their brains were tired and going to meeting on Sunday only added to the weariness. I know by experience we can rest by attending meetings and partaking of the Spirit which generally prevails and which should always prevail in our meetings. (Sept. 2, 1889, DW 39:461)

Beneficial results of conferences. It is very interesting to us to meet together as we do from time to time, according to the appointments which are made, to have brought to our attention our condition and circumstances as a people. Even if we hear the same truths told that we are familiar with, when they are told under the influence of the Spirit of God, there is a freshness, a sweetness and a novelty, I may say, about them that makes them interesting to us, and we feel refreshed and strengthened in our spirit by listening to them and contemplating them in the Spirit of God. That is one peculiarity which the Gospel possesses; when men and women live as they should do, it is always sweet and attractive to them and does not become worn and threadbare or wearisome.

When we come together in conferences like these, if we come in the right spirit and with the right feeling, we are sure to receive the instruction that is adapted to our circumstances, and when we leave the conference, we feel that we have been profited and that our hearts have been made to rejoice in the truths that have been dwelt upon by the brethren who have spoken. (Jan. 18, 1885, DNW 34:50)

The object of Sunday Schools. Our Sunday Schools are for the purpose of teaching our children the principles of the Gospel. . . . We want to make Latter-day Saints of our children. If I send a child to Sunday School, I want the child taught the Gospel. He can read and learn history and a great many other things outside of the Sunday School that ought not to be taught in the Sunday School. In the Sunday Schools we should confine our labors to the object for which they have been established. . . .

We want to teach the children the simple principles of the Gospel. Care should be taken by the superintendency to see that this is done and that the time of the Sunday School is not occupied in teaching subjects, the knowledge of which can be obtained outside of the Sunday School. I wish this could be impressed upon the minds of our superintendents and teachers. The Sunday School is a school, as I have said, and as you all ought and do understand, for the purpose of giving our children instructions in the principles of the Gospel, to indoctrinate them in its principles, and, if we give them any history at all, it should be the history of our Church and the dealings of God with His people—that is, from a sacred standpoint, a religious standpoint.

Of course, information concerning the history of peoples can be given, or brought to bear occasionally, illustrating God's dealings with mankind to prepare the way for the carrying out of His work. This is proper, but it is not proper to go into extended lessons upon secular history. (Oct. 6, 1897, JI 32:749)

Teachers to set example. Our brethren and sisters should always remember that the work of teaching in our Sunday Schools imposes upon them a moral obligation to make their daily walk and conversation accord with their teachings. Of all lessons, the living lesson is the best. Children are surprisingly shrewd in detecting inconsistencies between the instructions and habits of their instructors. Besides, the teacher who seeks to live up to his own advice not only benefits his scholars, but his teachings exert a salutary influence upon himself, and he profits by his own lessons. (Apr. 8, 1887, MS 49:299)
