Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 36

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper

The sacrament—a sacred ordinance. We partake of the sacrament for one most important reason, that we may always remember that sacred body that was offered up for our salvation, by which the ransom was paid and we were brought into communion with the Father and made heirs of salvation and joint heirs with Him who made the sacrifice. To rob the ordinance of any of its significance by omitting any of its parts is not pleasing to the Lord, for to do so obviously weakens the intent for which it was established as an ordinance of the everlasting Gospel. So effectually and permanently does the Lord wish to impress the remembrance of that great sacrifice at Calvary on our memories that He permits us all to partake of the emblems—the bread and wine. . . . So that we may all remember Him, all who are members of the Church are permitted to partake as are also the unbaptized children who have not reached the years of full accountability. . . . (Nov. 15, 1899, JI 34:704-5)

The solemn nature of the sacrament. It is very important that our children should be made to understand the importance and solemn nature of the sacrament. It is administered with some regularity in our Sunday Schools; but the mere eating and drinking by the children would be of little or no benefit to them if they did not understand why they eat the bread and drink of the cup. Great care should, therefore, be taken to teach them the object of the sacrament.

The Lord has commanded His people to meet together oft and eat and drink in remembrance of Him, of His sufferings and death, and to witness unto the Father that they are willing to keep His commandments which He has given them, that they may always have His Spirit to be with them. This is the purpose of the sacrament, and that these things might be kept constantly in mind, the Lord's people are required to partake of the sacrament often.

Effect of neglecting sacrament meetings. Yet, there are members of the Church who seem to attach no particular importance to these meetings. They will allow weeks, yes and months, to pass without having the least anxiety or desire to avail themselves of the privilege of partaking of the Lord's Supper. Can there be any wonder at such people being barren, spiritless and indifferent about the work of the Lord? They neglect the means which the Lord has provided for the nourishing of their spiritual natures, and they are in a state of spiritual starvation—a starvation which is as fatal in its effects upon the spirit as the continued refusal to eat food has upon the natural body.

No Latter-day Saint who places proper value upon his standing before the Lord will be guilty of this neglect. Circumstances may, at times, prevent him from joining with his brethren and sisters in eating and drinking in the way appointed in remembrance of the Lord; but this will always be a cause of regret to him, and he will hasten at the first opportunity to the meeting where he can share with the Saints in the sacrament. (Feb. 1, 1893, JI 28:89)

Forgiveness of sins and the sacrament. The ordinance of baptism is instituted for the remission of sins. The sacrament of the Lord's Supper was not instituted for that purpose. Yet, when people partake of that sacrament worthily, they no doubt obtain the forgiveness of their sins on the same principle that we obtain the forgiveness of our sins whenever we confess them and repent of them. . . .

On the Sabbath Day we assemble together to partake of the Lord's Supper. We are commanded not to partake of that ordinance unworthily; that is, we should eat and drink with a spirit of penitence in our hearts in remembrance of the Lord and witness unto Him that we are willing to take upon us the name of the Son and keep His commandments. If we have sinned publicly, we should, before we partake of that ordinance, confess publicly and obtain the forgiveness of the Church, as well as the forgiveness of the Lord. If our wrong-doing be against the Lord alone, then we should humble ourselves before Him in secret and confess to Him, and all this before we partake of the sacrament. Can there be a doubt in anyone's mind that, under those circumstances, if the sacrament be partaken of in the right spirit, the Saints do obtain the forgiveness of their sins? Certainly they do. . . . (See James 5:14-15.)

There is a case recorded by Matthew where the Lord Jesus, seeing the faith of the people who brought to Him a man sick of the palsy, said to the man, who we have no reason to believe was a member of the Church of Christ; "Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee." (Matthew 9:2.)

But does it follow, because of . . . this act of our Savior's, that we should set forth that our sins will be forgiven by having hands laid upon us by the Elders when we are sick?

However true it may be that sins are forgiven under such circumstances, it is not for the forgiveness of sins that that ordinance was instituted. It was for the healing of the sick. So also with the Lord's Supper. Even if penitent Latter-day Saints are forgiven their faults when they partake worthily of the sacrament, they do not eat and drink for that purpose, but in remembrance of the Lord and of His blood that was shed for our salvation that they may have His Spirit to be with them.

The ordinance of baptism is for the purpose of obtaining a remission of sins. If a means of obtaining forgiveness of sin be held up to our children, the ordinance of baptism is the proper means, and to teach anything else is liable to mislead. (July 15, 1890, JI 25:442-43)

Only worthy ones to partake of sacrament. Before we come here to partake of this bread and to drink of this cup, we should know that there is nothing in our hearts or conduct that will prevent us from eating and drinking without condemnation and without sin attaching to the act. If we are not in this condition, then we are not as we should be.

It is the imperative duty of the officers of this Church, if they know that there is a man or a woman whose life is not what it should be, to forbid that person from eating of this bread or drinking of this cup, that they may not do it unworthily. If they do not take this course with their brethren and sisters who are in transgression, or who are not living as they should, the sins of such individuals are likely to attach to them. . . . (3 Nephi 18:28.)

Our lives should be such that when we go away from this place, after partaking of this holy ordinance, we may be filled with the Spirit, refreshed, feeling that our souls are filled with the bread of life and that our spiritual strength is renewed. (May 26, 1889, DW 38:710)

Non-tithe payers unworthy to partake of sacrament. Reflect upon this, ye Saints; if you are not willing to pay your tithing, to gather with the people of God, to receive and obey every principle and ordinance which He has instituted, you are not willing to keep His commandments, and, therefore, you can not partake of the sacrament; you are unworthy of it, as in partaking of that ordinance you witness unto God, the Eternal Father, that you are willing to always remember Jesus and keep His commandments which He has given you. No Elder would be justified in administering it unto you under such circumstances. And if you cannot partake of the sacrament, whose are ye? Ye cannot be Christ's, neither will you be His at His appearing upon the earth. (Mar. 27, 1857, WS 377)

Importance of the sacrament. There are various causes for the loss of the Spirit and decrease of faith among the Saints—adultery, lust, murmuring against the Priesthood, neglect of prayer and other duties, etc.; but there is, perhaps, no single cause more frequently productive of these evil consequences than the partaking of the sacrament by the Saints while in possession of a wrong spirit and feeling. To commit adultery, every one who has had any experience or understanding of the work of God knows, will inevitably result, unless speedily and sincerely repented of, in the apostasy of the adulterer. So also in the commission of other sins, though the denial of the faith by the one thus sinning might not follow the sinful act so quickly as in the other instance.

But the partaking of the Lord's Supper appears almost to be so unimportant in the estimation of some (probably through partaking of it often) that they think it a matter of no consequence whatever, whether they are at that time filled with love to God and their brethren, or whether they are filled with enmity—whether they eat and drink in remembrance of the Lord Jesus, or whether His death and sufferings are never thought about by them. The eating of a piece of bread, or the drinking of a little wine, or its substitute, under ordinary circumstances, might not be expected to excite any particular emotions in those thus partaking; but it is nothing less than solemn mockery for men and women, professed followers of the Lord Jesus, to assemble together and unite in a prayer to have the bread and the contents of the cup blessed and sanctified to their souls, and then eat and drink with feelings of enmity in their bosoms to some one or more individuals of the same faith and hope with themselves and in total forgetfulness of their Lord and His precepts.

Partaking unworthily may cause sickness. No individual, whether officer or member, can pursue a course of this kind and escape condemnation. Such was also Paul's faith in ancient days; for he wrote to the Corinthian Branch of the Church that in consequences of their partaking of the Lord's Supper unworthily many were weak and sickly among them and many had slept. (1 Corinthians 11: 26-30.)

The Lord Jesus himself attaches so much importance to the sacrament that He has commanded His servants not to knowingly suffer any one to partake of His flesh and blood unworthily when they shall minister it. They are required to forbid such, because they who eat His flesh and blood unworthily eat and drink damnation to their souls. (3 Nephi 18:28-29; D&C 46:4.)

A safeguard against apostasy. This places the Elders under solemn obligations to see that iniquity does not exist among the Saints, for iniquity of any kind would render whoever practiced it unworthy of this ordinance. If there are feelings of enmity in the bosom of one against another—if there is evil speaking one of another, those harboring such feelings, those giving utterance to such sentiments, cannot partake of the Lord's Supper without incurring His displeasure. Entertaining such a spirit and such feelings causes them to be unworthy, and they have need of repentance. Those who eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Lord should always remember Him and should be filled with perfect love for Him and for their brethren, and upon no other principle can they expect to have His Spirit to be with them. We feel that there is a feeling of apathy and carelessness upon this subject which should not exist among the Saints.

To partake of the sacrament often and in a proper spirit is a very great safeguard against apostasy, because the Saints who will do thus will always remember the Lord and, as a consequence, according to His promise, shall have His Spirit to be with them. But to partake of it unworthily involves terrible consequences. No Elder can do his duty and permit persons who he knows are not feeling and doing right to partake of this ordinance. (Feb. 23, 1861, MS 23:120-22)

Follow revealed order. It is a safe rule for us to follow in all things that which the Lord has revealed for our guidance; and where He has condescended to reveal any set form of prayer or order of procedure, those words should be used and that order should be followed with due strictness. We cannot improve on the ways of the Lord. The world has been trying to do so ever since Adam fell, and signal failure has characterized all their attempts. We, the Latter-day Saints, should not fall into the same quagmire. The ways of the Lord are perfect, and all His laws are righteousness.

On the other hand, the Lord will not make a man an offender for a word. If we through a slip of the tongue, or a sudden lapse of memory, fail to follow word for word the form given, that will not invalidate the ordinance or make the prayer of noneffect. In all these things the Spirit has to be considered, and the question that should be answered in our hearts is, "Are we doing this (whatever it may be) with an eye single to the glory of God?" If we are administering the sacrament, we may ask ourselves, "Are our hearts aright before God and are we officiating in this holy rite fully realizing and conscious of the importance of that supreme sacrifice which we commemorate and with the desire to keep in active remembrance the infinite benefits it has brought to us and to all mankind?"

When we have this spirit, we shall not be negligent in minor matters connected with the observance of the ordinance. Then, anything savoring of uncleanliness or disorder will be repugnant to our feelings, and we shall approach the table of the Lord with reverence, respect and love.

Deviations sometimes permitted. There are times and places where the Lord permits, on account of the condition and surroundings of His people, a slight deviation from established customs. For instance, on some of the small islands of the South Pacific Ocean there is no bread, and all the water is salt, and the fruit of the coconut tree is the chief food of man. If the members of the Church waited to solemnize the ordinance as their brethren do in more favored lands, the native Saints would seldom, if ever, partake of the sacrament. But in these strange conditions the Lord accepts instead of bread and wine, or bread and water, the meat of the coconut as the emblem of the body and its milk as the emblem of the blood of our crucified Lord. This is the best the people there can do; therefore, it is accepted of God; but, if we, with our advantages, inspired by some whim or fanciful notion, were to make such changes, we should expose ourselves to the displeasure of the Lord, because we could present no justification for such a change.

Any wilful departure from that which the Lord has commanded is dangerous in the extreme. It is by such departures the Church of Christ has in past times left the true path; little by little they went astray. The Lord accepts water as the sacrament instead of wine; when there is no bread, He accepts that which is used in its stead; but the ordinances of God's house cannot be deviated from. (Aug. 15, 1897, JI 32:530)

Observe the form as revealed. Where the Lord has condescended to give us a form of words or a manner of procedure in the performance of any ordinance in His Church, we should esteem it a pleasure and a duty to observe strictly what the Lord has revealed and neither add to nor diminish from His expressed wishes and commands. Where no exact formula is given of Him, we are safest in following the usual practice of the Saints, sanctioned by the presence or teachings of "those who hold the keys." Then, for the rest, let the Holy Spirit guide us to the details and the exact language to be used. If we are living our religion as faithfully as we should be, there is little fear of our going far astray while we thus officiate as His servants. (Nov. 15, 1899, JI 34:705)

The sacramental bread. The officiating Elders or Priests should endeavor not to break much more bread than is needed; in other words, they should adapt the amount broken to the number present to whom it is to be administered. If any remains over it should be returned to the care of the brother who provides the bread for the ordinance, and he should be admonished to see that it is not used for improper purposes. . . .

We learn from the writings of the early Christian fathers that it was the custom in the ancient Church in the days of the Apostles and their immediate successors for the Deacons, after the sacrament meeting was closed, to carry the bread to the homes of those Saints who from sickness or other justifiable causes were prevented from being present at the assembly of the Saints. Those thus kindly remembered partook of the bread with gladness. We have known this to be done in these days and believe such action, whether by the Deacons or others, to be justifiable and praiseworthy, but in the organized wards of the Church, it should be done with the knowledge and consent of the Bishop.

The Lord has not commanded that the emblems of His infinite sacrifice should only be partaken of at a public meeting or on a certain day. . . . Neither the revelations of the Lord nor the practice of the Saints justifies such a conclusion. We have had the pleasure of partaking of this ordinance in the House of the Lord on other days than Sunday when the proceeding was sanctioned by the presence and participation of all the General Authorities of the Church, and was under the immediate direction of our Prophet, Seer and Revelator, God's earthly mouthpiece, both him who now lives and those who have gone before. (Nov. 15, 1889, JI 34:704)

The Last Supper. At the Last Supper, at which the Savior Himself was present, the bread and the wine were not passed as is the custom now among us. It was an actual supper. In our Church numerous instances have occurred where the Sacrament has been administered, in certain places, in the same way—that is, bread and wine (or water) have been partaken of as a meal and not, as is usual when the Sacrament is passed in our general meetings, in the shape of small pieces of bread and a little sip of water.

The Savior, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, after breaking the bread, "gave unto the disciples and commanded that they should eat. And when they had eaten and were filled, he commanded that they should give unto the multitude." (3 Nephi 18:3-4.) Afterwards "he commanded his disciples that they should take of the wine of the cup and drink of it, and that they should also give unto the multitude that they might drink of it and were filled; and they gave unto the multitude, and they did drink, and they were filled." (3 Nephi 18:8-9.)

It seems from this that in partaking of this ordinance they satisfied their appetites—that is, they ate and drank until they were filled.

This would be the proper manner to administer this ordinance now if circumstances permitted; but situated as the Church is, it is not convenient to administer the Sacrament in this manner, and, therefore, our present mode is the one that is sanctioned by usage and by permission of the Lord through His inspired servants. (Jan. 15, 1897, JI 32:52-53)
