Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 38

Prayer—The Bulwark of the Saints

Even wicked may enjoy God's blessings. The men and the women who do not pray to Him are of course protected and preserved by God; they are fed, clothed and furnished by His bounty; He sends His rain upon the just and the unjust, and even those who blaspheme and deny His goodness and mercies, and those who even deny His existence receive kindnesses at His hands. All this does not cause Him to withdraw His care entirely from them, and it is this mercy and compassion which the Lord has for His children that causes many of them to think that there is no God.

They see the wicked enjoying every blessing, and, reasoning as poor, human, ignorant beings are apt to do, they say: "There can be no God, or if there be a God, it is no use to pray to Him, because see those people who do pray to Him; do they fare any better than those who do not? Aren't those who do not pray to Him prospered? Do they not have riches and the good things of this life just as much as those who do pray to Him? What is the use of praying to Him, where there is no sign that anyone has been benefited by it?" In this way these people reason and think their reasoning is sound. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord nor His purposes. They do not even know the thoughts and the feelings of those who serve Him and of those who pray unto Him. They are incapable of judging any of these things. (Jan. 1, 1895, JI 30:17)

The importance of prayer. It is a bad sign for those making our professions to be neglectful in seeking to the Lord for that strength which He alone can give and which is so necessary for Saints to possess. . . .

There can be no true spiritual vitality about a man or a woman who does not pray. They know nothing about the power of their religion. They have not any conception of its height, its depth or its breadth. Without prayer, also, no one can truly realize that feeling of humility which the people of God should possess, for it is by prayer that a knowledge of our imperfections and weaknesses is brought home to us. It is by prayer that the most correct conceptions can be obtained of the majesty of our God and of His purity and holiness. No man or woman can be in a proper condition to withstand temptation or be properly on his or her guard who does not pray. It is a direct command from the Lord, often repeated in His word, constantly declared by His servants, that it is the duty of His children to pray to Him without ceasing. When they do not bow the knee, it is still their duty to pray in their hearts.

A safeguard against every evil. Prayer is an unfailing source of happiness. It is a continued cause of relief to those who offer it in a proper spirit to the Most High. The burdened and afflicted soul who goes to the Lord in prayer never comes away without relief. Those who are tempted and tried do not seek Him in vain, when they bow themselves before Him. How anyone calling himself a Latter-day Saint can neglect this duty, which is so productive of benefits, which brings so much comfort and increases joy so materially, which is a source of strength and a safeguard against every evil, is most strange. Whenever prayer is neglected, it is evident that faith is lacking; either the person who neglects it has never known the blessings which result from it or, if he has known them, has so far forgotten the goodness of God as to be in a most dangerous condition.

However faithful men and women may be, they still are required to watch and pray; for they are commanded, "Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." (1 Corinthians 10:12.) But the man or the woman who does not pray is positively unsafe and is liable to be overcome at any moment and to become an alien to all the covenants and promises of the Lord. . . .

Even resurrected Savior prayed. If it were necessary that He, so perfect and so pure, should seek for strength and consolation and power through this means, how much more necessary is it that we, who are so weak and fallible, should seek through the same means for that help which we need?

But not only did our Savior pray to His Father while He was in this mortal condition, but the Book of Mormon informs us that He prayed, while among the Nephites, to His Father after His resurrection. Even then in His exalted state, having triumphed over death and the grave, having ascended on high and let captivity captive and having been received at the right hand of the Father, He still bowed Himself down in humble prayer before His Father in heaven. What a beautiful example He has left for us! And how diligent we should be in following it. (May 1, 1891, JI 26:278)

A guide for doing right. Let us ask the Lord at the appointed times to bless us in all that we may do, say or think all the day long, and then let us guide our life by this prayer and not do anything but what we are sure would be consistent with our requests to Heaven. And if we have our doubts about any thing being right or wrong, let us leave it alone until we can inquire of the Priesthood or of our parents.

That which we cannot ask the blessing of God upon is almost sure to be wrong, and if we have none of His servants at hand to appeal to and dare not approach Him humbly in prayer, rest assured that that thing had best be left undone or that word unsaid. If, on the other hand, we can go with full confidence and with all our hearts and ask the blessings of Heaven on any action, we may feel certain it is not far wrong; for no boy or girl, whose heart is right before the Almighty, dare ask His blessing while doing those things which he or she knows the Lord has forbidden or in leaving undone those things that He has revealed unto us it is His will we should perform. (Oct. 22, 1869, JI 4:172)

The efficacy of family prayer. Is it any wonder that people get in the dark concerning spiritual things when they neglect this important duty? Is it strange that children of parents who thus neglect so plain and necessary a duty as family prayer should grow up indifferent to and ignorant of the principles of the everlasting Gospel? How can love for our Heavenly Father and for the truth exist in the minds of parents who are thus unmindful of their duty? Or how can this love be fostered in the minds of children when their parents are so careless and ungrateful to the Almighty as they must be when they neglect to pray in their families?

No family that fails to attend to family prayers in the proper season can keep up with the progress of the Kingdom of God. Such families fall behind in everything. They become dark in their minds, dull in their spirits and lose what little faith they may possess. They are guilty of gross ingratitude, and this is a great sin. The Spirit of God is grieved and will withdraw itself from every person who does not appreciate the goodness of God to him and who fails to render Him that worship and thanksgiving which are due to Him as our Creator and Protector.

As human beings we can judge by our own feelings, to some extent, of the manner in which our Heavenly Father views such conduct. Take the case of a kind and loving father and mother here on earth. They have children whom they love and for whose benefit, advancement and prosperity they labor without ceasing. They are continually planning for their good. They watch over them, provide food and clothing and shelter for them and bestow upon them various gifts. But if these children receive all these benefits without entertaining any feeling of gratitude toward their parents, paying no respect to them and not showing in any way that they value the gifts or appreciate the kindness which are bestowed them, what effect does this conduct have upon the parents? They are hurt and grieved and feel that their kindness and provident care are wasted upon those children and that they are unworthy of all that has been done them.

If this be the case with earthly parents, how much more is it with our great Creator and Author of our being, the Fountain of all our blessings and happiness!

Prayer a bulwark. Prayer is the bulwark of the Saints. It shields and protects those who offer it in sincerity and faith. Without prayer man is exposed to wicked temptations and to every evil. When he goes unto the Lord in humility, he shows Him his weaknesses and the dangers by which he is surrounded. This prompts him who prays to seek unto God for strength to overcome his weaknesses and to resist every temptation. His faith is strengthened by having his prayers answered. He has communion with his Heavenly Father through the Holy Ghost, and that Spirit becomes his constant companion and guide.

God is with him, and He reveals to him those precious things that belong to His Kingdom. The man who observes the command of God concerning prayer feels more and more the necessity of crying unto the Lord for help. He sees the danger in which he is placed, and he is guarded against that danger.

Children in seeing their parents pray are impressed by the example. When they, therefore, are in trouble, they seek relief through prayer unto God. They know that He hears and answers them, and this is a testimony to them that God lives. It is a constant comfort in the hours of temptation and trial and in the midst of the afflictions with which all have to contend.

Prayer is spiritual nourishment. To live without prayer is to live a mere animal existence. It is to leave the best part of our natures in a starving condition; for without prayer the spirit is starved, and men dwindle in their feelings and die in their faith. If anyone is disposed to enquire into the truth of this and satisfy himself upon this point, let him visit the families of those who observe their prayers in the season thereof. The effect upon the household is very marked. Children grow up in an atmosphere of faith. A reverence for God, for truth and for everything holy and pure is developed within them. They are more easily controlled. Their consciences are more tender. They have a higher conception of that which is right.

If a family where prayer is neglected be visited, the children will be of a different type and disposition. What influence is there to hold them? If the parents do not honor God, what grounds have the children for honoring their parents?

We trust that every reader . . . will make it a fixed rule to attend to secret and family prayers. Better go without a meat than to neglect this duty. If your stomach is empty, you will feel faint and be reminded that you must give it food. Remember that the spirit also needs food, and make it your business to attend to supplying it in the way that God has appointed. Then your spirit and your body will be developed alike, and strength will be maintained. (Jan. 15, 1892, JI 27:58-59)

Teach children to pray early. Children should be taught in early life to pray to God. They should be taught that there is a God who will hear and answer their prayers. When they are sick, they should be taught to ask their father or the Elders to lay hands upon them, and if neither the father nor any Elder is near, to have their mother lay her hands on them and pray for them; this is not sinful; it is not wrong. Women do not have the Priesthood like men have, but they can pray for their children, and their prayers are heard just as much as the prayers of the men are heard, though they may not have the authority to rebuke disease as men who bear the Priesthood.

Children should be brought to their mother's knees and taught to pray and be brought up in a way that they will understand the nature and the power and the efficacy of prayer. If you will do this with your children, you will fortify them against the days of trial and temptation which will come to them when they grow older. Where this is done, you will have boys and girls that will be a blessing, a comfort and an honor to you, because their faith will be developed in early life, and they will know for themselves that there is a God.

It is very delightful to witness the faith of children and to hear their expressions concerning these matters when they are property taught. I am sure that if mothers would take this course with their children, they would have much more comfort from their children, their children would be easier governed, and they would develop in the children the best qualities of their minds; for every child is open particularly to these good influences, and children can be governed by appealing to their better natures, especially when they have been taught in the way I have spoken. . . .

Let children pray in family circle. We ought to make our religion attractive to our children, and one way to do that is to have every member of the family pray. Some men seem to think that their prayers alone are heard, that the prayers of their wives or their children are not listened to. If any entertain this idea, they are much mistaken, because the Lord hears the prayers of women just as much as He does of men, and He hears the prayers of children just as much as He does of grown people.

Every child should be taught to pray in the family circle. As soon as he can lisp or talk or be taught to frame a prayer, he should be asked to pray in the family circle; and the Lord hears the prayers of these little children, and they take interest then in family worship, because it is a great part of their service as well as their parents.

When a child can ask a blessing, if he or she can only say, "O Lord bless this food, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen," it is better to let them commence even with these few words than not have them pray. It is pleasing to see the interest children take in asking blessings. They feel as though they were honored and they take pleasure in it. So in prayer. It is not the multitude of words that the Lord pays attention to. He does not listen to our fine, flowery sermons and our fine, flowery prayers; He looks at our hearts and the sincerity of our desires.

Make prayers brief. We ought to worship Him with our hearts and not with these long, flowery sentences. Another thing: If we pray in secret, we will not want to make such long prayers in public as some do; we shall have relieved our hearts in our secret prayers to a very great extent. We can pray by ourselves and we can take as long time as we wish to, and we do not wear anybody out unless it is ourselves. It is not probable that those who listen to us are wearied by our devotion.

When others are kneeling down with us, we ought in our prayers to be direct and brief and not pray about everything there is on the earth and imagine that we must mention everything in detail or the Lord won't know about it. He does know, and we do not need to mention everything as though He had forgotten and would not take notice unless we mentioned it. If we pay attention to the Lord's prayer that he taught His disciples, we will see the beauty of that, how simple it was and direct; it contained no superfluous words, but it was to the point, asking for that which they needed. . . .

Pray in our hearts. It is a good thing to know how to pray; and we are not heard for our much speaking in prayer. It seems to me we should be full of the spirit of prayer, and we should pray in our hearts as well as with our lips and on our knees and cultivate the habit of praying in our hearts. We cannot stop always to get down on our knees to ask for that which we need; but we can ask the Lord in our hearts, no matter what we are engaged in.

We may be going to meet somebody that is of importance and have not time to stop to pray, but we can ask God to give us wisdom. If we are going to transact some business, we can ask God to be with us in the transaction, to give us His Holy Spirit to enlighten us and enable us to do the right thing. I do not know how I would have got along in life if I had not done this, because there are many times we are thrown in circumstances where the wisdom of heaven is needed, and it is a good thing to cultivate the habit of asking the Lord for that.

I believe if I was going to break a horse or do some work in my field as a farmer or anything of this character, I would want to ask the Lord's blessing upon it. It would not probably be convenient to kneel down and ask Him right then for that special occasion; but I would ask Him in my heart. Of course, in our family and secret prayers we ask the Lord for these special things.

You are called on to speak suddenly or to do something suddenly; it is a good thing to ask the Lord to be with you when you are doing that, to guide you. When we have a decision to make, we should ask the Lord to enlighten our minds that we decide aright and come to a correct conclusion.

A mother going to have an interview with a child that is unruly should ask the Lord to give her His Spirit to talk to the child and to pour out His Spirit upon the child that it may be softened. When I have anything disagreeable to do, I always feel to do this, to pray that the Lord will soften the hearts of those with whom I am brought in contact, give their hearts the right feeling and give me the right feeling. I believe a great deal of the success of my life has been due to the Lord hearing this kind of prayer, for I know he does hear such prayers. (Jan. 1, 1897, DW 54:290-91)

Saying Amen. There is another practice that ought to be maintained among us; it is the saying of "Amen" in an audible voice after prayer has been offered in the congregation.

The Church in early days was taught that this was an acceptable practice in the sight of God. It was expected that every member of the Church, when prayer was offered, would in an audible voice say "Amen" at the conclusion of the prayer—in effect saying to the Lord that the prayer that had been offered was their prayer. . . .

Our children should be taught to say "Amen" when a blessing is asked at the table or when prayers are offered in the Sunday school or in the family circle; and the same should be done in the public congregations. In this way we can witness unto the Lord that we are interested in having the prayers that are offered heard and answered; and we may rest assured it will be more acceptable to the Lord, because in doing this we display an interest in the objects that are prayed for. (Feb. 15, 1896, JI 31:117)
