Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 40

Administering to the Sick

The ordinance for the sick. Among the blessings promised by the risen Savior as signs which should follow the believers in His Gospel, He said, "They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:18.) The. . . "laying on of hands to cure human sickness," then, was practiced and taught by the Savior of mankind. And it became an established ordinance of the Church under the direction of His Apostles. (See James 5:14-15.)

. . . When the true Church of Christ was re-established on earth through the ministry of Joseph Smith, the restoration of this ordinance was one of its marked characteristics, distinguishing it from the ecclesiastical systems established by men. Hands were laid upon the sick, and they did recover. In thousands upon thousands of instances, in all kinds of diseases, in every country where the Elders have ministered, the sick have been healed by the power of God through the laying on of hands. And there is no "quackery" about it. Those who administer lay claim to no extraordinary sanctity or personal supernatural power. They simply act as ministers of Christ, carrying out His commandments and relying upon His promise.

The question may be asked, "Does the laying on of hands cure in every instance, and if not, why not?" The answer is no, and the reason is because faith is necessary to effectual administration, and faith does not always accompany it. James says, "the prayer of faith shall save the sick." Jesus always declared that it was faith which caused the healings that attended His ministry. Said He, "Go thy way: thy faith hath made thee whole." (Luke 17:19.) "If you have power to heal the sick," exclaims the skeptic, "why don't you exercise it before the world and make everybody believe you?" Gently, wise scoffer. Faith does not come by seeing signs, but signs come by faith. The healings are not the cause but the effects of faith. They are not given to make people believe, but they follow them that do believe. In his own region of country Jesus did no mighty work, "and he marveled because of their unbelief." If signs were to create faith, that was the very spot where they were most needed.

If the power to heal in every case was given to men, out of sympathy for the suffering they would continually exercise it, and there would be, as a consequence, no sickness and no death. By this means the divine plan would be frustrated, and this earth would be no place of probation or sphere of trial. If objection is raised against the laying on of hands because its effects are not uniform in every case, the poet's advice, "Throw physic to the dogs" should be followed, for there is nothing more uncertain than the results of medical treatment, and we should therefore use no drugs and fee no doctors.

The most remarkable cures have been effected through the laying on of hands, both in ancient and in modern times. The Bible bears abundant testimony to the former; the Latter-day Saints in every country are witnesses of the latter. And if in these times of unbelief it sometimes happens that relief does not follow administration of the ordinance, it should not be any matter of wonder, because the Apostles of the early Church, amid the wonders wrought under their hands, could not always obtain the faith necessary to heal. Therefore, Paul gave advice to Timothy in regard to his "often infirmities" (1 Timothy 5:23), and in relating an account of his travels, had to say, "Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick" (1 Timothy 4:20). Yet Paul counted himself not behind the chiefest of the Apostles, in "signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds." (2 Corinthians 12:11.)

All have not faith. And those who are able to exercise faith at one time may not be able at another time. Some men have faith to heal; others have only faith to be healed. But the ordinance should be administered to the sick to fulfill the law and to give them the benefit of all the faith that can be obtained in their behalf. The power to heal alone does not prove the possessor to be a man of God, nor that his doctrines or principles are correct. Neither does the absence of the faith to heal or be healed prove the non-possessor a bad or unconverted man. But wherever and whenever the Church of Christ is upon the earth, the gift of healing through the prayer of faith will be exhibited, and any Church from which that blessing is entirely absent lacks one of the characteristics of Christ's Church, and therefore cannot be His, but is destitute of His authority.

The provision made for the sick in this Church, is given in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, section 42:43-44, 48-52.

The power of faith. Faith is a force. Those who have experienced its influence and seen its effects know this to be an incontrovertible fact. But faith does not come by the will of man. It is not the child of hope nor the offspring of desire. The laws by which it acts are not fully known to mortals. But by its power the sick have been instantaneously healed, the blind have been made to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to walk, the apparently dead to come to life, the elements to obey the voice of man, and the heavens to open to his gaze and disclose the secrets which are veiled from unbelieving eyes.

He who is Omnipotent works by faith. He calls light out of the darkness; He brings order out of chaos; He calls worlds into being and quickens inanimate atoms with the breath of life; and faith is the force by which He wields His sceptre of power, directs the creative energy and fills the universe with beauty and glory.

It is a dormant faculty of every human soul, because the spirit of the children of men are the off-spring of God. Every seed brings forth of its kind. Earthly life is not the period for its perfect exercise. But when the redeemed sons and daughters of the Eternal One come up to the measure of His fulness, faith will be developed in them with all its strength and potency, and they will follow in the footsteps of their Great Head, and pattern after His mighty works among inexhaustible elements, in illimitable space, throughout a ceaseless eternity. (Oct. 15, 1877, MS 39:675-76)

Exercise faith in healing ordinances. Many of us have not faith enough even to send for the Elders of the Church when any one of our family is sick; but the first thought is, "go for a doctor," as though the gift of healing had been lost in the Church. How many of you feel as if the gift of healing no longer existed in the Church of Christ but that doctors must be sent for and drugs administered? And this among the Latter-day Saints, a people who profess what we do and to whom such glorious promises have been made!

I am scarcely ever called in to administer to a sick person without being told what the doctor is doing and what he says. To me, it is an evidence of a want of faith in the ordinances of God's house and in His promises. To think of a people with the promise made to them that their sick shall be healed, if they will only exercise faith, neglecting this and treating it as though there was no certainty to be attached to it!

It is the same in other directions. We fail to set a proper example before our young people. If I were to send for a doctor, what would be the effect upon my children? Why, they would say, "That is the course my father took, and he is an Eider in the Church and a man of experience; he sent for the doctors, and why should not I? My mother was a good woman, but when one of the children was sick, she sent for a doctor; she did not trust to the ordinance alone; and shall we not send for a doctor? Must it all be faith and no works?" How often do we hear this sort of reasoning?

I believe in works; I believe in nursing, in taking care of the sick and in doing all that is possible for them; but I believe also in the ordinances of the house of God. God has made precious promises to the Latter-day Saints concerning the health of their families, and I tell you, in the presence of the Lord, that if the Latter-day Saints would observe the Word of Wisdom there would be less of this disposition to send for doctors and more faith in the ordinances that the Lord has established. . . .

And let me tell you, there will be pestilences, and there will be diseases; for the Lord has said that there shall be an overwhelming scourge pass through the nations of the earth; and if the Latter-day Saints do not keep His counsel on this as well as other matters, how can they expect to enjoy immunity or receive deliverance? (Aug. 26, 1894, DW 49:450)

Trust more in God. Speaking about faith-cures, I have felt deeply impressed with the idea that the members of our Church do not value as they should the means which God has placed within their reach for the relief and healing of the sick.

There is too great a disposition, when sickness enters a household, to send for a doctor. Occasional appeals will be made to the Elders to come and administer, but the two methods are too frequently united—the doctor on the one hand and the Elders on the other.

The experience of those who put their trust in the Lord, and who with careful nursing unite the administering of the ordinance, goes to prove that the Lord has not forgotten His promises. Instances are very common among the faithful Saints of the gift of healing being manifested in a very wonderful manner.

In the breasts of our children, especially, the greatest care should be taken to inculcate faith in this healing ordinance. Where children are thus taught, it is remarkable how strong their faith becomes. . . .

God has not forgotten His promises, and He has not withdrawn Himself from His people. But the Latter-day Saints should make use of these means more frequently than they do, and put more trust in God and less in man's skill. (Mar. 26, 1888, MS 50:194-95)

Healing by faith. The laying on of hands for the healing of the sick is an ordinance of the Gospel. One of the signs which the Lord Jesus Himself promised His disciples in ancient days that should follow them that believed was, "they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:18.) In our day the promise has been renewed, and we can claim it. . . .

Many, however, fail to avail themselves of these promises, and excuse themselves for doing so by saying that faith without works is dead. They seem to think that works consist in sending for a doctor and using what he may prescribe, having apparently more faith in man's skill than in God's power to heal through the ordinance which He has appointed.

Sick should be nursed. In saying this we would not wish to convey any wrong idea. We believe it to be the duty of those who have sick in their households to do all in their power for their comfort, to nurse them with the greatest possible care and to use what skill they may have in that direction, asking the Lord to bless the means which they use and also to inspire those who may have to wait upon the sick to do the very thing for them that will be of the greatest advantage. In this way works can be united with faith, and the ordinance of the Gospel can be used. . . .

It is only reasonable to think that the Lord knows better that which is good for us than man does. His power to heal is without limit. He desires His children to exercise faith. By its exercise great blessings can be obtained. The more it is exercised and the oftener the results which are desired are obtained the stronger does faith become.

Teach children to exercise faith. Children who are taught by their parents to desire the laying on of hands by the Elders when they are sick receive astonishing benefits therefrom, and their faith becomes exceedingly strong. But, if instead of teaching them that the Lord has placed the ordinance of laying on of hands for the healing of the sick in His Church, a doctor is immediately sent for when anything ails them, they gain confidence in the doctor and his prescriptions and lose faith in the ordinance.

How long would it take, if this tendency were allowed to grow among the Latter-day Saints, before faith in the ordinance of laying on of hands would die out? Little by little the practice of using drugs and resorting to men and women skilled in their use would grow among the people, until those who had sick children or other relatives who did not send for a doctor when they were attacked with a sickness would be looked upon as heartless and cruel. Perhaps they would be taunted for not sending for some skilled person and perchance be condemned for trusting entirely to the ordinance of the Gospel and the proper nursing and kind attentions which every person who is sick should receive.

There is great need of stirring up the Latter-day Saints upon this point. Faith should be encouraged. The people should be taught that great and mighty works can be accomplished by the exercise of faith. The sick have been healed, devils have been cast out, the blind have been restored to sight, the deaf have been made to hear, lameness has been cured and even the dead have been raised to life by the exercise of faith. And this, too, in our day and in our Church by the administration of God's servants in the way appointed. All these things can again be done, under the blessing of the Lord, where faith exists. It is this faith that we should seek to preserve and to promote in the breasts of our children and of all mankind. (Nov. 1, 1893, JI 28:669-70)

Faith to be healed. A cheerful and buoyant mind as well as a sound brain are all important in both the prevention and the healing of disease. Many doctors realize the importance of keeping the mind in a proper condition during sickness, and they do all they can to inspire confidence in the patient. . . .

Those who have had numerous opportunities, as many of our Elders have, of administering to the sick must be fully conscious of the effect that the will and the determination of the sick have upon their own health. This is really faith. How many times have the sick been healed by the administration of the Elders through arousing within them faith in the promises of the Lord. The cheering and comforting words of the Elders, the promises they are led to make, have a tendency to strengthen the sick in their power to resist and overcome disease.

Men may ridicule the laying on of hands and the prayer of faith, but faithful Latter-day Saints know that the gift of healing is in the Church of Jesus Christ and that the promises made by the Lord concerning the administration of the ordinance which has been established in the Church for this purpose are fulfilled. The more the gift of healing is exercised the stronger it grows. The more the Latter-day Saints depend upon this ordinance and seek relief through it the greater are the benefits and the more frequent are the instances of recovery through the administration of the Elders in the appointed way.

When not appointed unto death (for death is passed upon all), there is no ailment that afflicts humanity that cannot be reached by faith and the administration of the ordinance of the Gospel. Miracles have been performed and are of frequent occurrence in the Church where the Saints rely upon the promises of the Lord. . . .

When children are taught the importance of this principle, they naturally, when anything ails them, seek relief through the laying on of hands, and when they have hands laid upon them by the Elders, they are healed in a great majority of cases. Faith is like every other principle; it can be cultivated and can become a strong power in the man or the woman who possesses it. (Aug. 1, 1896, JI 31:450-51)

Administering to sick by priests. A Priest holds the authority of the Aaronic Priesthood, and while that Priesthood does not give him the power to lay hands on baptized believers for the reception of the Holy Ghost, it undoubtedly gives him authority to lay hands on the sick, if it be necessary. Indeed, members of the Church can lay hands on the sick and pray for their recovery, though they have no right, if they rebuke the disease in the name of Jesus, to say they do so by the authority of the Priesthood. (Mar. 1, 1898, JI 33:186)

Administering by mothers. Even sisters can do this, and there is no impropriety in it, though it would be better if one holding the Priesthood could be obtained to attend to this ordinance. It is frequently the case that mothers find it necessary to administer to their sick children at times when no one is at hand who bears the Priesthood whom they can secure to administer the ordinance of laying on of hands for the restoration of sick. There have been repeated instances of such administration by mothers being attended with healing effects. [^1] This, we suppose, no one of experience in the Church will question. (Jan. 15, 1896, JI 31:60)

Administering and contagious disease. A well and healthy person has as much right to be considered in matters pertaining to the preservation of his health as a sick person has to be considered in matters pertaining to the restoration of his health. To prevent sickness is no less to be desired than to cure sickness. While it is true that those who are well do not need a physician, it is also true that no correct sense of duty requires a physician or any one else to jeopardize a healthy person in seeking to aid a diseased one. That the sick may be healed is the proper desire of every right-minded person, but that in seeking to aid them, others who are not sick shall be also brought down in illness, is a requirement of neither humanity nor common sense. And this view of the case is greatly emphasized when a disease so loathsome and so highly contagious as small pox is believed to be, is under consideration; for then it is not only a question of perhaps helping one while perhaps harming one—it is a question of desiring to aid one at the serious risk and danger of perhaps the whole community.

Now, no one will feel like saying to a Bishop or an Elder that when called upon to go and administer to the sick he must not do it. He may have abundant faith that through his administration the afflicted ones may be healed and he himself escape unharmed. Many Elders have manifested this faith in instances of the most frightful plagues, and the results have justified them. But if one have such faith as this, having no fear of himself, let him at least be warned against exposing others to such plagues as have been named. He ought to complain of no proper regulation adopted as a precaution for the safety of the neighbors and the community, submitting if need be to restraint of liberty to come and go at will and manifesting thus a consistent interest not alone in the sick but in the well also. (Jan. 15, 1900, JI 35:63)

Administering to nonmembers. It is always lawful to do good. We say this on the authority of the Savior of mankind. If a person has faith to seek health through the ministrations of the Elders in the name of Jesus, even though he have not the greater faith to accept and obey the fullness of the everlasting Gospel, he should not be deprived of the lesser blessing of bodily soundness by any lack of willingness on our part to magnify the name of God.

We nowhere read in the scriptures that when the sick came to Jesus Himself and sought His healing blessing that He first asked, "Have you been baptized?" He did not inquire of the blind or paralytic, "Are you a member of the Church?"

It is true these gifts of the Holy Spirit are to follow the believers; they were not placed in the Church to make converts. But the man or woman who asks for the administration of the Elders (we are not now talking of sign-seekers) is, to certain extent, a believer, though not yet a member of Christ's holy Church, and is not doing wrong by seeking the blessing. That God is not offended at this manifestation of faith is evident from the fact that He often honors these ministrations by healing the subject. (Mar. 1, 1894, JI 29:144)

The rule generally adopted by all Elders under such circumstances, as far as we understand, has been to require the sick person, before being administered to, to make a covenant that he or she would obey the ordinances of the Gospel, and upon this promise being made the Elders felt justified in administering the ordinance for the healing of the sick. (Jan. 1, 1896, JI 31:25)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Respecting females administering for the healing of the sick; . . . there could be no evil in it, if God gave His sanction by healing; . . . there could be no sin in any female laying hands on and praying for the sick, than in wetting the face with water; it is no sin for anybody to administer that has faith, or if the sick have faith to be healed by their administration." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 224-25.)
