Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 41

Virtue, Chastity, and Love

Modesty in dress. Every modest girl should set her face against any fashion that would for a moment identify her with those of her sex who have no claim to modesty. Loud dressing leads to loud manners and loud manners to all kinds of evils. There is no virtue in a woman more appreciated by good and sensible men than true modesty. This reaches even to the dress we wear and the way we wear it.

Can any of our young lady readers tell us the estimate people are apt to put on them if they see them dressed in the extreme of a fashion, no matter how outrageous or even disgusting? Neatness and cleanliness are always becoming, but many a fashion has been introduced into the world to hide the deformity or sin of some one, who being a "lady of high degree," was very apt to be copied by those wishing to flatter her, for imitation is the sincerest kind of flattery.

The modes that first see the light in the midst of the corruption of Paris and other great cities of Babylon are no more worthy of being copied by the pure and innocent daughters of Zion than other follies and frivolities of the Gentile world. We should make our own fashions of which neatness, comfort and adaptability should be the distinguishing traits. (Feb. 6, 1875, JI 10:30)

Adultery greatest sin next to murder. The adulterer commits the greatest sin next to murder that can be committed by a human being, according to the word of the Lord to us. The man who commits sin with his neighbor's wife, the man who seduces the innocent, who takes advantage of the unwary, who by his fascination or attraction or by persuasion or by the power which God has given him for a righteous purpose, the man who uses that to degrade his sister, the daughter of God, commits the next greatest crime in the catalogue of crime in the sight of God to the shedding of innocent blood. (Apr. 8, 1883, DNW 32:258)

Virtue the foundation of greatness. I would rather see men punished with death—which we believe is a law that should be put in force against any man who ruins women—than that there ever should be a time in our country when corruption and wrongs of this character should run riot and be unchecked. Virtue lies at the foundation of individual and national greatness. No man can amount to much who is not a virtuous man, who is not strong in his virtue, I do not care who he is. He may be as talented as Lucifer; but if he is not a virtuous man, his greatness will not amount to much. Virtue lies at the foundation of greatness. (June 20, 1883, JD 24:224-25)

Virtue the chief cornerstone. God has established this Church, and He has told us from the very beginning that the chief corner stone, it may be said, of this great edifice that He has reared and is rearing is virtue. Early in the history of the Church the Prophet Joseph received revelations to this effect, that he who looked upon a woman to lust after her should deny the faith, and unless he repented, he should be cast out. What an amount of purity is embodied in this statement of the Lord to us in this revelation!

A man must not only refrain from doing that which is wrong with the opposite sex; he must not only refrain from carrying his lust into the actual commission of crime, but he must be so pure in heart that he shall not look upon the other sex with a lustful eye and a lustful desire. If he does so, we are told by the Almighty that he shall deny the faith. . . . The frequent apostasies from this Church, the many who have left the Church, denied the faith, lost the Spirit of God, the most of them, no doubt, are traceable to the commission of this sin. It is, as I have said, the crying sin of the age. . . .

Teach children importance of virtue. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance that we, in training our children, should lay deep and solid in their minds the importance of virtue. They should be taught that their whole lives as Latter-day Saints depend upon the cultivation and preservation of this principle and that if they are guilty of wrong in this direction, unless there is sincere and heartfelt repentance before the Lord, He will undoubtedly withdraw His Holy Spirit from them and leave them to themselves to become a prey to those wicked influences that are seeking constantly to take possession of the hearts of the Saints of God.

Now, we can best do this in childhood; we can teach our children in childhood and in youth, and as they grow to manhood and to womanhood, we can fortify them against those evils. . . .

A greater strictness needed. There should be greater strictness enforced among our people. There has been a growth of wrong-doing in many quarters that has been most painful to all those who have the welfare of the Saints of God at heart and who desire the prosperity of Zion. . . . Now, such a condition of things if permitted to continue in our midst, unchecked, would be productive of the most terrible consequences. The Spirit of God would undoubtedly be so grieved that it would forsake not only those who are guilty of these acts, but it would withdraw itself from those who would suffer them to be done in our midst unchecked and unrebuked; and from the President of the Church down, throughout the entire ranks of the Priesthood, there would be a loss of the Spirit of God, a withdrawal of His gifts and blessing and His power, because of their not taking the proper measures to check and to expose their iniquity. (Jan. 18, 1885, JD 26:138-39)

Purity the strength of Zion. Impress the minds of the children with the great importance of purity, of avoiding everything vulgar, of keeping clear from all who are inclined to vulgarity and to anything that would lead to evil and unchastity. The purity of our people is the strength of Zion. Their love of virtue, the chasteness of their conversation and their associations constitute the strength of the Latter-day Saints. We who have children in our charge can do much towards perpetuating this love of purity by fortifying the rising generation against the evils of the world.

The consequences that will follow the violation of the laws of virtue are dreadful to contemplate. The Lord will root out an impure generation, just as He has declared. Any generation that indulges in practices by which virtue is trampled under foot is sure to bring the displeasure and anger of God, and His destroying power will fall upon them. It is the great evil of our day and generation, and we are in the midst of these temptations. (Feb. 1, 1901, JI 36:81.)

The great sin of this generation. The great, crying sin of this generation is lasciviousness in its various forms. Satan, knowing how powerful an agency this is in corrupting men and women, and in driving the Spirit from them, and bringing them under condemnation before the Lord, uses it to the greatest extent possible. It requires an incessant warfare to check its spread and to prevent the people of God from becoming its victims.

No people who practice or countenance these sins can be accepted of the Lord or find favor in His sight. His anger will fall upon them unless they thoroughly and heartily repent of every such evil. When we take into consideration the teachings we have received upon this subject, the holy covenants into which we have entered, and the professions which we make, unchastity should have no existence among us. It is sorrowful to contemplate that Satan finds those among us who are willing to yield to his temptations, and thus bring misery upon themselves and all connected with them.

We solemnly call, as we have done so often before, upon all the officers of the Church to set their faces like flint against practices of this character. Those who indulge in them must be dealt with according to the laws of God, and they must be made to feel that if they do indulge in this wickedness they cannot have the fellowship of the Saints nor a standing in the Church of Christ. If men and women would only profit by the experiences of those who have fallen, they would resist the allurements of sin and walk in the path of righteousness. "The wages of sin is death." The misery which it brings upon the guilty, and upon all connected with them, furnishes some idea of the dreadful condition of the wicked who die in their sins and do not obtain the forgiveness of their God.

Oh, that men and women could be warned, and that they would turn to the Lord and seek unto Him, humble themselves before Him, put away their sins, and obtain His Holy Spirit to be their guide and their companion, then no matter what the circumstances might be in which they were placed, they would have the peace of heaven, the joy of the Holy Ghost, and a conscience void of offense towards God and man! And this is the condition in which every Latter-day Saint should live. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 48:706)

Now, my brethren and sisters, what is the great and damning sin today of this generation? What is it that is causing the inhabitants of the earth to rush on the broad road to destruction? . . . It is the impurity of mankind. It is the corruption and licentiousness that have grown up in the world, until virtue has become almost a matter of ridicule. . . .

The most fruitful cause of apostasy. There has been no more fruitful cause of apostasy in this Church than this. Those who have been familiar with the Elders who have fallen and know the cause of their fall will agree with me, I am sure, in saying that this sin has been the most fruitful cause of the overthrow of Elders in this Church. . . . The Spirit of God will dwell only in holy and pure tabernacles. To have it, therefore, we must be pure, not only in our acts, but in our words and our thoughts; for by the medium of thought we can corrupt ourselves and indulge in lust, which will drive the Spirit of God away from us, leaving us in darkness. (May 19, 1889, DW 39:17-18)

Unvirtuous to lose faith. The testimony that we bear is that the Latter-day Saint who indulges in sexual sin will be damned, if he does not repent. There has been no greater cause of apostasy in this Church than the want of virtue. You can predict the future of a man who is guilty of sins of this kind, unless he repents, as sure as you can predict that darkness will follow the setting of the sun.

God will have a virtuous people, and those of you who are not virtuous will go the way that others have gone unless you repent; you will lose the faith, for the Spirit of God will not dwell in an unholy tabernacle. The man or the woman that is unvirtuous cannot retain the Spirit of God. They may be members of the Church today, in full fellowship, unsuspected by their fellows, but if they do not repent, their wickedness will produce its fruits and the result which God has said would attend it.

Think of what the word of God is. In two revelations that He has given to the Church, He has said that "he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her shall deny the faith . . . if he repents not." (D&C 42:23.) He that "looketh" upon a woman, remember—not lay his hands upon her—but "he that looketh upon a woman to lust after her, shall deny the faith." Therefore, we must not only be pure in deed but be pure in thought, in order to retain the Spirit of God and to have it dwell in our tabernacles. It will not dwell in those who are lustful.

This is the standard that God has raised for His people. He wants us to come up to this standard—to be pure as angels are pure. And why should not we be? If we are going to dwell with God and Christ and with the holy angels, why should not we emulate on the earth the purity that they possess, which makes heaven the blest abode that it is?

I am thankful that this standard has been raised among us. It gives hope for the future of humanity. Otherwise, the fate of this generation is sure. They are going the downward road, and nothing can save them except thorough repentance. The Elders wonder why it is that they do not gather out more from the nations of the earth than they did formerly. The reason is obvious. The people are corrupt. They are full of lust and abominable evils. Abortion and feticide and kindred sins are practiced almost universally. (Oct. 5, 1890, DW 41:650-51)

Many times we wonder how men fall away. We look around and see if we can define the cause. What is the cause? The man was a good, faithful man, strong in the faith, and yet how weak he has grown. He is careless about his duty and indifferent. He is spiritually sick; he exhibits the evidences of spiritual disease, and if he examines his own heart, he is conscious of it, but blinded by the spirit that has taken possession of him he will not repent. If he could only be made to realize the dreadful condition which he is in, he would be stirred up to repentance and would put all his sins far from him. (Apr. 21, 1895, DW 51:290)

Examples from Church history. Oliver Cowdery, who stood side by side with Joseph, who was ordained by an angel from heaven, who was the second Elder in the Church, who beheld the Son of God himself, who saw many wonderful things and was blessed of God as was Joseph—this man whom one would think would have stood if any man in the flesh ever could—indulged in sin. Joseph warned him against that which he did, but he persisted in it, and the result was his Priesthood was taken from him, and the crown that he would have had was given to another. Hyrum Smith received the blessings that Oliver Cowdery had had bestowed upon him and which he had forfeited by his impure conduct.

Ought not this to be a warning to all of us? What man is there in the flesh who can calculate upon being secure from committing sin if he could not? This is the fate also of other men who received great gifts from God. Apostle Lyman Johnson had great manifestations. Angels ministered unto him, and he was the first man in this generation to be chosen one of the Twelve Apostles. Yet he apostatized, denied the faith and became an enemy to the Kingdom of God. These are illustrations of the truth of what God has said, and our history is full of such illustrations. You see men of great promise—I have watched them in my life—all at once wither up, lose their power. They lose the life that was in them. What is the cause? Why, they have committed sin. (June 20, 1892, DW 45:258)

Better to die than lose virtue. We should teach our children these principles. Every daughter, as soon as she is old enough, should be taught that it is better for her to lose her life than her virtue. Every boy should be taught that it is better for him to die than to be guilty of unvirtuous conduct. Impress it upon them in their childhood. And then, when you have done it all, you may find some of them going astray and doing wrong. Still, it is the duty of parents to acquit themselves by teaching their children these things. (DEN, Mar. 4, 1895)

Men more accountable than women. Men ought to be held, and I believe the Lord does hold them in such cases, to a far stricter accountability than he does women. The woman has her own passions to contend against; but when she has the man's importunities added to these, shall not the woman be viewed with mercy and be looked upon differently to that vile creature who, possessed of strength and power, adds his importunities to her weakness and overcomes her, and makes her the victim of his unholy lust? I say, Yes, Yes! Such men will be damned; and if there is any deeper damnation than another, they will be consigned to it. (Oct. 6, 1897, CR 67)

Those who preside have grave responsibilities. Oh, ye Presidents of Stakes and ye Bishops, you must be on the watchtower about these things, for God will hold you accountable. The sins of the people will be found upon your garments in the day of the Lord Jesus, if you do not cleanse impurity from the midst of your Wards. If you recommend men who are unworthy, through tenderness of heart and through sympathy, when they are wicked, I say to you, in the name of Jesus Christ, that the condemnation of God will rest upon you, and He will hold you to a strict accountability. For God has not chosen men to preside without laying upon them responsibility of a very grave and weighty character. He holds us accountable for these things. (Oct. 5, 1884, JD 25:327-28)

Pure and correct thoughts. There is no temptation which it is more necessary to guard against, because there is probably no practice which is more injurious in its tendencies, than that of giving way to evil surmisings. It is very true that "As he thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Proverbs 23:7.) Words and actions are but the external fruits of the inward thoughts of the soul; they must be conceived there before they find their birth from the lips or the hands of the corporeal frame. Hence, we can see the necessity of properly governing our thoughts and of cultivating a habit of pure and correct thinking.

If a man be pure in thought, he will be correspondingly pure in action; but if he allow his mind to roam in unrestricted freedom through the various avenues of evil or to dwell unchecked upon the contemplation of forbidden indulgences, it will not be long before his feet tread those paths and his hand plucks the tempting but deceitful fruit. When once the tempter gains the citadel of the heart, his power is very great, and there is no knowing to what excesses of folly and crime he may incite his unhappy victim.

Our first and chief efforts, therefore, should be directed to having our hearts cleansed from all evil by the sanctifying and purifying influences of the Spirit of the Lord, and then, the tree having been made good at the root, its fruit will be sure to be of a corresponding character. Hence, the Lord says, "My son, give me thine heart." (Proverbs 23:26.) Not thy lip service, thy money, or anything else that may be possessed as an inseparable adjunct of life, but thine heart, knowing, as He does, that where this is given all else will follow. (Feb. 13, 1864, MS 26:105)

A distinguishing feature of Mormonism. There is one thing that distinguishes the Latter-day Saints from every other people that I know anything about—and I have traveled considerably—and that is they love one another. It is not in name; it is not a profession of love; but they are a people who love one another so strongly that they are willing to die for each other if it is necessary, and it is that deep and abiding love that binds them in union.

Travel among the "Mormons" wherever you will, north or south, east or west, at home or abroad, in the United States or in foreign lands, this love is a distinguishing characteristic of the people; you behold it everywhere. Men may never have beheld each other's faces and yet they will love one another, and it is a love that is greater than the love of woman. It exceeds any sexual love that can be conceived of, and it is this love that has bound the people together. It has been a cement that all the persecution, all the tribulation and all kinds of trial could not dissolve or break; and the extraordinary feature of it all is, as I have said, that this people who are thus bound together are not a people of one township, not a people of one nation, not a people of one language, but they are as diverse as it is possible to get the human family to be.

It would not be so strange if all were Americans, or all eastern men, born in New England, brought up with the traditions of New England; it would not be so strange if all were men of the middle States, or of the northern States, or of the western States. But who is there that asks among the "Mormons" or Latter-day Saints as to a man's nationality? Who is it asks where a man or a woman came from? No one. Here are Danish, French, German, Italian, English, American—northern, southern, eastern and western men—all living together as brothers, full of love for each other; none of that rancorous feeling that exists between different nationalities is to be witnessed. (July 24, 1881, JD 22:365-66)

The power of love. There is one power which the Latter-day Saints in their history have had experience in exercising—the power of love. The Savior's teachings impress upon those who receive them the potency of love. It is much more effective than violence.

It is grander in its results. It is happier in its effects. It wins the wrongdoer. It softens the heart of the offender. It disarms the anger of the violent. It expands the heart and produces the most delightful results upon the person who exercises it and who restrains himself and instead of yielding to anger and to resentment repays the one who wrongs him by kindness and love. Let anyone try this, if he has not done so, he will see how true the saying is that has come down to us in the scriptures, that "A soft answer turneth away wrath." (Mar. 1, 1895, JI 30:147)

Love and its power. The principle of love lies at the foundation of all true religion. Children should be taught to love God. If they love Him, they will obey Him; they will never do anything to offend Him or to grieve His Holy Spirit. Where love is absent, true and acceptable worship cannot be rendered for the heart is not in it. We can see this in our daily life. The child who has true love for its parent will not fail to obey him. Such a child will do all in its power to please its parent; and if it should at any time do anything that would offend, it will readily ask forgiveness and humble itself before its parent.

Where love does not exist, and the obedience of children is only obtained by threats and fears, there is but little real respect and reverence manifested. Children should obey their parents not because they are forced to do so by fear of punishment or by threats but because they take delight in doing that which their parents ask them to do. Both receive pleasure in this way. The children take pleasure in pleasing the parents; the parents receive pleasure in witnessing the willingness of the children to comply with their requests. Really good government in the family cannot prevail in any other way. . . .

Members of the Church of Christ should not base their obedience to the Lord and His commands upon the fear of punishment that will follow if they do not comply with His requirements. A far better way is to obey the Lord because we love Him and because we take delight in doing His will. How good and kind and long-suffering and merciful He has been to us. . . .

A Being so beneficent, and who shows such wondrous kindness to us, is worthy of our worship and of our love. When we feel as we should do, our hearts are filled with love and adoration for Him; and if we have this love within us and remember all that He has done for us, can we not worship Him with all our hearts? Can we not obey Him in all things? Is it not our delight to listen to His counsel and take pleasure in doing that which He asks? Remember, it is for our salvation that He makes requirements of us and gives unto us His laws. Some may imagine that they are doing our Father in heaven some great service by obeying Him. It is those who obey who receive the greatest benefit from their obedience. . . .

Every man, woman and child should cultivate love; for "God is love." (1 John 4:8.) We should love one another. We should love our parents. We should love the Lord our God and everything that proceedeth from Him. By cultivating this heavenly principle, we shall be prepared to dwell in His presence, where love abounds. (Sept. 15, 1890, JI 25:562)
