Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

SECTION 6

ASSORTED GOSPEL THEMES

The Gospel has been revealed for the purpose of enabling mankind to comprehend saving truths. It contains the laws which men and women must obey to prepare them for that higher society which exists in heaven. It is by observing these laws and precepts that angels have attained to their glory, and by which also He who is greater than the angels has reached His high and exalted position—our beloved Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ. —GEORGE Q. CANNON Juvenile Instructor 29:680

CHAPTER 42

Habits—Good and Bad

The value of self-denial. Undoubtedly self-denial is an excellent quality, and one that all should practice. Our natures, appetites and inclinations should be controlled. A child should be taught self-denial in many directions besides these that have been mentioned. In fact, to be pure in the sight of the Lord great self-denial is required throughout life, in order to bring everything into proper subjection to the law of the Lord and the requirements of His Gospel. The body and its appetites and desires must be brought into subjection to the spirit.

It is for this purpose that a probation is granted to us on the earth, so that we may by obedience to law make our bodies fit tabernacles for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, and in this manner prepare it for a glorious resurrection and a residence, in an immortal condition, in the presence of the Lord. (Dec. 15, 1894, JI 29:769)

Anger and the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God produces peace and quiet and good-temper. Men and women who have the Spirit are amiable, are kind and loving one towards another. They control their tempers, because the Spirit of God will not dwell where the spirit of anger and hatred and violence exist.

We should, of all people upon the face of the earth, be the best tempered, the kindest, the most forbearing, the most loving, the least disposed to quarrel. (June 15, 1882, JI 17:190)

The evil of uncontrolled anger. It is very difficult to be angry and sin not. The anger which is not unto sin is that which God and his servants feel against the wicked and their evil ways; but the anger of children one with another is not from God, but from that source from which all evils flow and sorrows rise. It is the temptation of the wicked one to lead us astray.

We have all to learn to govern our tempers and passions. It matters not if we be big or little, old or young, we must not let them control us. If they do, they will destroy us. A man with passions he cannot govern is like a run-away locomotive engine; no one knows where it will go or the injury it will do, but it is sure to come to destruction at last.

How sad a sight is a passionate child, one who disputes and contends, who quarrels and fights. What good can we prophecy of such a child if these angry passions are not checked while it is young. That feeling grows in many into the spirit of shedding blood and has made many a man a murderer, as it did Cain, who in his wrath slew his brother Abel. Sorrow waits on all those who do not strive to conquer this burning, choking, death-dealing feeling of anger that so quickly and uncalled for rises in our hearts and fills for a short time our whole souls. It is not of God. He abhors it, and men fear and hate it.

The passionate man is a foe to himself. Anger plows more furrows on the forehead and spoils more pretty faces than age itself. The passionate man carries in his bosom a never-dying fire that burns to his destruction and consumes the vital powers of his being. Many men shorten their lives, not for weeks or days but for years, by giving way to anger. It is like an earthquake is to the ground; it overturns and displaces, disorganizes and destroys, and throws all of the hidden machinery of a man's body into disorder. And thus a man brings evil on himself.

Perhaps you may think it strange that anger should hurt the body; but it is so. The spirit and body are so united that all the feelings of the mind act upon the body. Love and hatred, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, cheerfulness and gloom all work for good or harm on this outward clothing of the spirit. Even the fact, small as it may seem, of our asking a blessing on our food and thanking our Heavenly Father for it has a good effect on our bodies. That is, if the heart rises with the lips in gratitude. That feeling of gratitude or thankfulness fits the stomach to receive the food, while gloom or anger unfits it for its work. A crust of bread eaten with a cheerful heart will do us more good than the choicest food partaken of in sullenness or wrath. Thus, in so small a thing as this may appear, while we honor God, we bless ourselves.

The spirit we should bear is peace, meekness and love. Jesus said, "Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God." (Matthew 5:9.) What a glorious title! Let us try and remember it. Remember also that a wise man has said, "A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger." (Proverbs 15:1.) Boys and girls who fancy that they have received an insult or suffered a wrong should think twice before they speak once, and think that "a soft answer turneth away wrath," then act upon this thought and give a kind word with a smile, and peace will dwell in two hearts where, had a cross word been given, anger would have reigned.

There is one thing more, never vex a companion to anger by taunts or unwise jests. Such a course is also wrong; it produces the evil we have been talking about. But let your intercourse be in kindness and love and you will grow up to be indeed "the children of God." (Apr. 15, 1868, JI 3:60)

Punctuality a desirable trait. One of the most desirable traits in a man's or woman's character is punctuality. The word covers a great deal of ground. We call a man punctual when he keeps an appointment at a given minute or hour; and this is the most common use of the word. But it really means much more than this. A man is punctual who, whenever he gives his word, keeps it, who never neglects to fulfill his promise at the time and in the way he has said he would. The punctual man, therefore, is the truthful man; while the man who is unpunctual is apt to mislead and perhaps deceive others and is guilty of conduct closely akin to untruthfulness.

Punctuality is a virtue that every juvenile should cultivate. Much of the success and happiness of life depends upon its observance. Boys and girls who are punctual are sure to secure confidence. People learn to rely upon them. They trust them. They always have good credit. If they wish to obtain a favor, their character for punctuality secures it for them. If they are in a position where it is necessary for them to borrow, their punctuality is trusted, and they get what they want. And it is frequently in what are called small things that this quality is best shown. Certainly it is in such things that it should be cultivated.

One form of this virtue is shown in the answering of letters. In this respect many otherwise very worthy people are neglectful. They are neither punctual nor courteous. They receive letters of love, letters of friendship, letters of business, letters of inquiry; but instead of answering them when they are received, they lay them aside till some other time, which they think will be more convenient, and they are perhaps never answered. Such conduct is not only unpunctual; it is rude; it is very bad manners and is a lack of good breeding. Of course, there may be times when other pressing business may prevent the most punctual people from answering letters. Under such circumstances such neglect can be excused, But, as a rule, the best time to answer a letter is immediately upon its receipt or as soon thereafter as possible. The one who receives it has the spirit of it then and usually can better answer it then than at any other time. If it be put off, every day that passes makes it more difficult to do, until it is forgotten altogether, in which event the writer feels slighted and perhaps offended. Not only does the writer feel that he has been shabbily treated, but the one who has failed to reply feels ashamed and condemned at his own neglect.

One of the most punctual men we ever knew was President Young. Yet he was a busy man. But he was punctual at his meetings. He was punctual at his meals. However crowded he might be he did not feel that it was proper to keep others, not even his family, waiting for him. His family met for prayers at a certain time of an evening; he would break away from the most engrossing business, from the most interesting conversation, to be punctual at family prayers; he would not even keep his children waiting for him. (Apr. 1, 1883, JI 18:104)

Procrastination. Another bad habit akin to want of punctuality is that of procrastination. The meaning of procrastination is the act of putting off till tomorrow or a future time.

Children should be taught to avoid this and not suffer a habit of this kind to fasten itself upon them. They should be made to understand that whatever should be done ought to be done promptly and at the time that it is expected. Work is always done best and quickest and with the most satisfaction at the proper time. To put off till tomorrow that which should be done today is a bad habit to fall into.

Young people frequently have an inclination of this kind. If not watched and reminded of what they have to do, they are likely to neglect work and put it off, especially if the duty or the labor is not pleasant. If they are not well trained on this point in early life, when they become men and women they find it difficult to do unpleasant things, and because of this duties are frequently neglected. Observing people find by experience that it is always more satisfactory and attended with better results to perform a duty at the time it ought to be done, especially if it should be something unpleasant. (Dec. 1, 1892, JI 27:726)

Have noble aspirations. The man or woman that lives the most fruitful and interesting life is the one that has wholesome, vigorous aspirations. Without these a person's life may be commonplace or even a failure, though his abilities are great; possessing them he must attain influence and success, whether his abilities seem at first great or small. Aspirations, if they are real, create a need for abilities to carry them out. If abilities are present, they are put to use; if absent, they are cultivated. . . .

Political eminence is not the only goal to which we may aspire. Vocations should be chosen according to tastes and opportunities. The effort should be to make oneself most useful in his occupation and thoroughly the master of it. Our life plans should be carefully made and should always be subject to reasonable change. The most prominent thought in them should be excellence and combined with this determination to work. . . .

But aspirations are not complete if they do not lead to moral strength and spiritual activity. Without these qualities the character lacks true greatness. The Savior never led an army, never held position in any state, but how incomparably does His divine personality surpass that of the mightiest conqueror or of the most illustrious ruler! Joseph Smith, His chosen servant in latter days, was not college bred nor trained in any political school, but yet how much more keen was his insight into national conditions than that of the men who ruled the nation during the latter part of his life, and how much better would humanity have been if his advice had been followed and the fratricidal war between North and South averted!

"Aim at the stars; you may attain the mountain tops." Human beings cannot reach perfection, but we can think of it and can strive toward it. And the more clearly we conceive what is true and perfect and the more sincerely we strive the closer will we approach it and the better will be our lives. (Sept. 1, 1898, JI 33:600-601)

Avoid the extremes. There is a disposition evinced in many individuals to follow up some favorite idea or some particular theory and stretch it to undue bounds, attaching to it an importance far beyond what it is legitimately entitled to. . . .

The Gospel has been revealed to elevate us above these narrow, contracted notions and teaches us that one truth is not entitled to such paramount importance above another but is chiefly valuable by its connection with kindred truths, all blending into each other and forming a whole calculated to exalt man in every condition of existence. Still, many men who have had sufficient opportunities in the Church to obtain a more liberal and extended understanding of the truth permit themselves to be governed by this one-sided principle and, seizing upon some favorite doctrine, make it their hobby and invest it with all the importance due to the entire scheme of salvation. . . .

The Priesthood are sent forth as saviours of men, and it devolves upon every one who is called to minister among the people to divest himself of illiberal and contracted ideas and to teach the great truths of salvation whereby man can be made free, ever pursuing a course to win the love and confidence of the honest among men and dealing by them in a spirit of charity and kindness. . . .

Hence, to be effective ministers of salvation, the Priesthood ought continually to keep in their minds and teach, by precept and example, the importance of all the principles of truth with which they have become acquainted, ever carefully avoiding extremes, that the Saint may increase in knowledge and understanding and power before God. . . .

And if they permit that hobby-riding spirit, so dominant in the world, to govern them, intelligent men and women will be repelled instead of attracted by the influence which accompanies them; whereas, liberal views and charitable teachings in consonance with the spirit of the Gospel will possess an irresistible charm for all who love freedom of thought and purity of life. (July 6, 1861, MS 23:424-26)

Correct speaking and writing. There is too little regard paid to the elementary principles of education. . . . Every child should be taught to write a good hand. The greatest care should be taken in teaching them this art. The forming of figures, also should be taught with care; and, of course, reading and spelling ought to be considered of the first importance as the foundation of an education. There is too great a tendency to having our children study the higher branches of education and to look upon reading, writing and spelling as of little importance. This is a great mistake. No matter how educated a man or a woman may be, if the handwriting is poor, it gives a bad impression to those who see it of the writer's education; and if bad spelling is added to bad writing, of course no one reading it can suppose that the person is anything but a dunce. (Mar. 15, 1897, JI 32:186)

Be careful what you write. Among the many wise counsels which the Prophet Joseph Smith gave to his brethren and to the world, one was never to commit anything to paper in correspondence that could be communicated orally or that if written would not bear publication. This counsel the Elders of our Church and our people generally should follow; in fact, it would be better for everyone to remember it and never put in writing that which they would be ashamed to see in print.

There has been no end of trouble through carelessness in these respects. When a person has committed to writing that which should not be said, it is difficult and in some cases impossible to recall it. Words spoken are heard and sometimes remembered in a way to produce unpleasant results; but that danger is insignificant compared with that which attends the committing of things to writing that should not be said. (Apr. 1, 1896, JI 31:199)

An improper word or a wrong idea, when spoken indiscreetly and without any evil intention by a servant of God, may be removed from the memory and mind of the hearers or be so modified as to lose its hurtfulness, by the influence of the Spirit of God; but, when they are once written, their effects cannot be so easily corrected. . . .

A man who today may not attach much importance to his opinions might possibly be disagreeably surprised in the great day of accounts, were he, while he lived, to write much and be careless as to its agreement with truth, to find how much evil had been wrought out by his indiscreet and irresponsible writings. An importance is frequently attached to the utterances and acts and position of a man who has lived a generation or two previously which his contemporaries would be quite unwilling to accord to them. When it is truth which has been written by a faithful servant of God and thus been perpetuated, it produces great good; but when it is error, it will readily be perceived that its effects are increasingly hurtful.

Paul's writings given undue preeminence. There is an amount of deference paid to the writings of Paul at the present time which he possibly never anticipated would be when he penned them, or he might have written differently on some points; that is, if we accept the present version of his writings as not very, very incorrect. With his contemporaries they did not weigh so very much. Even among his brethren and the Saints—though they, doubtless, attached far more value to them than anybody else—they did not receive the consideration which the writings of others obtained, who are considered now-a-days his inferiors. He either wrote more than many of his brethren, or what he did write was much better preserved than their writings, and posterity have therefore assigned him a preeminence among his brethren which, when alive, he did not possess.

Every word should be carefully weighed. If we take the past as a guide, posterity will be considerably influenced by our ideas and views. The Elders can scarcely conceive, at the present time, of the weight which will be attached by future generations to their words and acts, as they may find them recorded; how exceedingly careful we ought to be, then, that we should not be the means of perpetuating error or anything that would be likely to lead to evil!

We should consider it far preferable to have everything that we had ever written destroyed and blotted out of earthly existence than to have our writings be the means of perpetuating error or imparting improper ideas. Let our every word, then, as servants of God and speaking by His authority, be carefully weighed that when it is sent forth, whether its circulation be limited or extensive, it may accomplish good. (Aug. 6, 1863, MS 26:505-6)

Avoid the use of slang. Children are imitative; they are quick at learning and seizing new or odd expressions. If they hear swearing or vulgar language, they are apt to pick it up, so with slang. For this reason, parents and teachers and all who are in frequent contact with children should be careful in their speech. Good style in speaking is learned early in life and is rarely, if ever, forgotten. So with a careless, bad style.

The style of language used in the family circle should not only be for home purposes and every day wear, but should be that which can be used in other society and upon state occasions. By being thus trained young people will feel at ease among all cultivated and well-bred people, an advantage which all of them will, sooner or later, learn to appreciate. (Oct. 1, 1893, JI 28:602)

Importance of accuracy. Every young person should be particular to cultivate the habit of exact truthfulness in all his words, whether in conversation upon trivial matters or in the relation of events of importance. It is remarkable how easily a habit of carelessness can be acquired in this direction. . . .

Children should be taught in early life to state everything exactly as it occurs. Their consciences should be developed in this direction, and they should be made to feel how wrong it is to be inaccurate in their statements of what has occurred. They should be taught to repeat conversations as nearly as possible in the spirit as well as the words in which they have been uttered; for though the same words may be repeated, they may convey an entirely different impression unless they are repeated in the same spirit in which they were originally spoken.

There should be a love of truth developed in every human breast, and everyone should be made to feet the great importance of truthfulness. Too great care cannot be taken in relating occurrences or conversations which are likely to affect the opinion of the person to whom they are related concerning other parties who may be absent. If one person conveys an incorrect impression to the mind of another concerning an absent one, a great injury is done, and sometimes serious consequences follow. . . .

It should be the aim of all to obtain such a character for telling the truth that every acquaintance will know that, when such persons make statements, they can be thoroughly relied upon. It should be understood that they would not deviate the breadth of a hair from a correct statement of facts concerning any transaction to which they may have been a party. A character of this kind secured by a young person is invaluable to him or to her throughout life. We should be as reliable in our sphere as the angels are in their sphere, and never, willingly, make any statement that will not bear the strictest scrutiny. (Jan. 15, 1890, JI 25:50-51)

Disrespect for aged a growing evil. Let every child be taught to respect and reverence not only their parents but old age. Let us endeavor to raise up a generation who will respect age. One of the great and growing evils that exists to-day in our land is the disrespect that is manifested by the young to age. Let us train our children to be respectful and to honor the gray hairs of the aged, to honor their parents that the great promise that was made in olden times may be bestowed upon them—namely, that their days may be long in the land. (June 27, 1880, JD 22:58)

Taking Lord's name in vain a serious offense. "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." (Exodus 20:7.) This was one of the commandments that the Lord gave to the children of Israel when He led them out of Egypt. All the people were required to observe it, and if they did not, the penalty was very severe. . . .

The Lord required not only the children of Israel to observe this commandment, but the stranger also who should be living in their midst. The penalty for breaking the commandments was . . . death. It is a terrible punishment, but then the crime was a great one. Suppose that every one were punished with death now who took the Lord's name in vain. A great many would have to die. Even among those who call themselves Latter-day Saints a great many would fall victims to this penalty.

If it was wrong in the days of Moses to take the name of the Lord in vain, is it not wrong now? If a man were stoned to death for blaspheming the name of the Lord at that time, what should be the penalty now? Moses did not punish that man until he had asked the Lord what he was to do with him. (Leviticus 24:10-17.) He was killed by a command of the Lord. This shows that the Lord wants all men to honor His holy name.

When we hear boys and men speak lightly of our Father in heaven, cursing or swearing, we think of the punishment that this man received. For Latter-day Saints, or their children, to take the name of the Lord in vain is a dreadful crime, because they have been taught better. They know it is wrong, and yet are there not many who are guilty of this?

Use His sacred name infrequently. We have sometimes heard Elders telling some story or some joke in which the name of the Deity has been taken in vain, and they would repeat it. Now, this is very wrong. It is just as great a sin for the man who repeats what another man said, in taking the name of the Lord in vain, as it was for the man who first said it, to do it. Therefore, if a man takes the name of the Lord in vain, we should not repeat it nor think ourselves justified in doing so because we merely quote his language.

There are some Elders who use the name of the Deity very frequently in their preaching and in their praying; they make the name altogether too common. In praying the Savior taught His disciples to say, "Our Father, who art in heaven," "Our Father!" How Sweet this is; how near it brings us to him! What better or more endearing title can we use? Children, when you pray, address Him as Father, and when you speak of Him, do so as our Heavenly Father, or Lord, and do not use His sacred name lightly or frequently, neither in praying nor speaking; and remember that He "will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." (Sept. 1, 1877, JI 12:198)

An inexcusable vice. To profane the name of God is a heinous sin—one that the Almighty proclaimed against in a very early age and many times since. It is one of the sins mentioned, of which the Lord said "even the souls that commit them shall be cut off from among their people." (Leviticus 18:29.)

Of all the vices we can think of that of profanity admits of the least possible excuse or palliation. It gratifies no sense nor appetite; it benefits no one; it does not even commend the person indulging in it to the estimation of anyone. It is a most senseless and unreasonable practice, that can be accounted for only on the score of depravity.

Our language is certainly rich enough in expletives to allow any person to express his feelings with all the emphasis necessary without using profanely the name of the Deity for such a purpose. . . .

If a person believes in the existence of the Creator, how wicked, how irreverent, how ungrateful in him is the practice of profaning His name! If a person does not believe in the existence of such a Being, how foolish, how unreasonable it is for him to swear by that name! (Sept. 1, 1881, JI 16:198)

A safe rule to follow. It is a safe rule that it is not wise to adopt any habit in this life that must be given up before we can enter into the joys of the next, or, we should never encourage on earth that which will not be permitted in heaven. Every one of us is willing to admit that good men do not swear; do we expect they will do so when they enter the presence of God? Do angels take the Lord's name in vain? The idea is so ridiculous that we scarcely like to ask the question. But then there is another question which this leads to of great importance to the blasphemer. It is this: How dare we do that which angels dare not do? Is it possible for us to argue that that which is forbidden in heaven is praiseworthy on earth? . . .

Though we are sure no boy can tell us any advantage that can arise from the abuse of God's holy name, yet we can tell him many evils that arise therefrom. To begin, it is unnecessary and consequently foolish; it lessens our respect for holy things and leads us into the society of the wicked; it brings upon us the disrespect of the good who avoid us; it leads us to other sins, for he who is willing to abuse his Creator is not ashamed to defraud his fellow creature; and also by so doing we directly and knowingly break one of the most direct of God's commandments. (Sept. 27, 1873, JI 8:156)

Moral courage. Moral courage is a gift which every man should highly prize and which our young readers should cultivate. Physical courage is a quality not uncommon among men and animals—the courage to face danger, to grapple with tangible obstacles and to incur the risk of death. In the excitement of battle, or under the influence of passion, men perform daring feats of valor and lose all sense of fear. Under the influence of stimulants, too, men will face danger and have no fears as to results. This kind of courage is rather common among men and is frequently called brute courage.

But moral courage is a quality of a different character. It requires moral courage to be a Latter-day Saint. It requires moral courage to do the right thing and say the right word when it is unpopular to do so. No man can be a truly great man who does not possess this quality. A man possessed of moral courage never shrinks from telling the truth. Such a man is never a liar or a deceiver or a hypocrite; he is never untrue to his principles. To use one of the phrases now common in our day, such a man has the courage of his convictions. A man or woman possessed of true moral courage always excites admiration and compels respect. Moral cowards especially respect such persons, for the reason that it is natural for mankind to admire the good in others that is lacking in their own characters. (Nov. 15, 1882, JI 17:344)

Evil of falsehood. The man who frames a lie is a great sinner; but the one who loves a lie, and who circulates a lie after it is told, is also under condemnation. Many stories go from mouth to mouth concerning the truth of which those who repeat them know nothing. But it seems as though the constant repetition of a falsehood impresses many people as though it were a fact.

Where Latter-day Saints, so-called, are found telling that which is untrue, they should be called to an account. It is written that whosoever loveth and maketh a lie shall not be permitted to enter into the Holy City, nor to have a right to the tree of life, but they are to be without, with dogs, sorcerers, whoremongers, murderers and idolaters. The Lord has said, "He that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight." (Psalm 101:7.) Latter-day Saints should be warned upon these points, that they may not grieve the Spirit of the Lord, nor do injury to their friends and neighbors, by indulging in this pernicious habit of repeating and attaching credence to every slander and false rumor that may be put in circulation.

But every one should be careful, when they hear a story about their brethren and sisters, to refrain from repeating it until they know it to be true, and then not to do so in a way to injure the person about whom it is told. The reputation of our neighbors and the members of our Church should be as dear to us as our own, and we should carefully avoid doing anything to another or saying anything about another that we would not wish done or said about ourselves. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 48:713-14)

Cowards tell ties. Always tell the truth. He is a coward who does not tell the truth; she is a coward who does not tell the truth. You would not like to be called cowards, but recollect that if ever you feet tempted to tell a lie, it is cowardice which prompts you to do it. You are cowardly when you do not tell the truth.

Says a boy, "If I do tell the truth, I may get whipped." It is better to be whipped for telling the truth than to save yourselves from it by telling a lie, although no wise parent or teacher would whip a child for telling the truth. But do you not see that if you tell a lie to avoid a whipping, it is fear which causes you to lie? The boy or girl who is afraid to tell the truth for fear of a whipping is a coward.

Always remember that it is cowardly to tell a lie but brave to tell the truth. Everybody admires the truthteller. If, when you do wrong, you frankly and bravely own, "I did that," your parents will feet thankful that they have a son or a daughter who is brave enough to tell the truth, and though they will disapprove the wrong committed, they will feel in their hearts to bless you for telling the truth. (July 19, 1873, JI 8:116)

Avoid all evil speaking. Latter-day Saints cannot speak evil of their neighbors or their brethren and sisters without coming under censure and grieving the Spirit of the Lord. Such examples before children are attended with very bad effects. Children hear their parents or others speak lightly about absent friends or relatives, and it encourages them to do the same; they think they are at perfect liberty to comment in the most familiar manner about everyone whom they may know. In many cases neither age nor standing nor sex is respected; young people criticize the words and acts of others with the utmost freedom, and because of the example of their parents perhaps, or of others with whom they associate, they do not think they are doing anything improper in being thus flippant with the reputation of those whom they may know. . . .

Children can be trained to avoid speaking evil of anyone, and they should be taught to exercise the greatest care in this direction. The Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ and all the teachings of the servants of God are of such a character as to check this inclination in the human mind. . . .

The person who speaks evil of another injures himself or herself more than the person concerning whom the remarks are made. It should be understood by the Latter-day Saints that doing wrong in any form injures the person who commits it, whether it be in word or in act, to a far greater extent than it does the person whose injury is sought.

The truth is, no righteous person can be permanently injured by anything that may be said or done about him. It may seem to do him harm for the time being, but the Lord overrules all these things and controls them for the good of those who serve Him. Therefore, it is not only contrary to the commands of God to speak evil and to tell falsehoods concerning others, but it is bad policy. The injury falls not upon the person for whom it is intended, but upon the one who indulges in it. (May 15, 1895, JI 30:305-6)

Exercise true charity. Charity would prevent us from speaking unkindly of the weaknesses or faults of our brethren and sisters and would enable us to treat them leniently and refrain from gossiping about them or magnifying them in speaking of them to others. There is enough good in every human character, especially in those Latter-day Saints, to permit us to dwell lovingly upon the good traits and qualities of those with whom we associate, and then with proper charity we can cover and hide from our view any weaknesses that they may have.

But when Latter-day Saints are guilty of wrongs which amount to clear violations of the law of God, it is not right to cover over those wrongs by exercising charity. There is a way to correct them, and it is true mercy to a man or a woman who thus violates a law of God to bring that to his or her attention and to make him or her conscious of the fact that it is a violation of God's law. A true friend to such parties will not hesitate to speak the truth plainly to them upon questions of this kind and take the necessary steps to have them checked in the commission of wrong and to repent truly and sincerely of it and forsake it.

Herein many officers in the Church have erred. They have exercised mistaken clemency towards sinners. They have supposed that they were exercising charity by bearing with those who were transgressors of the law of God. A Bishop or other officer who takes a course of this kind is as unwise in his sphere as the parent who suffers his child for it. (June 1, 1887, JI 22:168)

Practical joking. At no time should we do anything that can be avoided which would chagrin, inconvenience or pain our fellowmen, and no word or sentence should ever pass our lips, even in a joke, which will not bear the strictest scrutiny under the searchlight of truth. If our surplus energy must find vent in some way, let it be utilized in providing surprises in the shape of blessings for the widows and the fatherless or in doing something that will contribute to the happiness and well-being of our fellowmen. (Sept. 1, 1895, JI 30:527)

Raffling not approved. Speaking in general upon the practice of raffling, we wish to say that it is not approved of by the authorities of the Church. We think it ought not to be encouraged among our people, no matter how worthy the various purposes or persons that may be urged as beneficiaries from its profits or proceeds. We regard it an especially bad practice to introduce among children. It comes very close indeed to a form of gambling; it at least teaches those who engage in it to build hopes on mere chances, the great majority of which, of course, cannot help but be futile in the very nature of things. . . . It is sufficient to say that it is not regarded as a good practice; it is not attended with good results and ought not to be encouraged among our people. (Jan. 15, 1899, JI 34:48)

Card playing—a tool of the adversary. There is no language of ours that will too strongly condemn this growing evil among the young people of Zion. We look upon it as a dangerous amusement and one which every self-respecting man and woman ought to avoid, and especially those who profess to be Latter-day Saints. We have watched the course of some boys and girls who have persistently followed this habit and have yet to see the first case where good has resulted from this game. On the other hand, instances without number might be named where great evil has followed the playing of cards. . . .

Cards are the tools of the adversary, and even though there may be, as some claim, no evil in the game of cards itself, such amusement frequently leads to bad results.

It should be the rule of young people never to go upon the devil's ground, in other words, never to place themselves in the way of temptation. They will then be better able to resist evil when it does come to them, as it most assuredly will do to each individual who maintains his integrity and retains his place among the people of God. (Feb. 1, 1895, JI 30:97)

Gambling an evil. There are many evils in the world which young folks need to be guarded against. One of these is gambling. There are various forms of this evil but they are all bad and should not be indulged in. Such games of chance as appear most innocent are liable to lead to others that involve greater risks, and they ought to be avoided. When one indulges in a game of chance of any kind, it presents before him a great temptation to continue the practice. In this way many have been led to ruin. . . .

Every boy and girl should keep in mind that the proper way to gain wealth is to work for it—to earn it by legitimate labor. It should also be remembered that such labor is always honorable and that there is no occasion for any one to feel ashamed or humiliated because he has to work for his living. (Aug. 15, 1898, JI 33:572-73)

The sin of ingratitude. There are some sins which are greater than others. To sin against the Holy Ghost, or to shed innocent blood, is a most dreadful crime, the worst a man can commit and one that cannot be forgiven. Judas Iscariot was guilty of this, and many other apostates have been guilty of the same crime. Next to this is the sin of adultery. Those who indulge in this great sin fall under heavy condemnation, and unless they thoroughly repent, their punishment will be severe. Many more sins might be mentioned which are of a very grave character; but we will only mention one now. It is the sin of ingratitude, a sin that is far too common.

Probably some of our readers may not understand what this sin is. We will explain. God, our Heavenly Father, blesses his children with His Spirit and health, food, raiment and other favors. Those who receive these and do not feel thankful to Him for them are guilty of ingratitude. (May 27, 1871, JI 6:84)

Be honest because it is right. "Honesty is the best policy." This is a very old and true maxim and one that is often quoted. But is there no higher and better reason why people should be honest than because policy suggests that they should be so—than because it pays to be honest? We think so. A person should be honest from principle—because it is right to be honest. If a person is honest merely because there is a prospect of his losing something by dishonesty, he is very likely to change his tactics when the prospect changes. If a person observes the law and does right from fear of punishment only, he is liable to do wrong when the penalty of wrong-doing is not before his eyes. . . .

We believe that "honesty is the best policy." We believe that honesty will pay. But suppose it wouldn't pay; would that fact justify us in acting dishonestly? Not by any means. (May 15, 1880, JI 15:66)

Debt—a terrible slavery. Extravagance is the sin and peril of the age. Either from the example of others or the laxity of their own principles, people are prone to live beyond their means. Whatever they earn, they spend more. Debt is easily fallen into, but its slavery is terrible. It discourages ambition; it is a drag upon high endeavor; it is a slow but consuming death to an honest and sensitive soul. War hath slain its thousands, but debt its tens of thousands. It makes of him whom it catches in its toils a serf and either a coward or a scamp. It gnaws like canker; it burns like caustic; it grinds on and on till the grave closes over the unhappy victim. It eats relentlessly away at his substance not only while all the world is awake and active, but also while all the world sleeps. No lock or bar can keep out its blight; in no clime or concealment can the debtor escape its iron clutch.

"To earn a little and to spend a little less" means contentment, courage in facing one's fellows, incentive to braver struggles with the world's adversities and honor and reputation of the most priceless sort. Peace of mind is a jewel beyond compare, whether it be associated with wealth or poverty or be found in that genial middle zone where contentment with a little holds sway. But debt is a tormentor and a mill-stone about the neck, and is the natural and sworn enemy of happiness. Shun it, reader, as you would a serpent! (Sept. 1, 1899, JI 34:529-30)

Masked and character balls. There are decided objections to masked balls among the Latter-day Saints, because they can so easily be made agencies of evil. It is difficult to understand how one's interest or pleasure can be increased by concealing his or her face at a social party. Of course, not all who do this have any improper motives whatever; but the opportunity for the evil-minded is there, and innocent persons are frequently thrown into close contact with others as partners whom they would scorn to meet or associate with under other circumstances. A masked ball, as such, is therefore entirely disapproved of.

As to character or costume balls where the face is not masked, much of the objection above referred to would be removed. There is of course the item of expense in dressing in character, and sometimes there is a tendency to indecency in costume; in other words, those who take part sometimes feel that properly to present the character they have in mind they must wear clothing . . . they and their friends would be ashamed of under other circumstances. Such a feature as this is, of course, to be criticized. But, on the other hand, character balls can frequently be made very entertaining and even instructive where thought is bestowed upon the costume and it represents truthfully the person or the time that the wearer has in mind. . . . They, however, are only enjoyable when characterized by good taste, and, like all other amusements of the kind, should be managed with great prudence. (Mar. 1, 1899, JI 34:139)

Moderate amusement is proper. We have no fault to find with anybody for seeking amusement. It is proper that it should be indulged in, moderately, of course. We may go to the extreme in almost everything, and it is very easy to do so in pleasure-seeking. But while we would condemn that, we would not commend the example of the over-industrious person, who is as absorbed in business and the cares of life as to find no time for amusement. And still more would we condemn that fakir-like class of persons, who, in their religious zeal, consider it necessary to spend their lives in the practice of austerities and stifle the pleasure-desiring attributes of their natures.

Mankind represents the only species of all the creations of our Father, so far as we are aware, which is provided with the faculty of indulging in laughter. We are not endowed with that faculty without a purpose. Though we are taught in the revelations of the Almighty that loud or excessive laughter is not pleasing to Him, we have no reason to suppose that we can please Him by stifling the inclination to laugh or to indulge in pleasurable emotions. Seeking passing pleasure is right, but it is not the sole, nor indeed the highest object of life by any means. . . .

Many, very many avenues of pleasure are open to those who are cultivated intellectually, that are closed effectually to others on account of their ignorance. Among these may be mentioned the innumerable and varied pleasures which the reading of books affords, the practice of literary composition, music in its various branches, and intelligent, instructive and elevating conversation. Ignorant, illiterate people are not qualified to indulge in any such sources of enjoyment as these and are almost forced in their pleasure-seeking to resort to those of a baser kind. . . .

A clear conscience and assurance that our course is approved by the Almighty and, above all, the presence of the Holy Spirit, will tend to afford us pleasure, and without we live to enjoy these, our seeking for pleasure is like chasing our own shadow or grasping at bubbles that vanish at our touch. (Jan. 15, 1882, JI 17:24)

Social enjoyment and amusements. We have given the religious world a lesson upon this point. We have shown that social enjoyment and amusements are not incompatible with correct conduct and true religion. Instead of forbidding the theater and placing it under ban, it has been the aim of the Latter-day Saints to control it and keep it free from impure influences, and to preserve it as a place where all could meet for the purpose of healthful enjoyment. . . .

Our social parties should be conducted in a manner to give gratification to all who attend them, however delicate and refined they may be in their feelings. Rude and boisterous conduct and everything of an improper character should be forbidden at such assemblages. . . .

Pleasure and relaxation, which in themselves may be not only harmless but really beneficial to mind and body, are often rendered evil in the extreme, because of their surroundings and associations. The thoughtless and inexperienced are frequently oblivious to the harm thus attending something in which there is no essential wrong, and are led to look with allowance, if not actual approval, upon things that would shock them under other circumstances. The indiscriminate commingling of the Saints with persons not of their faith whose habits, history and purposes are bad or unknown to them is fraught with evil and to be strongly deprecated. To expose our youth to the contaminating influence of vile men and women such as often congregate in places of public amusement, where they are thrown together in social intercourse, is more then folly; it is wickedness. It is proper that strangers should be treated with courtesy and respect, but intimacy with them is not desirable, and our young people should be cautioned and guarded against casual acquaintanceship and the society of persons whose intentions and influence may be of the very worst character. . . .

Order should be maintained in the midst of merriment. Indecorous language and conduct should be frowned down. All excess is detrimental. Temperance should govern in everything. Amusement is not the purpose of life; it should be indulged in only by way of variety. When people accustom themselves to constant and oft-repeated rounds of pleasure, the true objects of human existence are forgotten and duty becomes irksome and detestable. (Apr. 8, 1887, MS 49:297-98)

Don't destroy animal life. Our religion teaches us that human life is most sacred and should not be wantonly taken. The Lord also has spoken with great plainness concerning the animal creation. The beasts, fowls and fishes are all the creation of His power and their lives are precious in His sight. No properly constituted person will lightly take the life of any creature; and every girl should be taught that it is wrong to adorn herself with feathers obtained from the slaughter of birds. Animals, fowls and fish are created for the use of man; but their lives should not be wasted. They are to supply the wants of man, not to be slaughtered for mere amusement or for the gratification of vanity.

It is strange that there should be such a desire on the part of human beings of our race to kill birds for the mere pleasure of shooting them. The first impulse with many boys and men, when they have guns in their hands and they see birds flying or wild animals running, is to shoot, though they have no use whatever for the animals or fowl thus killed. Probably, after they have shot, their victims are left to rot on the ground. Such a practice is murderous, and we think that our boys should be taught by their parents that it is wicked to take the life even of the humblest animal or the most insignificant bird. They should not shed blood, only when it is necessary to produce food, To merely go out "gunning" for pleasure is wrong. (Nov. 15, 1893, JI 28:712)

Wanton killing. There is a great difference between wild beasts and birds and human beings; but, nevertheless, all derive their life from our Great Creator. He has bestowed life upon man and upon beasts, birds, fishes and insects, and no one has the right to take that life, except in the way and under the conditions which the Lord prescribes. . . .

The Lord has given animals, fowl and fish to man for his use. They are placed under man's control, to be used for food with prudence and thanksgiving and not wastefully. . . . When people can use game of any kind for food, and they stand in need of it, the Lord is not displeased if they kill it. When, however, they hunt it for the mere pleasure of killing, then sin is committed.

The time will come when man and animals which are now wild and ferocious will dwell together without hurting each other. The Prophets have foretold this with great plainness. But before this day comes men will have to cease their war upon the animals, the reptiles and the insects. At the present time every one of these flee from his presence with fear; they feel that if he can reach them by his weapons, he will kill them. The Lord gives them knowledge enough to take care of the lives which He has given them, and He, doubtless, teaches them to shun man. But when man becomes their true friend, they will learn to love and not to fear him. The Spirit of the Lord which will rest upon man will also be given to the animal creation—man will not hurt nor destroy, not even tigers and lions and wolves and snakes, and they will not harm him—and universal peace will prevail. (Dec. 1, 1889, JI 24:548-49)

Kindness to animals. Every child that is brought into contact with animals should be taught, by parents and by all who attempt to instruct the young, that it is a very great sin in the sight of the Almighty for the dumb creation to be treated with cruelty or even with neglect. A merciful man is merciful to his beast. A good master will see that his animals are fed and cared for, if they have been performing labor, before he himself sits down to food or to take rest. A merciful man who loves the animals which he owns and uses would not be contented to sit down to eat if he knew his horses or his cows were hungry and uncared for. He would see that they had food and water and were protected from the inclemency of the weather as much as they possibly could be before he could enjoy his own food and drink and comfort. This same feeling should be impressed upon the minds of all children so that no animal that is in their care may be neglected. (Feb. 15, 1899, JI 34:113-14)

Trees are sacred. The poet tells us "the groves were God's first temples," and we know that early religious observances of nearly all pagan peoples were associated with trees. The first and greatest incident in the world, so far as concerns the human family, is directly associated with trees by the sacred writer: "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die." (Genesis 2:16-17.) And then, when the parents of our race had disobeyed the divine command, again a tree is prominently mentioned: "Lest he [the man] put forth his hand and partake also of the tree of life, and eat and live forever, therefore I, the Lord God, sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. . . . So I drove out the man." (Moses 4:28-31.)

"The tree of life," "the tree of knowledge," how vast the significance of such terms! Is it any wonder that early peoples, even though pagan, worshipped trees and under their shade, that the poet was moved to exclaim, "the groves were God's first temples," and that every sensitive and rightfeeling soul today regards a growing tree as something almost sacred? . . .

For my own part, I consider the life of a tree so sacred that I am reluctant to destroy it, even when the tree is no longer useful where it is, and even when it is in the way of better improvement; and I cannot understand the temper and disposition of people (nor can I have much friendship for them) who needlessly and ruthlessly go hacking about with axes or knives destroying tree life without purpose.

I would like to see our children taught to respect tree life as they do bird life and animal life and human life. All are parts of the great creation of our Father—and none of the workmanship of His hands should we presume to tamper with, wreck or destroy, except as our needs may justify or our intelligence suggest as necessary for the welfare of those concerned. (May 1, 1899, JI 34:264-66)
