Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 43

True Education—Literature for the Saints

Self-dependence necessary. It is necessary that every man and woman and child connected with this work should learn as rapidly as possible the habit of self-dependence, to exercise faith before God for themselves, so that each one in his place or in her place will be able to perform his or her part to the acceptance of our God and in such a manner as to bring to pass their own salvation. This is much more easy at the present time than it was in the past from the fact that doctrine is becoming better understood, the principles of the Gospel are more thoroughly disseminated by the aid of all the various agencies that are at work in our midst. . . .

This work is spreading to so great an extent that responsibility must rest upon individual members. The Presidency of the Church, the Twelve Apostles, the various presiding authorities, can no longer do as they have done in years past—carry the people along. The people themselves must learn to walk, to bear their own burdens, to perform their own duties, and to take such a course as will result in their own development and in the advancement of this great work that God has established upon the earth. . . .

Intelligence needed. It would be an impossibility for this work to achieve the high destiny in store for it and concerning which we have indulged in so many glowing anticipations upon any other principle than this. We are told that intelligence is the glory of God, and it certainly is the glory of man. And with the obstacles that have to be overcome, that confront us every step in our progress, there must be knowledge developed among this people; there must be the highest attainment and grade of intelligence developed among us. Upon no other principle can we stand. Upon no other principle can we progress. Upon no other principle can we accomplish the great results that we have before us. (July 15, 1883, JD 24:181-82)

A foundation for true education. It is of the utmost importance to us and to our children and to the work of God which is entrusted to us that we should give our children every advantage of education, including the training of them in the principles of the Gospel, for it is of the first importance that all should have laid the foundation in their hearts of faith in God and confidence in the Holy Priesthood and in the ordinances of the house of God. This is of the first importance, more important than anything else, more important even than teaching them to read and write. Train them in the faith of God and in the knowledge of God, so far as it can be imparted to them, until they can find out God for themselves, seeking him in earnestness in their closets and private places.

And when we have laid this foundation in their hearts, then impart to them skill in education to read and write perfectly. (June 27, 1881, JD 22:287)

No system of education can be perfect which does not teach the principles of righteousness and faith in God. Learning has not saved the world, neither can it save it. No man by wisdom ever found out God, and men may study all their lives and acquire all the knowledge and worldly wisdom that is within the reach of the human mind and yet be utterly destitute of the true knowledge of God.

It is of the utmost importance that our children should, in the first place, be taught faith in God. This cannot be left out of our system of education. Every child in our midst should be taught how to obtain a knowledge of God. This should be made the corner stone and the foundation of all education. (Apr. 15, 1890, JI 25:243)

Teach children the Gospel. Our children should be indoctrinated in the principles of the Gospel from their earliest childhood. They should be made familiar with the contents of the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. These should be their chief text books, and everything should be done to establish and promote in their hearts genuine faith in God, in His Gospel and its ordinances, and in His works. But under our common school system this is not possible. . . . In no direction can we invest the means God has given us to better advantage than in the training of our children in the principles of righteousness and in laying the foundation in their hearts of that pure faith which is restored to the earth. (Oct. 6, 1886, MS 48:715-16)

Religion should be taught. There is no good reason why the biographies and writings of pagan philosophers should be admitted into our schools, while the life, teachings and works of the Son of God are denied admission there. As our schools are now managed, the infidel has every advantage. Infidelity is almost sure to follow the use of many of the text books. The books which are opposed to true religion and to imparting a true knowledge of all that is holiest, best and most valuable for men to know are rigidly excluded from the school-room. This is wrong.

No people in the world ought to have a deeper interest than we Latter-day Saints in the question as to whether religion should be taught in the school-room. Our very existence is wholly dependent upon our religion. The most deadly blow that could be struck at our organization would be to deprive our children of instruction in our religion. The prosperity and permanency of our society depend upon the thorough instruction of the rising generation in its principles. (Aug. 15, 1886, JI 21:252)

Destiny of Zion depends on true education. Our destiny is assured; the Lord has spoken so plainly concerning it that no doubt remains upon it. Zion must be at the head. The struggles that we have to encounter are the training intended to qualify us to occupy that supreme position among the nations which the Prophets have predicted. But before Zion can achieve her true position, her sons and daughters must be educated in the highest and best sense of the word—not the education of worldly wisdom, but the education which has for its basis a true knowledge of God and of the glorious principles revealed by Him in these days. Taking this for the foundation, we can build a superstructure of knowledge upon it that will be grand and glorious.

It should be the aim of every parent, of every teacher, and of every public man in our land to furnish the rising generation with every facility to make them so intelligent that they can appear with credit in the midst of the high and the noble among the various nations of the earth. (Aug. 1, 1882, JI 17:232)

True seekers of knowledge. As a people the Latter-day Saints are ardent friends of learning, true seekers after knowledge. They recognize in a good education the best of fortunes; it broadens the mind, creates liberal and noble sentiments and fits the possessor for a more successful struggle with the obstacles of life. No matter how rough the path or how hard the labor, intelligence helps to make it easier. On the other hand, the pleasures of life are heightened by knowledge; one appreciates more fully the beauties of art and enjoys with supreme zest the wonders of nature. The possession of knowledge is of itself the highest pleasure, indispensable and satisfying to those who are thrown among cultured people and comforting to the solitary and the recluse. (Apr. 1, 1892, JI 27:210)

Strive for good education. The value of a good education is beyond price. This is especially so with the Latter-day Saints. We have to meet the world; we have to show it that the Lord has given us a system of government, of religion and of morals superior to any other.

The world is educated. The people pride themselves upon their knowledge gained through education. They despised the Elders in former days because they were unlearned; but those Elders had the power and blessings of God to attend them. They met the learned and the educated and gained victories over them. They also reached the honest and, under the blessing of the Lord, convinced them of the truth and brought them into the Church.

The Lord is still with His Elders. He still helps them whether they are educated or not. But times have changed. We are now in circumstances where we can gain education. All the boys and girls in our land can now get a good education if they will strive for it. . . .

The Church is growing and spreading. It is gaining influence. Our Elders can now reach people of a different class to those to whom they preached in the beginning. This will be more and more the case every year. We shall be able before long to get access with our doctrines to the leading people and the ruling classes in every land. To accomplish the Lord's purposes in this direction the Elders should be educated. They should know all that the world knows and, in addition, have the wisdom and knowledge which God bestows upon His true servants. . . .

Seek for education. Learn to be good writers. Learn to read properly. Learn to spell correctly. Learn to put to use the rules of grammar. Learn every useful branch. Read the best books. . . . Learn good manners. Practice good manners at home; speak politely and correctly at home. Then, when you go abroad into society, you feel at ease, because you are natural. You do there what you do everywhere, speak and act as a gentleman or a lady should. A Latter-day Saint, who lives according to the rules of his or her religion, is thereby made a gentleman or lady. Such persons cannot be anything else. (Feb. 15, 1881, JI 16:42)

More than book learning necessary. True education does not consist alone in a knowledge gained from books. A man may be very learned in book knowledge and yet be a great dunce in other respects and scarcely able to gain a living. We have seen men who could scarcely read and write who were far better educated in the true sense of the word than many so-called learned men. Their knowledge was of a true, every-day, useful character. They had educated brains and were well cultivated in other respects and were worth any number of educated book-worms. We place a high value upon education of the mind by means of book learning; but we would rather see our juveniles, if they must only learn one branch of education, well trained in the arts of life rather than to see them mere book scholars. But they need not be confined to any one branch of education.

Every child among the Latter-day Saints should learn to work with his hands, as well as with his head. In learning to work with the hands the head should not be neglected, for it is a well-established fact that men who have healthy employment for their brains and who keep their brains active live longer than those who work with their hands alone. (Feb. 19, 1870, JI 5:28)

Teach children industrious habits. Children should be taught industrious habits. They should be taught to labor; their bodies should be accustomed to toil, and skill should be imparted to them in the use of their faculties, their hands, their eyes, their brain and all the faculties of mind and body. Skill, also, in the use of tools should be imparted. . . .

Latter-day Saints should teach their children these things. Every child among us should learn to work. Every girl should acquire a thorough knowledge of cooking and housekeeping, and if she could make her own dresses and help make the clothes of her brothers or her sisters, it would do her no harm. To be a good milliner and dressmaker would be more valuable than a knowledge of some fancy accomplishments. A boy that could mend a wagon or help build a house or who could plough or help harvest would be a more useful citizen than if he did not possess that skill but understood Latin or Greek. (Aug. 15, 1880, JI 15:186)

Our young people should be taught to employ their time to the best advantage and be made to see that to waste time is to waste money. They should be trained in such a manner that it would be painful for them to spend their time in "loafing." If they have no work to do, they should be studying, reading useful books and storing up knowledge. (Mar. 15, 1891, JI 26:183)

Teach children to test what they read. We should be exceedingly careful in the selection of books that we put in the hands of our children. . . . Teach the children not to accept that which they read in a book as true because it is printed; teach them to weigh for themselves, to examine for themselves and test for themselves the statements which may be made up on any and every subject that may be brought to their attention through the medium of books, whether scientific or otherwise.

The danger in indiscriminate reading on the part of young people lies in this: their impressions are vivid, and if what they read be incorrect, if, in point of fact, what they read is based on unsound premises and be entirely wrong but it is presented in an agreeable taking and specious manner, they are apt to accept it as being true.

Gospel truth a standard. Now . . . God has revealed certain principles which we know to be true, certain cardinal truths which are as finger-boards pointing the way of life. We should teach them to our children . . . and endeavor, by the help of God, to implant them in their hearts, so that they afterwards in their search for knowledge of any kind may be able to bring what they may read to this standard and test the same thereby. And if our children are taught thus to read, the danger of infidelity, the danger arising from superficial reading and the imbibing of incorrect ideas sometimes set forth in a scientific way will be, to a great extent, obviated; to my mind great care should be taken in these things by all teachers, by all parents, by every one, in fact, who has the care of young people or the direction of their studies. The same rule applies to every one, whether a child or an adult. Let us endeavor to cultivate this disposition in our children to investigate carefully, to weigh properly the statements which may be presented to them. (Apr. 5, 1881, JI 22:274)

Use means to educate children. A man who suffers his children to grow up in ignorance and without the benefits of education—that which pertains at least to a common school education—is guilty of a great wrong. We should take every pains in our power to instruct our children, to furnish them every facility for learning. . . . Spend [your means] wisely upon your children in your lifetime, and when you have educated them, when you have given them something which they can keep, when they lie down at night, without the slightest danger of burglars stealing it, they are equipped for the struggle of life.

Every child in our community should be educated, not in books alone, but to sustain himself, or herself, so that in case he or she be left alone, or otherwise, they will be able, from the elements around them, inasmuch as they possess the use of their own limbs and faculties, to earn a living and thereby aid somebody else to live. . . .

Children are like unpolished diamonds. I hope that we shall do everything in our power to furnish facilities for our children. Do not spare means in this direction. You do not know what future there is before your children. They are like diamonds. True, they may need polish, in order to bring out their brilliancy and best qualities; and education of the right kind will impart this lustre. . . . God has so distributed his gifts that He has not given them to any one family. I thank Him for that. He is not going to build up a dynasty in His Kingdom. He does not confine His gifts and blessings to any special class of men. He has distributed them like He has the air, so that all have them and all share in them.

A man and his wife may be an obscure couple, yet their children may make the brightest men and women. None of you know what your children are capable of until you give them proper opportunities. You should not think that because you have got through life without much education that therefore your children ought to go through in the same manner. Give your children opportunities, and do not work them to death and thereby stunt their minds; but give the boys a chance and give the girls a chance, bearing in mind that they will have more extended opportunities than you have had for the use of education, and you ought to train them accordingly. (Apr. 5, 1881, JD 22:274-77)

Parents indebted to children. I feet that when a child is born the parents are indebted to that child. To bring it into the world as a waif, to launch it upon the society without giving it a proper education and proper training and assistance, is a great wrong. If we did this, we would be like animals. It is the duty of every man and every woman who has a child to do everything in their power for that child, to qualify it to be a useful man or woman, and no pains should be spared in this direction. We live in our children. After we are gone, we will live in our offspring, and our good qualities will be perpetuated in them if we will take the right course. . . .

We should take pains to teach our boys and our girls everything that will make them useful and help to give them a knowledge of the principles that God has revealed. In this way we will be a blessing to our children. They will rejoice in us, and they will arise and call us blessed. What a glorious thing it is to think that our posterity will honor us and that they will say, "I know that my father was a good man, that he did all he could for me. I know my mother was a good woman; she loved me and did all in her power to give me a good start and to furnish me with all the knowledge that she could to make a useful woman," and to have those children quote the example of their parents to their posterity and let it go down as a heritage from one generation to another, until we shall arise up a generation that will be accepted of the Lord and upon whom His blessing and His power will rest.

Lay the foundation now. We will soon enter upon the Millennium. God has told us this; and it should be the desire of every man and woman in this Church that their posterity may live, not only for a generation or two, but throughout the entire Millennium, and then throughout that period when Satan will be loosed again, that as long as time shall endure some of our posterity may be found among the friends of God, bearing the holy Priesthood, honoring God, keeping His commandments, not only through the Millennium, but during that period when Satan will be loosed again to go forth and tempt the nations, that even then some of our descendants will be found numbered among the righteous and continue to be numbered among them as long as time shall last. I think this is a desirable wish for every man. And let us lay the foundation now. Let us, as parents, influence our children. (Apr. 6, 1891, MS 53:451-52)

Study discourses of leaders. Where the people of God pay attention to the written word and cherish and observe the written word, they are always better prepared to hear the oral instructions of the servants of God; they are better prepared to receive those instructions; they have greater interest in seeking to obtain instructions than they have when they are careless about the written word of God. . . . How many of you read the Book of Mormon, the Bible, the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and the discourses of the Elders as they are published? How many of you make a practice of reading the word of God as it is in these records and as it appears in published discourses? . . .

If we talk about the living oracles and want to pay respect to them, how shall we do this? Shall we do it by never reading their words, by paying no attention to that which they say? That is a very poor way of doing. We ought to listen to their words. When we cannot hear their words, we should read them, for they are the words of the authorized servants of God. . . .

Danger to young people. I have been impressed very much of late with the danger to which our young people are exposed. When the parents neglect to read the word of God, when they prefer novels, magazines, or any kind of light reading, and do not set the example by reading that which God has given to us, you may expect the children to do the same. They will not take up the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants to read, because when they read these illustrated papers, these catchy prints, these light novels, everything of a serious nature loses its interest.

To people who are fed on highly seasoned food, a plain diet is not inviting; men who have been accustomed to stimulants crave stimulants. People who read the class of literature I refer to are in the same condition mentally; they desire the sensational, and reading which does not have some of this element in it possesses but little interest. The result is, our books and our discourses—that which God reveals—go without being perused. (Oct. 5, 1897, CR 38-40)

A duty to store up Gospel knowledge. The faithful servants of the Lord, in this dispensation, have the same promise extended to them which was given to the ancient Apostles and disciples—viz., that the Spirit shall bring to their remembrance all things that are necessary for them to utter when they stand up in advocacy and defense of the Gospel. But, if their minds are vacant and have never been stored with the principles of the Gospel and general, useful knowledge, there would be nothing for the Spirit of the Lord to operate upon; and, as it would be impossible for any being to bring to their remembrance that which they never knew, they would be very likely to be extremely disappointed in the aid which they expected to receive.

It is the duty of the Elders to constantly study the revelations which the Lord has given to His children in all ages and to make themselves thoroughly familiar with all the doctrines and principles of the Church and to store their minds with all the direct or indirect proofs, whether from sacred or profane history of the truths they are advocating. Then, they may, with confidence, ask and expect the Spirit of the Lord to aid them in selecting and bringing forth, from the store-house of the mind, those truths which are best adapted to the wants and circumstances of the people they are addressing. (Sept. 26, 1863, MS 25:618)

What do you read? From constant reading of fiction, the truth becomes tame and uninteresting. A realm of romance, or at least a world of extremes, is where he would choose to dwell; for his associates or ideals he would have either persons of strangely exaggerated attributes or impossible heroes.

On the other hand, the reader of sound, healthy literature is aided and strengthened by his reading for each day's struggle as it comes along. His heroes are real men, whom he or his parents or someone else has actually known, and the evidence of whose existence is found in the works they left behind them. He delights in the lessons of history as well as in the noble achievements of individuals. Those whom he admires have other things to recommend them to his fancy than abnormal traits of character and fictitious performances; and from studying their lives he is not made familiar with vice, either through direct description or by suggestion. His mind is clear; his head is steady; his tastes are earnest; his ambitions are worthy. He knows what it is to encounter difficulty, for he remembers the trials of others who have preceded him; but he is also encouraged to overcome it by recalling how they did the same. He loves truth, reality, nature and all that his senses and his conscience and his heart and his faith tell him is deserving of honest esteem. . . .

Judged by books read. A boy can not be judged half so correctly by the company he keeps as by the books he reads. In the former case he may not always be able to make his selection and may be unable to escape from company he really does not like. But the silent yet most influential companions, which we call books, these are matters of his own choice, and in his love for this one or that, he reflects his own inclinations as plainly and truly as a plate glass mirror reflects his features.

Waste of time a serious matter. If parents and children alike would realize that nothing is worth reading that is not worth remembering, hundreds of hours in each person's life might be saved and utilized that are now wasted—yes, worse than wasted, for in such pursuits the time itself is not only gone to no purpose, but the memory is weakened and the mind is more or less tainted. Waste of any kind is little short of crime; and worst of all waste—worse than waste of food, for more food can be grown or bought; worse than the waste of money or substance, for this can be perhaps again obtained—is the waste of time, which neither money nor influence nor prayers can regain—once gone it is gone forever. (Jan. 1, 1899, JI 34:22-23)

Pernicious literature. Those who constantly read falsehoods against the servants of God cannot help but be influenced for evil thereby. . . . It is a most pertinent case of "little by little." The man or women who reads this ingeniously woven fabric of falsehood or venom at the first reading feels disgraced or angered. But curiosity, that potent cause of so much of this world's mischief, induces a desire for a second reading. An appetite for such pabulum is excited, and no matter how our nearest friends may be belied or the holiest things of our hearts' affections be traduced or ridiculed, we must read it. It is like eating the arsenic and other poisons, the appetite grows with that it feeds upon. And as has been said of vice by one of the poets, at first it is a monster of such hideous mien, we loathe, despise and abhor it,

But seen too oft, familiar grows its face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

Little by little this transition takes place until the faithful servant or handmaiden of the Lord is like a ship on the ocean without compass or rudder when a storm arises, "tossed to and fro by every wind"; he or she knows not what to believe or disbelieve. Some it is certain, is false, but the ingenious argument is advanced that "where there is so much smoke there must be some fire"; consequently, some of the vile assertions may possibly have a foundation in truth, and an enervating condition of spiritual doubt is created, which throws a cloud over the life and unfits the man, as a Saint, for the duties of his calling. He becomes neither hot nor cold and is but ill fitted for the Master's use. . . . The danger increases as the days roll by, and eventually the doubter in his brethren becomes the denier of his God. (Nov. 1, 1899, JI 34:656-57)

Effect of improper reading. The continued reading of false reports and statements concerning The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the character of its leading men have their effect upon the world. We have seen and had sorrowful reason for noticing the effect that this has had upon the minds of the people.

The Latter-day Saints themselves cannot read this class of literature without being affected by it. They may start out without lending the least credence to the statements that are made; but the lies oft repeated and oft read will have their effect; they will make their impression; they will leave seeds to germinate, which sooner or later will bear bitter fruit. Everything false, everything erroneous should therefore be shunned.

There is enough truth in the world to occupy men's attention, and especially children's, without bestowing thought or time upon that which is false. Everyone should shun books and periodicals of this character. No judicious parent would knowingly permit his or her children to associate with habitual liars, nor with persons who delight in untruthful statements. We should dread the effect of such contact. But this is no worse than permitting them to have access to literature of the same character, for their minds are sure to be poisoned by that which they read. (Dec. 15, 1895, JI 30:766)

A sure sign of danger. The reader of any periodical, especially if it is a publication which sets forth positive views upon any subject, such as politics or religion, for instance, will, perhaps insensibly to himself, be impressed with those views. He will gradually fall into the habit of looking at questions in the light in which they are presented in the printed matter that he reads. Flakes of snow fall gently and silently, but they soon accumulate, and the earth and every other object is covered by them. In like manner the constant reading of newspapers, magazines, or books of a certain character has its effect upon the minds of those who read them; their views and all their conclusions respecting the questions that are discussed in those writings are influenced by that reading.

The effect upon Latter-day Saints of reading what are called anti-Mormon publications is always pernicious. Everyone who has had any experience in the Church has seen the bad results of this. The consequences of such a course of reading are quite as injurious as mingling in the society and making companions of apostates. It is a sure sign of a loss of faith when men choose the companionship of those who are opposed to the Gospel in preference to those who love and are devoted to the Gospel. It is an equally sure sign of danger and a certain precursor of the loss of faith and the Spirit of God when men or their families read literature that is opposed to the work of God or the influence of which tends to weaken reverence for God's word or God's authority. No one can take a course of this kind, and pursue it, without endangering his faith; it will inevitably lead to darkness and unbelief. . . .

A cause of apostasy. Faithful men and women do not fall suddenly without cause into a spirit of unbelief concerning the authority which the Lord has restored to the earth. There is always a reason for such a change, and especially so where the previous lives of those who fall into this way of thinking have been the very opposite in all respects to this mode of thought and action. That cause, if not entirely due to the neglect of keeping in touch with the spirit of the Gospel and of the times, is at least principally due to it. The Saints are in spiritual peril when the publications which are intended for their benefit, for their enlightenment and growth in everything pertaining to the Church of Christ, are neglected and other literature is substituted therefor.

In making these remarks I would not wish to convey the idea that it is absolutely necessary for the Latter-day Saints to confine themselves to our periodicals alone. I would, however, emphasize the feeling that those periodicals should occupy the first place in the reading of every man in the Church and of his family. The children of the Latter-day Saints should be taught to read Latter-day Saint publications, to draw their inspiration from them and thereby get broader, better and higher conceptions of the Gospel and its application to their daily lives. In other words, they should be taught to read the works and words of the Latter-day Saints. If they do not read those works and are not brought up in that spirit, it is easy to foresee the consequences—they will grow up unbelievers; having imbibed the spirit of the world, they will be of the world, and the faith of the Gospel that should be in and govern them will have no place in their hearts. (Feb. 15, 1898, JI 33:143-44)

Dangers in modern education. It is a difficult thing in the midst of the widespread unbelief and the false doctrines and theories which come to us and to our children in the guise of science to prevent the spirit of unbelief from influencing us. This also is one of the great obstacles in the way of the education of our children. The books which are in our schools, and from which our children are taught, contain theories that are unsound; they are based upon false premises that lead to wrong conclusions; and it requires the utmost care on the part of parents and teachers to prevent bad effects following education based upon such text books. . . .

We have all these things to contend with. The rising generation have to be watched over with a care that in former times was not necessary. There is danger in education of this kind. (Oct. 7, 1894, DW 49:737)
