Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 44

The Standard Works—Our Scriptures

Standard works superior to other books. The inspired books are superior to all others. No matter how good books may be nor how good the men may be who write them, they are not the standard works of the Church. The Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price are the standard works. Others may be written under the influence of the Spirit of God, but they are not the word of God to the people. (Nov. 13, 1900, JI 36:110)

Our duty to uphold truths found in scriptures. I want to say here that there is a wave of unbelief sweeping over the land, and we can feel the effects of it among us. The leading magazines, or the popular magazines, are filled with ideas tending to unbelief, scientific hypotheses that are designed to destroy faith in the Bible, faith in the creation of the world, faith in the origin of man, and in the existence of God. Now these doctrines are being spread very insidiously. They are being taught in all the universities and colleges, speaking generally, of the land; with but few exceptions.

There is a generation growing up who do not believe in the cardinal principles of the Bible taught by our fathers before the Gospel in its fulness was revealed. These doctrines are being undermined, and it becomes the duty of the Latter-day Saints—it is the mission of the Latter-day Saints—to uphold these old truths and doctrines that have come down to us from God through the ages, to strengthen the faith of our children in them and, so far as we can, to neutralize the effect of these false doctrines that are being taught. . . .

We have three witnesses. We have the Bible but not that alone. They may indulge in their higher criticism and tell us that those whose names are attached to the various books of the Bible were not the authors of them, but we have something more sure than all their criticism. The Book of Mormon is of divine origin, divinely translated by the gift and power of God, and we know it is pure. It was not translated by man's ability; hence, we have a more sure word of prophecy, something to base our faith upon. We can call upon these testimonies because we know they are impregnable and cannot be destroyed.

In addition to this we have the word of God, the Book of Covenants, that has come from the Lord to us. It is the word of God to us who live now. Therefore, we have three witnesses. They may assail the Bible, as they do, and endeavor to prove that the writings attributed to different men were not written by them. We leave that to them. They can do as they please with their learning; we will cling to the Bible, because we know that whatever errors there are are errors of uninspired men who have done the translating. But they must not, and they cannot, tread upon other ground that we have.

They have assailed the Book of Mormon from an outside standpoint and claim that it was translated or, as they say, written by someone else than Joseph Smith. But we have disproved that, and the Book of Mormon comes to us pure, having been translated by divine power, and it contains incontrovertible internal evidence to those who read it and know anything about the power and spirit of God; it comes to them with internal evidence of its divinity, and they know it is true. Therefore, we have this, besides which we have the Doctrine and Covenants, and these three witnesses enable us to occupy a different position from any other religious denomination upon the face of the earth.

We should consider and teach our children all these things and fortify them against the pernicious doctrines being circulated and being taught in the institutions of learning in the land, and fortify them so that they will not imbibe the errors which will pass away, for they are not true. (Oct. 6, 1897, JI 32:751-52)

The value of the Bible. A knowledge of the Bible obtained in childhood has its effect on the whole after-life. Unconsciously its grand truths are impressed upon the minds of children, and they are influenced by them. Children trained in the reading of the Bible, all other things being equal, are more likely to be truthful, virtuous and honest men and women than if they had been brought up without the knowledge of it. The decay of public morals, the breaking down of honorable methods among men, the increase of impurity of every kind, the growth of corruption and lax methods of administration and the indistinct ideas which are becoming so prevalent concerning honor are without doubt principally due to the neglect of the Bible. . . .

Now, as Latter-day Saints we do not set forth the idea that the Bible is a perfect book. Many errors have crept into it through translation. The men who have given us the translation that we use made no pretension to inspiration; they translated it as best they could. But, with all its faults, it still stands as a grand monument of God's dealings with the human family and of man's industry and zeal in preserving it. Our present civilization and the advancement which the world has made in the right direction are due more to the Bible than to any other book in existence. To prove this we have only to look at the nations which have never had it as a record in their midst and contrast their condition with the condition of the nations among whom it has been widely circulated. (Apr. 15, 1895, JI 30:252)

The Bible of priceless worth. This book is of priceless worth; its value cannot be estimated by anything that is known among men upon which value is fixed. . . . To the Latter-day Saints it should always be a precious treasure. Beyond any people now upon the face of the earth, they should value it, for the reason that from its pages, from the doctrines set forth by its writers, the epitome of the plan of salvation which is there given unto us, we derive the highest consolation, we obtain the greatest strength. It is, as it were, a constant fountain sending forth streams of living life to satisfy the souls of all who peruse its pages. (May 8, 1881, JD 22:260-61)

An implicit faith in the Bible. The peculiarities, if such they may be called, which distinguish us from other people have their origin in our implicit faith in the Scriptures. There is no principle nor doctrine of our faith that we are not willing to have tested by the revelations and teachings contained in King James's translation of the Bible; and our Elders have gone forth taking that as their text-book, preaching from it the principles which those now called Latter-day Saints have embraced and which caused them to gather together from the nations of the earth. . . .

There is the great difficulty today; this is the cause of the diversity of beliefs in the Christian world. Instead of taking the word of the Lord as it is they wish to place their own instruction on that word so as to suit their own peculiar ideas and views; and having thus interpreted it they frame their belief in accordance with that interpretation. (Aug. 15, 1869, JD 14:47)

Bible errors. One of our Articles of Faith states "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly.". . . As our duty is to create faith in the word of God in the mind of the young student, we scarcely think that object is best attained by making the mistakes of translators the more prominent part of our teachings. Even children have their doubts, but it is not our business to encourage those doubts. Doubts never convert; negations seldom convince. Falsehood cannot be overthrown by negative teaching but by establishing the opposing truth.

We are not called to teach the errors of translators but the truth of God's word. It is our mission to develop faith in the revelations of God in the hearts of the children, and "How can that best be done?" is the question that confronts us. Certainly not by emphasizing doubts, creating difficulties or teaching negations. It is the positive element of personal testimony in teaching divine truth that gives that teaching power. . . .

The clause in the Articles of Faith regarding mistakes in the translation of the Bible was never inserted to encourage us to spend our time in searching out and studying those errors, but to emphasize the idea that it is the truth and the truth only that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accepts, no matter where it is found. (Apr. 1, 1901, JI 36:208)

Bible not fountain of all truth. If there is one thing for which we should be more thankful than for any other, it is this—that we have the knowledge that God has put himself in communication with men and revealed truths which will aid them in their onward course to the Celestial Kingdom of our Heavenly Father. Having this knowledge we have a testimony within us that we have embraced the Gospel, which we could never gain from the Bible.

With some men it is unpopular to say anything which may appear derogatory to the character of that book. Their affections and their faith are concentrated upon it; they almost worship it as a God. They reverence it as something so great, so sublime, so noble, so truthful, and so clear a reflection of God's countenance that to deprive them of it would be, they say, to deprive them of what they hold most dear and prize above everything they have besides.

I would not lessen their affection for the Bible. A certain amount of reverence for it is good. It is good to read here of the holy and good. It is good to have confidence in goodness, in holiness, in good and pure men. But, if we were to place all our confidence in this book, we should put something between us and that God, the light of whose wisdom illuminates its pages and gives it all its worth. To do this is to worship the book. I call it idolatry. . . .

I do not took upon it as the Creator nor as the fountain or source of all light. I do not look upon it as the Deity. I can read its pages and be instructed by the record of the teachings and sufferings of men who have, like myself, laboured and contended for the truth; and it strengthens me to persevere and faithfully exert myself, until I, like them, may obtain eternal life. Reading it thus, the Bible is valuable and should be appreciated and command love and reverence; but it should not be placed upon a pedestal and worshipped.

It is through the substitution of the book for God that confusion prevails through the religious world. They put it in the place of the revelation and truths and the gifts of God of which it tells us. It is through this substitution that infidelity marshals its hosts by thousands; for why should they adore a book that seems to split up the religious world and produce such confusion?

I want to teach you not to go to the book alone but beyond it—to the fountain whence it emanated—to Him who has filled us with noble and lofty aspirations, Who has brought us into intimate connection with Himself by revealing unto us His Gospel. We ought not to depend for our salvation and exaltation upon books but upon the Creator of the world, Who inspired the men who wrote this book. Possession of God's Spirit enables us to know whether this book is what it professes to be, and exalts us to the same level as the men whose narratives are here found.

In making these remarks it is not my wish to weaken your love for this book, but it is to give you to understand that it alone is not all that is necessary to build up the Kingdom of God. It is to induce you to look beyond it to that Being Who is the fountain of revelation and Who is the true source of all intelligence, so that if this book were burned and destroyed—if the millions of other books were all destroyed—there would still be a fountain of intelligence accessible to you from the life-giving stream, of which you might eternally drink.

It was not books alone that directed the ancients; the law of God was written in their hearts. They drank at the fountain of knowledge which God had opened up unto them as it flowed forth pure from Himself and thus were enabled to write the records which we now so much venerate. It is our privilege to receive and enjoy this same Spirit and knowledge. This Spirit makes known unto us the object for which religion exists—for which the Gospel was revealed in ancient days—not to inspire blind reverence in books, or even in the men who have recorded their faith, their gifts and their endowments, but to lead men on in all ages to the exaltation God has reserved for them and to lead them to an acquaintance with their Father and God. (July 14, 1861, MS 23:513-14)

Testimony of Book of Mormon. We do not believe it possible for any honest, unprejudiced soul to read the Book of Mormon in a prayerful spirit without being convinced that its words are the words of God. There is an influence which accompanies it, which the reader feels, if he will not reject it, that carries with it overpowering conviction and is a testimony that God is the Author, through His inspired servants, of that Book. So also with the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. (Aug. 15, 1890, JI 25:500)

Mankind prefer doubt and conjecture. Had these records, which contain so much that is important and interesting to mankind, been brought to light by any other agency than that designated by the Lord, they would have been received with enthusiasm, and the discoverer would have obtained a world-wide reputation and deathless fame. But, because Joseph Smith attributed their discovery and translation to the power of God—because he testified that, in fulfillment of the Scripture, the Lord had brought to light another witness, written on another continent, of the truth of His dealings with the children of men, to corroborate the records already extant in their midst, they could not receive them. Mankind prefer doubt and conjecture to certainty and knowledge. (Oct. 5, 1856, WS 220)

Book of Mormon to be accepted. Beliefs change, and misrepresentation and falsehood fade away as time passes on and truth is received and accepted; and the day will yet come, and it is not very far distant, . . . when this Book of Mormon and all connected with it will be received and accepted—that is, all the truth, as the truth of the living God, for the reason that it is true and that God Himself is its author. For that reason, and for that reason alone, the time will come—and as I have said, it is not far distant, though it may seem very presumptuous to make such a statement—when this record will be accepted, as the Bible is now accepted, as a book of divine origin, and that it has been revealed through the ministrations and agency of holy angels. . . .

Internal evidences. There are evidences in this work itself of its divinity. It is the internal evidence which the Book of Mormon contains that bears testimony of it. If Joseph Smith's claims as a Prophet of God had no other foundation than that which this book furnishes, then there is foundation enough for him to rank as one of the greatest Prophets that has ever lived upon the face of the earth. (Sept. 18, 1881, JD 22:253-54)

It contains the internal evidence of its own divinity, that God wrote it through inspired men and that no one but an inspired man or men could have written the book. There is no book in the English language that compares with it, unless it be books which contain the pure word of God.

It has the advantage of the Bible in this, that it was translated by the power of God, not by the learning of man, and not selected from hundreds and thousands of versions as the Bible has been; for there is no end to the versions which exist of the books contained in the Bible. Of course, we have our version translated by learned men, but there is scarcely a passage of any importance in the Bible concerning which there is not some dispute among learned commentators.

But with the Book of Mormon it is different. God preserved those records for a purpose in Himself. They were hidden up. (Apr. 6, 1884, JD 25:121)

So far as concerns the divinity of the Book of Mormon, the record itself bears the most abundant evidence of its truthfulness. No one can read it in a spirit of fairness without being impressed with it. As a child, I remember hearing the remark from one who, having been given a copy of the book, had read it through almost without interruption: "A good man would not have put forth such a book unless it were true, and a bad man could not have done it." [^1] This is a peculiarity of the book. It carries its own testimony to every prayerful heart.

Our duty to use external evidence. While this may answer for the Latter-day Saints, it cannot be expected to be convincing to skeptics and unbelievers. Those who are hostile to it will not only scoff at its claim to divinity, they will also tell all manner of falsehoods concerning it. Perhaps no amount of external evidence, no matter how strongly corroborative it may be, would satisfy such minds. The results of the effort to convince such people would not be worth the pains. And yet there is a duty to mankind which we as a Church cannot leave unfulfilled. If we can for them reconcile science with religion, it is our duty to do it, and thus leave without excuse those who are willing to accept science as the basis of belief and reject everything that runs counter to it.

Revelation has already made many things clear that have puzzled the most highly educated people. There is really no conflict between the true science and true religion. Truth cannot be opposed to itself; it is truth wherever it is found. And so those who have a foundation in revealed, and therefore undefiled, truth have the advantage of and can be of service to those whose accepted truths are more or less tainted with human theories and associated with errors. (May 15, 1900, JI 35:314)

The Book of Mormon witnesses. Fault-finders with the testimony of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon have urged as an objection to the reliability of their statements that of the eight witnesses four were of one family and three of another, while of the three witnesses one belonged to the same family that the four of the eight witnesses did. These objectors have seemed to think that because eight of the eleven witnesses belonged to two families they were too closely connected to make their testimony reliable.

But the circumstances which surrounded the translation of the Book of Mormon explain why so many of these witnesses were members of two families. It would be natural that the relatives of the Prophet Joseph who were with him and knew of the communication that he had received would make suitable witnesses, and also that the Whitmer family, whose house became his home while engaged in the labor of translating, should be the best witnesses of the divinity of the work, especially so when it is remembered that much opposition was manifested on every hand towards the Prophet and his labor.

Compared to followers of Jesus. In this respect, however, the resemblance between the immediate followers of the Son of God, when He was in the flesh, and the witnesses to the Book of Mormon is very striking. Geike, in his Life of Christ, in speaking of the Twelve Apostles whom Jesus selected, says they were his immediate neighbors and relatives. He says: "The Capernaum circle yielded him no fewer than seven of the twelve—Peter, his brother Andrew, James and John, James the Little and Jude and Matthew, while Philip belonged to the village of Bethsaida, in its immediate neighborhood, making in all eight of the Twelve virtually from the same favored place."

At least four of these Apostles—James and John, James the Little and Jude—seem to have been relations or connections of the Savior, so Geike says; and he adds that, if we accept the tradition which he quotes, he must add Thomas. This tradition is that "Thomas, whose Hebrew name was sometimes turned into the Greek equivalent Didymus, a twin, was the same person as Judas, the brother of Jesus, as if Mary had had a double birth after bearing her eldest son."

Speaking of the Apostles, Geike says, "We know nothing of the father of Andrew and Simon; but James and John were the sons of one Zabdia (Zebedee); and we know from comparison of texts that their mother was Salome, so honorably mentioned in the Gospels. Writers so acute as Ewald have seen in her a sister of Mary, the mother of Jesus; and if so, John and James were cousins to their Master." (Sept. 1, 1891, JI 26:534)

The Book of Mormon geography. There is a tendency, strongly manifested . . . among some of the brethren, to study the geography of the Book of Mormon. . . . We are greatly pleased to notice the . . . interest taken by the Saints in this holy book. . . . But valuable as is the Book of Mormon both in doctrine and history, yet it is possible to put this sacred volume to uses for which it was never intended, uses which are detrimental rather than advantageous to the cause of truth, and consequently to the work of the Lord. . . .

The brethren who lecture on the lands of the Nephites or the geography of the Book of Mormon are not united in their conclusions. No two of them, so far as we have learned, are agreed on all points, and in many cases the variations amount to tens of thousands of miles. These differences of views lead to discussion, contention and perplexity; and we believe more confusion is caused by these divergences than good is done by the truths elicited.

How is it that there is such a variety of ideas of this subject? Simply because the Book of Mormon is not a geographical primer. It was not written to teach geographical truths. What is told us of the situation of the various lands or cities of the ancient Jaredites, Nephites and Lamanites is usually simply an incidental remark connected with the doctrinal or historical portions of the work and almost invariably only extends to a statement of the relative position of some land or city to contiguous or surrounding places and nowhere gives us the exact situation or boundaries so that it can be definitely located without fear of error.

It must be remembered that geography as a science, like chronology and other branches of education, was not understood or taught after the manner or by the methods of the moderns. It could not be amongst those peoples who were not acquainted with the size and form of the earth, as was the case with most of the nations of antiquity, though not with the Nephites. Their Seers and Prophets appear to have received divine light on this subject.

The First Presidency have often been asked to prepare some suggestive map illustrative of Nephite geography but have never consented to do so. Nor are we acquainted with any of the Twelve Apostles who would undertake such a task. The reason is that without further information they are not prepared even to suggest. The word of the Lord or the translation of other ancient records is required to clear up many points now so obscure that, as we have said, no two original investigators agree with regard to them. . . .

For these reasons we have strong objections to the introduction of maps and their circulation among our people which profess to give the location of the Nephite cities and settlements. As we have said, they have a tendency to mislead instead of enlighten, and they give rise to discussions which will lead to division of sentiment and be very unprofitable. We see no necessity for maps of this character, because, at least, much would be left to the imagination of those who prepare them; and we hope that there will be no attempt made to introduce them or give them general circulation.

Of course, there can be no harm result from the study of the geography of this continent at the time it was settled by the Nephites, drawing all the information possible from the record which has been translated for our benefit. But beyond this we do not think it necessary, at the present time, to go, because it is plain to be seen, we think, that evils may result therefrom. (Jan. 1, 1890, JI 18-19)

The Hill Cumorah in New York. While on a recent visit to the States on business Brother Brigham Young, Jun., and I arranged to make a visit to the hill Cumorah—the hill where Mormon and Moroni secreted the records, by the command of the Lord, which were revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and from which he translated the Book of Mormon. . . .

Undoubtedly great changes had occurred in the appearance of the surrounding country since the days when Mormon and Moroni had trod the spot where we stood; still, we could readily understand, even now, how admirable a position this would be for a general to occupy in watching and directing the movements of armies and in scrutinizing the position of an enemy. Around Cumorah is yet a land of many waters, rivers and fountains, as Mormon said it was in his day.

Our emotions on treading on this sacred hill were of the most peculiar character. They were indescribable. This was the hill Ramah of the Jaredites, and it is probable that in this vicinity Coriantumr and Shiz, with the people whom they led, fought their last battle. For this great battle they were four years preparing, gathering the people together from all parts of the land and arming men and women, and even children. The battle lasted eight days, and the result was the complete extermination of the Jaredite nation, none being left but the Prophet Ether—who warned the nation of the fate that awaited it unless the people repented and who lived to record the fulfillment of his own warnings and predictions—and Coriantumr who succeeded in slaying his mortal enemy, Shiz.

It is probable that the Prophet Ether, when he emerged from his hiding-place to view the destruction of his race, which he had been inspired to foretell, had ascended this hill and from its summit had gazed with profound grief upon the thousands of slain which lay scattered unburied upon the surface of the earth around. He and Coriantumr alone of all that mighty race which had flourished for upwards of fifteen hundred years were left. Who can imagine the feelings which he must have had on such an occasion?

From the summit of this hill, doubtless, Mormon and his great son Moroni had also witnessed the gathering of the hosts of the Nephites and the dusky and myriad legions of their deadly enemies, the Lamanites. Around this hill they had marshaled their forces, their twenty-three divisions of ten thousand men each, commanded by the most skillful of their generals—all to be swept away, except Mormon and Moroni and twenty-two others, in one day's battle, by the fierce and relentless foe whom God permitted to execute his threatened judgment. Stealthily, perhaps, for fear of exciting the attention of the Lamanites, Mormon and Moroni and their companions may have ascended this hill and gazed on the dreadful scene around them. What a picture of desolation and woe must have met their sight! How deep must have been their anguish at thus witnessing the destruction of the fair ones of their nation! No wonder they cried out in anguish and mourned with pathetic lamentations the rebellion against God which had brought this terrible destruction upon them.

Mormon's feelings must have been very peculiar. At fifteen years of age chosen to be the commander-in-chief of the armies of his nation, he had fought battle after battle until now, at seventy-four years of age, he witnessed the complete blotting out of what had been the most favored people on the earth. His reflections must have been peculiarly painful, because he knew that had they listened to him he could have saved them.

It was here that he hid the abridgment which he made of the records, and which is now known by his name, and it was here, thirty-six years after this tremendous battle, that his son Moroni also hid his abridgment of the Book of Ether and the record which he had made, from which we learn the fate of his father Mormon and his other companions, that sixteen years after the battle of Cumorah Mormon and all the Nephites except Moroni had been killed by the Lamanites. It was to this spot that, about fourteen hundred years after these events, Joseph Smith, the Prophet, was led by Moroni in person, and here the records, engraved on plates, were committed to him for translation.

Who could tread this ground and reflect upon these mighty events and not be filled with indescribable emotion? We were literally surrounded by the graves of two of the mightiest nations which had ever flourished on the earth. We stood in the center of their burial place. They had rebelled against God; they had slain His Prophets, disregarded His warnings and arrayed themselves against Him. (July 5, 1873, JI 8:108-9)

Study the scriptures. In teaching the principles of the Gospel let us see that the children comprehend them. You have heard a great deal about the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. . . . We feel impressed to say to all of you, "Have no substitutes for these works." They are the inspired words of God. There is nothing you can refer to that is so good as they are. Make these books interesting to the children. I know that no better reading matter can be obtained than these books furnish.

We should instill into the children's minds a love for the word of God. Of course, there are other good books which may be used as auxiliaries and works of reference. I do not wish to depreciate them in the least; but I do not want to say one word in favor of any work in preference to the word of God. The word of God is not studied enough among us. . . .

I think you will find this feeling of indifference for the written word too general among our young people, and I take this opportunity of impressing upon you the importance of the study of these works. All other works, however well written they may be, cannot be compared with the word of God. The stories from the word of God are as interesting as any fairy stories that man ever wrote. (Nov. 13, 1900, JI 36:267-68)

Home reading for children. Children should be encouraged to read the standard works of the Church at home. What they read at Sunday School is not sufficient. They are there but an hour or two once in the week, while in most cases they have many hours of leisure during the other six days. While children are young their minds are free and retentive. What they read they can remember, and they are lastingly impressed with it. . . .

It is a mistake to think that boys and girls from ten to fifteen years of age are too young to read and understand such books as the New Testament and the Book of Mormon. They are able to understand sufficient to be impressed with their truthful and sacred character and to be greatly benefited by their reading. Children who have learned the art of reading and take an interest in books will be sure to read something. If left to choose their own books, they may select those that are harmful in their character. (Nov. 1, 1898, JI 33:728-29)

Scripture memorizing. Children are fond of committing sentences to memory. It is a pleasure to them, and they take to it at an early age. This childish trait, if property guided, can be turned to good service. By a little assistance in the way of suggestion they can be led to memorizing passages of scripture. If these passages are from the sayings of the Savior, or bear upon the principles of the Gospel, they will be of value to the children throughout life. Especially will this be the case if they are called into the mission field, or as teachers in the Sabbath School. . . .

It is a pleasing and profitable mental recreation for children to memorize. They will commit to memory something; if it is not good, it will be either bad or indifferent and useless. Their minds as well as their bodies must be active. It is no more difficult for them to commit to memory useful passages of scripture, even though they may not fully understand them, than to learn foolish nursery rhymes or current doggerel that has no meaning whatever. (Dec. 1, 1898, JI 33:795)

Keep on safe ground in theology. There is no end to the questions that might be asked which would be very difficult if not impossible for any mortal to answer. It does not require much intelligence nor much thought to propound a query to which the wisest man can not make a satisfactory reply. A desire for information is of course to be commended; but a curiosity as to abstruse points in theology does not always indicate a real search for knowledge nor does it necessarily imply dearth of thought or diligent study. It is frequently an evidence of a quibbling mind, and in many cases that have come to our knowledge it suggests rather a desire to "show off" in argument and display skill in controversy than a desire for the real essence of truth.

However, there is much truth which all men cannot yet understand; and there are many things which are plain to some that are obscure to others. Where the plain word of God has been given, there is an end to dispute or controversy. Beyond this it is unprofitable for theological classes to venture; for when disputants follow their theories past the point where the written or revealed word extends, they are at once in a vast realm of uncertainty where one man's opinion is as good as another's.

We repeat, it is well for students in our theological classes to confine themselves to the written revelations and to the word of God as He has given it, not indulging in wild speculations and all sorts of fancies concerning things about which the Lord has not given His word. There are many things which He has revealed to His faithful servants that are unwise for them to teach, and they do not teach them. (Apr. 1, 1899, JI 34:209)

Leave the mysteries alone. There are a great many things in connection with God's dealings with the children of men which cannot be explained fully to human understanding. Hence, faith is required. No man can please God who does not have faith. He must trust in God. It is not to be expected that men, in their mortal condition, can comprehend all the works and providences of our God. If they could, there would be no necessity for them to learn, for there would be nothing to learn. But because we cannot understand certain principles and give the reasons for everything that we see, it does not follow that those are not correct. It is because we are ignorant that we cannot understand or explain them.

The time will come, if we continue to progress, when we shall understand all truth; and the mystery that now surrounds many questions will be entirely removed by the light of heaven. It does not follow, because a matter cannot be explained, that it is false. There are very many features connected with the earth, connected with the religion of the Lord Jesus Christ, which are true but cannot be fully explained. And it is unwise for Latter-day Saints to be puzzling themselves over abstruse questions and matters that are of no particular moment at the present time that, if answered, would prove of no special benefit to them. (July 1, 1890, JI 25:404)

As "children of the light" (John 12:36; Luke 16:8), we have this great consolation, that the Creator has restored unto us every power of the Priesthood, blessed us with every ordinance of His Holy House and bereft us of no authority, key or endowment necessary for our eternal salvation and exaltation in His most glorious presence. This being so, what matters the rest? At best they are certainly not worth periling our immortal souls for, or by contention, which breeds disunion and ill feeling towards our brethren and mental darkness and sometimes spiritual death.

Most of the disagreements between brethren on doctrinal subjects arise from one of two causes. Either the disputants are contending regarding that which has already been revealed, but with which they, in their ignorance of the fullness of God's word, are unacquainted, or they are arguing with regard to questions which no man can answer because the Lord has not revealed them. The remedy for the former condition is an easy one. It is that we should make ourselves more fully acquainted with God's written word, a duty which too many, called by the name of Saint, woefully neglect. In the second place, it is labor in vain; it is a condition in which one man's opinion is as good as another man's opinion, and when the discussion is over and the reasons all submitted, the disputants are just where they started out, unless, unfortunately, hard feelings and coldness have arisen between members of the Church, then their last state is worse than the first. (Apr. 1, 1897, JI 32:209)

Teach only sound doctrine. There should be care exercised, especially when speaking in the presence of young, inexperienced men, in setting forth doctrine about which there is room for discussion. There is enough that is sound and true upon which Elders can converse without venturing upon topics concerning which there is liable to be disputation. Whenever contention or disputation arise among Elders, it may be accepted as a sure sign that there is something wrong; for the Spirit of God does not teach doctrines which are in conflict with each other, nor present opposing views concerning the plan of salvation. (Oct. 15, 1891, JI 26:622)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] George Q. Cannon's father made this statement.
