Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 45

Apostasy from the Truth—Some Causes

Apostasy and its causes. It has been truthfully remarked on many occasions that a man did not know himself or know his fellows until he or they embraced the Gospel in its fulness and purity. Then whatever good or evil qualities or dispositions he or they might have would be brought to the surface, and their true characters would be known. A man, under the influence of the Gospel, either becomes a very faithful, true man, or a very unfaithful, bad man. He cannot, while professing to be a believer in the truth and connected with the Church, stand still. He must inevitably progress or go backward, and the signs of his progress or of his retrogression have been made so familiar to the people by long experience that they have not the least difficulty in discerning his true condition.

There are certain rules with which experience has made the people familiar, that cannot be persistently violated without retrogression and apostasy following. They are as familiar as "household words" to all the members of the Church who have had any experience.

Experience has proved that the indulgence in whoredom, adultery and lust is fatal to faith in the Gospel. This practice is so antagonistic to the spirit of the Gospel that the two cannot co-exist in the same individual.

Experience has also proved that opposing or speaking against the Priesthood, or the authority which God has placed in His Church to govern it, is inevitably followed, sooner or later, by a loss of faith and by complete apostasy.

These are two rules, or they may be termed laws, which, during the experience of nearly forty years, have never been known to be violated without apostasy following, unless, indeed, the transgressor of them repented humbly and sincerely and succeeded in obtaining forgiveness. Position, knowledge or influence may be of advantage to a man under some circumstances; but they avail him nothing in averting the penalty which follows the transgression of either of these laws. It falls alike upon all from the highest to the lowest, from the richest to the poorest, from the most learned to the most illiterate, and all are amenable to it.

Besides these, there are numerous other laws which must be observed. . . . When they are violated, it is quickly discerned, and frequently when least suspected by the person who is guilty of the violation. If a man is dishonest, grasping, greedy, taking advantage of his neighbor, neglectful of his duties as a Saint, not living up to his profession, delighting in the society of the wicked, and he persists in any or all of these things, confidence in him becomes weakened, it is seen that he does not possess a good spirit, and those who know him are prepared for what must inevitably follow, unless he repent, viz., a loss of faith, and, finally, apostasy.

Out of all who have lost their fellowship and standing in the Church from the beginning until the present, we never knew or heard of one who lost it when in the full and active discharge of his duty. Many have lost their faith and been expelled from the Church through their indulgence in the spirit of whoredom and lust. Many, also, through following the example of Lucifer, who opposed constituted authority and rebelled against it, and, like him, have been cut off from the society of the virtuous and the righteous; and many, also, for other sins; but when or where, in all the history of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was one ever excommunicated who was humbly and faithfully discharging his duties as a servant and Saint of God? There never was an instance of the kind.

We know that there scarcely ever was a prominent individual cut off from the Church that did not make the assertion that he was expelled without a cause. Such persons . . . have always been—if their statements were to be believed—exceedingly righteous. They were not wrong; oh, no, it was Joseph, or it was somebody else that had erred and was in the dark and had fallen. Frequently they have continued to assert that they were as strong believers in the doctrines of the Church as they ever were, that they knew them to be true, but the authorities were wrong; the man who held the keys had transgressed and was in the dark. . . .

It is a noticeable fact that apostates, as a rule, assume to be wonderfully pious. More self-righteous men could not apparently exist than some of the early apostates when cut off from this Church. In fact, while true religion is esteemed, hypocritical pretense to piety is viewed with suspicion by the Latter-day Saints, it being understood to be an evidence of apostasy.

Another evidence is that when men drink into that spirit they immediately become very popular among the wicked. Those who sought the overthrow of the Church and the destruction of Joseph in the neighborhood of Kirtland, Far West and Nauvoo rejoiced when they heard of men apostatizing and proving false to him. While they were faithful and true the wicked hated them as they did him; but no sooner did they commence to operate against him, than they became the warm friends of this class and were welcomed to their society. This is a result which has never failed in cases of apostasy. (Dec. 1, 1869, MS 31: 779-80)

Apostasy always result of sin. No man ever fell away from this Church without a cause. God does not deal with His children in that manner. He does not leave them to themselves; He does not desert them. This is the glorious feature connected with the service of God. In the hour of the greatest extremity, in the time when His children need help the most, He is always near to them; He surrounds them with His power, and He bears them off as on eagles' wings.

Therefore, no man ever fell into darkness; no man ever became weak in the faith; no man ever lost his standing in this Church without a cause, and that cause has had its origin in himself. Within himself the cause can be traced, and the all-piercing eye of God the Eternal Father has penetrated it. He knows it. The Spirit of God, from which nothing can be hidden, knows it.

The Holy Ghost is one of the Godhead, and when anything of this kind is done, He is grieved and withdraws Himself from the individual, who is then left to fall into the dark. The light of heaven withdraws itself from such an individual, and he no longer feels the testimony of the Spirit, and he wonders within himself how he could speak as he once did. This does not take place all at once. Rarely is the Spirit entirely withdrawn in a moment.

Loss of Spirit compared to setting sun. It is like the sinking of the sun in our western horizon. We see the great orb of day disappear behind the mountains, and the heavens are still illumined with his glory; but gradually, and almost imperceptibly in our latitude, darkness spreads over the scene. So it is with the Spirit of the Lord. Being grieved and offended, and there being no repentance, it gradually withdraws itself from the soul, until darkness takes possession, and the man is left then to whatever influence and spirit he has yielded to. (Feb. 17, 1895, DW 50:418)

Apostasy a slow process. Everything that is impure will gradually be cleansed from the midst of the Saints. Adulterers and fornicators and liars and thieves may connect themselves with the Church and have a standing in it for a while; but sooner or later their deeds will be known. The Spirit of God will withdraw from them, and they will be left to themselves to deny the faith and separate themselves from the people of God. This cleansing process, though sure and steady, is not hasty. It sometimes takes years for men to entirely lose the Spirit of the Lord and their desire to be members of this Church. But sooner or later, if they live and continue to practice iniquity, they fall into this condition. Then, in the most of instances, they become bitter enemies to the work of God. (Feb. 15, 1885, JI 20:56)

None too strong to fall. We live in a day when we cannot trifle with God. He has said that His Spirit shall not always strive with man; He will withdraw that Spirit from us if we do not follow out His commands, and we shall be left to ourselves. The most dreadful condition that I can imagine a human being to be in is this, for a man who has once tasted of the word of God, who has felt its power, who has had a foretaste of the powers of the world to come, and who has rejoiced in those blessings, to suffer the Spirit of God to depart from him through his own acts.

Whenever I have thought of it concerning myself, I have been filled with inexpressible horror. It has seemed as though a thousand deaths would be preferable, for to die is an easy thing; it is a light matter compared with apostasy, the loss of the Spirit of God, the forfeiting of the favor of heaven, the loss of those blessings, promises and powers which God has bestowed, the loss of interest in the work of God, to have the Spirit fade and withdraw itself from us until we live without it. Can you imagine any worse condition?

Let him, the Apostle says, that standeth take heed lest he fall. There is no one so strong that he can be sure he will get through. It is only by the grace of God that we can expect to be faithful and to receive salvation. Think of the mighty men who have been in this Church who have fallen. . . .

Only faithful to stand. Can we expect to stand unless we keep the commandments of God and are faithful to the truth? No! There is only one way in which we can expect to do that which is right and to receive the glory of God; that is to hold out faithfully to the end, to walk humbly before our God, to walk prayerfully and circumspectly before Him and keep his commandments with all diligence, with all thankfulness day by day, hour by hour, seeking unto Him for strength, conscious of our own unworthiness, of our destitution in His holy sight, in the presence of His awful majesty. . . .

Let no man or woman deceive himself or herself and think they can sin and still retain the favor of God. God's Spirit will not dwell in unholy tabernacles, or with those who do not keep His commandments, who break their covenants and who do wrong either to Him or to one another. We should love one another with all our heart, keep ourselves from everything that would grieve the Spirit of God and live lives of Latter-day Saints in truth and in deed. (May 26, 1889, DW 38:710-11)

The principal cause of apostasy. It would seem to persons who are ignorant of the ways of the Lord that if a man or a woman once knew the truth and received a testimony from God respecting it, they would never deny or forsake it; and to such persons the departure of men and women, who have testified of the truth, from the Church, is incomprehensible upon any other principle than that they have found out the errors of the Work. The experience, however, of those who have been for a long time connected with this Church has proved to them that the fault has not been with the Work but with those who having once known it have afterwards denied it. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, where men have known the truth for themselves and testified of it and have afterwards denied it, their apostasy is directly traceable to their violation of the following words of the Lord:

And verily I say unto you, as I have said before, he that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear. Wherefore, I, the Lord, have said that the fearful, and the unbelieving, and all liars, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie, and the whoremonger, and the sorcerer, shall have their part in that lake which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Verily I say, that they shall not have part in the first resurrection. (D&C 63:16-18.)

We confidently assert, and we believe that the assertion is capable of the fullest proof, that more persons have denied the faith in consequence of their flagrant disobedience to this revelation than from any other cause. . . .

It is the great and crying sin of this generation, and God's anger and fierce indignation will be poured out upon the inhabitants of the earth because of their wickedness in this direction. The most holy and godlike power that he could bestow upon them is abused and made the cause of the misery and degradation of the human family, instead of being used for their blessing and the glory of God.

This, doubtless, is one principal reason of Jesus saying that there will be few who will tread the strait and narrow path and attain unto such a position as will entitle them to hold the gift eternally which God has bestowed upon men for this short period of existence. If men will abuse the gifts of God here and trample them under their feet, it is madness for them to expect that he will bestow such upon them to be in like manner abused throughout eternity. . . .

It is utterly impossible for any man who loves or practices impurity to remain steadfast in this Church. If he looks upon a woman to lust after her, or carries into execution his lustful desires in any form, unless he speedily repents, he will deny the faith. This is inevitable, as the word of God and the entire history of his people abundantly prove. If men and women will be pure before the Lord in all things, to the extent of their ability, their progress in the Church of God and in the knowledge of God will be very rapid. Pure-minded people readily comprehend every principle that is advanced. They have no difficulty in understanding the truth when presented before them nor in obeying its principles. Such persons never apostatize. God is bound by His promise to preserve them, and they can put unlimited confidence in Him, knowing that He will deliver them from every evil. (Mar. 14, 1863, MS 25:168-69)

No predestination to faithfulness. What is there to prevent us all being faithful. Is there any destiny in this? Are any of us destined or predestined to be faithful and others not to be faithful? Certainly not; there is nothing of this kind in the providence of God. . . . There is no foundation in truth in any such assumption.

God has selected all of us to attain to this glory, if we will take the course that He has marked out for its attainment. He has pointed out the way as plainly before us as this aisle is before me now in which we should walk; He has told us what to do and warned us of the dangers that beset our pathway and which we must guard against in order to attain to the end in view.

We enter in a race, so to speak. We start out full of courage and hope, determined to run the race vigorously and continuously to the end. But something arises to render the race undesirable to us and to lessen in our estimation the high value which we placed upon the prize to be attained when we started out. There are causes which produce this; but they are not due to the predestination of God. The causes are to be found within ourselves.

How many members of this Church have felt that they would sacrifice everything that they had on earth, yes, and lay down life itself, rather than deny the faith and thereby lose the Spirit of God and the fellowship of their brethren and sisters? I suppose there is scarcely a soul to be found in the Church that has not had that feeling. How lovely the truth was in their sight when they joined the Church! How desirable salvation and exaltation appeared before them! Everything connected with the Church and with the authority of the Priesthood seemed to them to be of God, and they loved it. They loved every principle of the Gospel with intense love.

But after awhile that love fades away; they cease to value their standing, and by degrees these men and women, who at one time felt that they would rather part with their life than with their standing in the Church, cease to value that standing and let it go without any effort to retain it, not condescending probably to ask forgiveness for wrong done. . . . The hand of fellowship is colder and colder, darker and darker, until they lose entirely all the love they ever had for the work of God or for the people of God. . . .

A sure sign of apostasy. Now, there are certain things that we cannot do and remain faithful to the work of God. The first and foremost among these is, (and I dwell on it, I hope, in a spirit that will be understood even by strangers), speaking evil against the Priesthood of the Son of God. It is one of the surest signs of apostasy. You may think that you have cause for this; you may see things in men that may appear to you wrong and to justify you in indulging in criticism and censorious remarks, and perhaps you may even feel justified in uttering words of condemnation; but let me say to you—and I say it as the result of a life time's experience and observation—that this cannot be done by any man or woman in this Church, great or small, without incurring the displeasure of the Almighty and without grieving the Spirit of God.

Those who have entered into holy places have made covenants, which are sacred in the sight of God and of their brethren and sisters, not to speak against the Lord's anointed. . . . No Latter-day Saint can do it without grieving the Spirit of God and causing it to withdraw itself. Do you realize this, when you are tempted or aroused by anger to say evil things concerning your brethren or sisters? If you but think of the consequences that may follow the indulgence in such a spirit, I am sure that you will restrain your speech and you will not give utterance to anything of the kind. . . .

Leave those who do wrong to the Lord. He will see that His servants are not permitted . . . to lead this people astray. If your brethren and sisters do wrong, take them out and talk to them yourselves and reason with them, but do not speak evil against them; do not backbite them and seek to lessen their influence with their neighbors. . . . I tell you as a servant of God that there is only one way to be saved and that is by keeping the commandments of God, and no man has any assurance that he will be saved unless he does this. (Apr. 21, 1895, DW 51:289-90)

Consequences of transgression. Among the many truths brought to light by the revelation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, one has been clearly proven in these days—that the man who practices iniquity cannot long maintain a standing in the Church of God. Men may obtain light and intelligence, may have the heavens opened to their view and enjoy the visions of eternity, may have seen the lame leap as a hart and the blind restored to sight through the exercise of faith and the power bestowed upon the servants of God; yet, after having witnessed and been the participants in all these blessings, if they pursue a course of wickedness, they will, sooner or later, fall into such darkness that truth and its accompanying blessings will no longer have any attractions for them, and they will be ready to forsake the Church of God, which they formerly prized so highly, and use all the influence in their power to oppose it. . . .

Because men have been in possession of knowledge and have experienced much of the goodness and power of God, it does not necessarily follow that they will always be in possession of the same feelings, irrespective of their actions. Lucifer, the son of the morning, holding power and authority, blessed with knowledge and experience, fell into transgression and became an angel of darkness, opposed to the Almighty and to all those who keep his commandments; and it is but reasonable to suppose that, if he could fall by indulging in sin, man, also, by taking a similar course, must be visited by similar consequences. The antagonism Lucifer manifests against the work of God is the same feeling that those who follow in his steps will have, in a less degree, towards that Work whenever it is established upon the earth. . . .

The loss of the Spirit of the Lord and a relapse into darkness are the inevitable consequences of a departure from or violation of the laws of God; and, so long as men are fallible and give way to temptation, so long will there be those who will be found fighting against the Lord and against His work and His servants. (July 19, 1856, WS 166-67)

Don't lift voice against Priesthood. There are some things that are worse than others. One is to lift our voice against or in any manner assail the Priesthood of the Son of God. You may think this a trifling thing. You may say, "Why who are these men that I should not speak about them? I know they are fallible men; they are mortal; they are guilty of many weaknesses. I do not see why I should respect them, or why they should be shielded from criticism, or why I should listen to their counsel."

Now, judged by man's standard, this may appear to be true. There is not a man in the Church . . . that has anything overpowering about him, that we should render him any degree of obedience. It is not that. These are but the earthly vessels. . . . But while these men are but earthly vessels, it is the authority, it is the power, it is God . . . that is within them that causes them to do these godly works. Without God were in them, they could not baptize men for remission of sins; they could not lay on hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost.

It is the spirit and power which God gives to all who receive His Priesthood that makes them in the sight of God so holy that they ought not to be spoken against; they ought not to be belittled; they ought not to be disobeyed by the people of God. (Apr. 17, 1897, DW 55:35)

A symptom of apostasy. It is not for everyone to judge and condemn God's servants. It is against such a feeling that the warning is given, "Touch not mine anointed and do my prophets no harm." (1 Chronicles 16:22.)

We have been taught from the beginning that one of the most dangerous symptoms of apostasy from the Church is speaking evil of the Lord's servants; whenever a spirit of this kind takes possession of one who is called a Latter-day Saint, it is sure to grieve the Spirit of God; it invites darkness to enter the mind, and, unless it is sincerely repented of, it causes apostasy to follow. For this reason, if for no other, our children should be taught from the time they are old enough to comprehend that they are treading upon slippery ground whenever they venture to criticize, censure or condemn those whom the Lord has chosen to be His servants.

Many think it is part of their privilege in the exercise of free speech to do this and that it is a sign of independence. But there is none of the true liberty of free speech in it; it becomes license and is offensive to the Lord. . . . Respect for authority should be constantly taught. . . . The Saints honor God; they honor the authority which He bestows; and in honoring that authority they honor those who bear it. This is the spirit of true independence, and it does not take away the least particle from the true dignity of manhood and womanhood. The Lord says: ". . . them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed." (1 Samuel 2:30.) (Nov. 1, 1894, JI 29:668)

Knowledge alone not sufficient. To a person without experience in the work of God and in the operations of his Holy Spirit, it appears strange that men who have known the truth and who have testified to having received such knowledge should ever deny or forsake it. Such persons seem unable to comprehend how a man can become so utterly inconsistent as to declare that to be false, either by his words or by his actions, which he formerly declared to be true. Yet the history of the Work of God in these days abounds with instances of men who have thus acted.

The fact is, knowledge alone is not sufficient to save men. They must put their knowledge into practice and act up to that which they know. There must be united with the knowledge that the Gospel is true a desire to put its principles into operation and apply them to themselves. Men have not apostatized from the Church of God because they have lacked knowledge, (for God has always bestowed it upon those who have entered his Church in a proper spirit), but because they have not put their knowledge to a proper use.

The Lord has pronounced certain penalties for disobedience. He has threatened the transgressor of His commandments with the loss of His Holy Spirit, which loss should be attended on their part with the denial of the faith. Yet, though men have seen numerous instances of the infliction of this penalty, they will themselves go and deliberately commit the very acts which they have every reason to know will be followed by such terrible consequences. In this case their knowledge fails to save them from the loss of that salvation which, when they embraced the Gospel, they hoped to obtain.

No man can retain that knowledge of the truth which is necessary to save him, if he does not possess the Spirit of the Lord. There may be some truths of which he may have a knowledge and of which he cannot be deprived. There have been men connected with this Church who have received such a knowledge from God respecting the revelation of the Gospel to the earth, through the agency of angels and of the bringing forth of the Book of Mormon by His almighty power in raising up His servant Joseph to be a Prophet, as to be forever after incapable of doubting the truth of those things; yet, through grieving the Holy Spirit they have fallen into gross transgressions and fought against that work and that man which, but a short time before, they would have been willing, apparently, to have defended at the cost of their lives. The knowledge which they had respecting this being the Work of God, instead of being an aid to them after the Spirit of the Lord had withdrawn from them, was a condemnation, and they strayed as widely from the path of salvation as the most ignorant could have done.

Apostates claim Church true until a certain time. The Saints should not imagine that because they know the truth and the Work of God at the present time that they will always know these things and therefore be able to stand. If they lose the Holy Spirit through their transgressions, from that moment their knowledge respecting the Work of God ceases to increase and becomes dead; a short time only elapses before such persons deny the faith. They may not deny that the Work was ever true or that the Elders were ever the servants of God, but they will place a limit and after that say, "Up to such a time the work was true and the Elders were right, but, after that, they went astray"—that very period being the time at which they themselves had committed some act or acts to forfeit the Spirit of God and kill the growth of that knowledge which they had had bestowed upon them. This has been the case in numerous instances in the past.

During the Prophet Joseph's lifetime, men who had lost the Spirit themselves through their transgressions would declare that he had gone astray, and in some instances attempt to point out the time when and the spot where his departure from the right path had commenced. Many of them were not in the least degree loth to contend that the work was of God and that Joseph had been the Prophet of God, but he had fallen, and they felt it to be their duty to deal with him and to rectify the errors and wrongs which he had committed. From his days until the present time numerous instances of this kind have occurred, and but few men have apostatized who have not been willing to affirm that the Work was all true and the servants of God were all right up to a certain point, since which everything had gone wrong.

The progress of the Work of God and the blessings which have rested upon His servants and people have given abundant proofs that the fault has lain with these persons who have been so loud in their talk respecting the transgressions of the servants of God. Indeed, if these were not sufficient evidences, their decrease. in everything that pertaineth to godliness, and the miserable results which attend their efforts, would be quite ample of themselves to convince a Saint of God that His displeasure was resting upon such characters. It is plain that it is they who have transgressed and thereby driven the Spirit of the Lord from them; and at the very time they say the Church of God strayed, they themselves were guilty of transgression. (Aug. 8, 1863, MS 25:504-6)

No obligation to preach to apostates. The Saints, and the Elders particularly, should never be in the least degree loth to advocate and defend the principles of their religion when they are in a position to warn the people and discharge the duty which they owe to mankind; and when they are in a position of this kind, if they are living near unto the Lord, they will have His Spirit to prompt and assist them; but they are not required to cast their "pearls before swine." (Matthew 7:6.)

They are under no obligation to preach to or hold controversy with those who have heard the Gospel an innumerable number of times and who have rejected and systematically opposed it, or with those who, having once known the truth and partaken of the Spirit of the Lord, have turned away therefrom. To talk to such individuals is time spent in vain; no good result can possibly attend such labor. There is enough work to be accomplished of a productive and satisfactory character in the world, to occupy all the time and attention of the Elders and Saints, without spending any in labor so barren of good results. There are thousands of individuals with whom time can be profitably spent, who have never heard the truth and the message of this last dispensation.

They rise and they fall. There are many apostates who profess to have claims which they wish to maintain, and they cry loudly for investigation. The Church of God, they say, has fallen into transgression and gone astray, and they, since their apostasy, have been able to ascertain the causes of this and have found the remedy. This has been the cry of every apostate of note from the beginning of the work of God in these days until the present time. One after another has risen, in countless numbers, denouncing the servants of God as having fallen and gone astray and professing to have the power to correct the evils of which they complained. One after another they have passed away into oblivion, after fully exposing their folly and imbecility, while the men whom they have denounced and attempted to ruin have continued to increase in knowledge and in power with God and man. (Aug. 1, 1863, MS 25:489)

Opposition to Authorities causes apostasy. A friend . . . wished to know whether we . . . considered an honest difference of opinion between a member of the Church and the Authorities of the Church was apostasy. . . . We replied that we had not stated that an honest difference of opinion between a member of the Church and the Authorities constituted apostasy, for we could conceive of a man honestly differing in opinion from the Authorities of the Church and yet not be an apostate; but we could not conceive of a man publishing these differences of opinion and seeking by arguments, sophistry and special pleading to enforce them upon the people to produce division and strife and to place the acts and counsels of the Authorities of the Church, if possible, in a wrong light, and not be an apostate, for such conduct was apostasy as we understood the term.

We further said that while a man might honestly differ in opinion from the Authorities through a want of understanding, he had to be exceedingly careful how he acted in relation to such differences, or the adversary would take advantage of him, and he would soon become imbued with the spirit of apostasy and be found fighting against God and the authority which He had placed here to govern His Church. (DEN, Nov. 3, 1869)

Satan seeks to undermine Authorities. Though men may deny the faith, in one sense, and turn away from the path of righteousness and dissolve their connection with the Church, yet they will cling, in most instances, to what we term the first principles of the Gospel of Christ; and it is a very rare thing to see those who have been members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints turning away and joining what we call sectarian churches. If they leave this Church, it is an exceedingly difficult thing for them to connect themselves with other denominations. . . .

But there are other principles more advanced with which the people are not so familiar, and of this the adversary seeks to take advantage, and when men deny the faith, they are apt to deny these principles; when they get into the dark, there is probably no point upon which they differ more frequently than that which relates to the authority that is exercised in presiding. This is a point that the adversary always aims at. . . .

It seems as though the adversary, in the day in which we live, seeks, by every means in his power, to undermine the influence and the authority of the man whom God has called to preside over His people. (Dec. 5, 1869, JD 13:44)

Cleansing process weeds out impure. We are setting an example in regard to virtue. Yet, I feel there is secret sin practiced among us. There is this, however, for our protection; God is cleansing this people and purging those who practice sin from their midst. Those who commit sin gradually leave the Church. They get into the dark, and they become cold and indifferent and finally leave the Church. If it were not for God's power in this respect, we would soon become corrupt, doubtless, as other people.

God in His wonderful providence has so arranged matters that impurity cannot live in this Church for any length of time. There is a cleansing process going on. God is cleansing His Church, and He is purging out the wicked and the ungodly, and He is leaving the residue. No man can be confident of standing in this Church unless he is pure in heart, for the Holy Ghost will not dwell in unholy tabernacles.

Men may deceive their fellowmen; women may deceive their sisters; but they cannot deceive God. They cannot commit sin and retain the Spirit of God. It will leave them sooner or later. It will decrease within them and finally leave them, unless they repent of their sin. And this is our safety and the safety of this Church; God is cleansing it and removing from the midst of the people the corrupt.

Those who practice secret sin may hide it from their fellows, as some do, and think it is not known; but God will make it known. His Spirit will leave them, unless they repent with all their hearts and turn from their sins. God will have an honest people. He will have a pure people; He will have a virtuous people. He will cleanse us and keep cleansing us until we shall be pure, and there will be a people found that are not hypocrites. The hypocrite will be cleansed from the midst of the Saints. In this way we will be built up and the Church will increase. (Oct. 6, 1895, DW 51:643)

Tell me the individual history of a member of this Church, and I will tell you his fate. Why? Because I know that certain causes will produce certain effects. And as with the individual so with the entire community. As a community we can only stand by doing right. Any man of experience in this Church can write the fate of members of the Church, so far as they know their course of life. Prophesy? Why, yes; predict it easily, because it has all been worked out thousands of times before. (DEN, Sept. 15, 1900)

Similarity of past and present apostasy. An examination of all the apostate schemes which have been concocted for the division and overthrow of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints reveals the curious fact that they all bear the marks of a common origin. The lapse of years and the change of men make no difference in this respect. If the programme of the apostates from the Church in Kirtland, and that of the apostates in Nauvoo, and that of those in later days be compared, the similarity is most striking. If they were the production of one brain, they could not be more alike. Even the language in some points is almost identical.

In Kirtland the doctrine which Joseph had taught, the organization which he had perfected, and the ordinances which he had administered were all divine, so said the apostates; but he had fallen, and was no longer a Prophet. He had transgressed, they said, and because of this his power and authority were taken from him.

Nauvoo apostates took precisely the same ground. Everything that Joseph had taught and done up to a certain point, even including the acts and policy which their predecessors, the apostates at Kirtland, had objected to, was correct; but they affirmed that he had fallen, because of something which he had just then done. He began to teach false doctrine, they said; the possession of power had spoiled him; he had become so intoxicated by it that he did not yield that respect to others which was justly their due; in fact, instead of being a Prophet of God which he once had been, they declared he had become a tyrant. . . .

We never look for consistency in apostates from this Church; for of all people, they are the most illogical and inconsistent. . . . In one breath calling Joseph a Prophet, the doctrine and religion which he taught the immutable and eternal principles of heaven, and in the next denouncing him as guilty of everything that is low and vile, and clamouring for his blood. Napoleon, we believe, it was who said that there was only one step from the sublime to the ridiculous. We never knew an apostate from this Church to undertake to defend his own course and to assail the presiding authority in the Church who did not take this step. (Jan. 11, 1870, MS 32:17-18)

Peculiar feature of apostates. There is a peculiar feature attending those who apostatize, of which the parallel cannot be found among any other people, except we go back to the primitive Christians—the immediate disciples of Jesus. Men may belong to any of the so-called Christian sects of the day, and they may renounce their belief or dissolve their connection with the religious bodies of which they are members, and we do not see that virulence, that spirit and disposition to seek for the blood of those with whom they were formerly connected, manifested on their part, which are manifested by those who have been members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and have apostatized therefrom. . . .

Impurity causes loss of spirit. We who are connected with this Church and retain our membership with this people must be pore in our thoughts, in our words and in our actions; we must take a course to retain the Spirit of God in our hearts; and if we do not take a course of this kind, the Spirit of God will inevitably leave us and that light which had illumined our understandings, that joy and peace which have filled our souls and caused us to rejoice exceedingly before the Lord, will depart from us, and we shall be left in a worse condition than we were before we obeyed the Gospel. (May 6, 1866, JD 11:226-27)

Hatred of apostates. The instruments most effective in the hands of Satan in carrying out his designs are those who, having enjoyed the truth and the spirit which accompanies it, take a course to stifle its increase and abandon themselves to do evil. They can enter more devotedly into his feelings and wishes than strangers to the truth and its influences, because they follow in his footsteps.

Satan was at one time in the possession of truth and, doubtless, rejoiced in the sunshine of God's favor; but having taken a course to forfeit his claim to this glory and to check the further development of truth in himself, he became wholly abandoned to evil and has since sought with all his power to deprive others of that which he himself cannot enjoy. The intensity with which his followers exhibit this same hatred to the truth and its believers is in proportion to the progress they have made in its knowledge and the extent to which they abandon themselves to the influences which he exercises.

Every apostate from the truth, Judas-like, indulges in this same feeling; and the hatred which they bear to the principles they once rejoiced in and its believers, their former brethren, is varied in intensity by the progress they made in the knowledge of truth when they loved it and the extent to which they abandon themselves to the influence which their master exercises. . . . This is a natural consequence of the influence to which they give heed. They quench the Spirit of the Lord, and it deserts them; they become fully possessed with the Evil One, and then, like their master, nothing will satiate them but the blood of the just. Like the Gospel in ancient days, "Mormonism" draws out these feelings in a man at the present time. . . .

When a man obeys the truth, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which comprehends all truth, he receives a spirit of light and intelligence, of peace and joy; he has a foretaste, as it were, of heaven. If he cherish it, it will increase within him and continually afford him the purest happiness, will fill him with peace and good-will to men and gradually lead him into all truth. But if he grieve and quench it after having once enjoyed it, it will decrease within him, until he will be entirely destitute of it and a prey to exactly the opposite feelings to those produced by its presence. He will hate the truth as strongly as he formerly loved it, and he will wonder how he could ever see anything about it that was lovely or attractive. Hence, Satan does not have the power over men who never knew the truth that he does over those who apostatize therefrom. (Dec. 27, 1856, WS 289-91)

Apostates filled with spirit of fear. In speaking about apostasy, it is a remarkable feature connected with it and with those who favor apostates and consort with them that they are filled with the spirit of fear. . . . The moment a man loses the Spirit of God and the spirit of the adversary takes possession of him, he is filled with fear; for "the sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites." (Isaiah 33:14.)

They say their lives are in danger. . . . No honest man or woman need fear; indeed they never fear. What are they afraid of? They have done nothing to cause the spirit of fear to come upon them. It is only when a man does that which is wrong that he receives the spirit of fear. . . .

Those who have the Spirit of God and love their religion have nothing to fear; they can meet their brethren and sisters, the angels of God, and even the Lord himself, without having that dastard fear with them. In the knowledge of their weakness, and their ignorance, and doing many things unintentionally, they feel sorry; but still they are sustained with a consciousness of doing no intentional wrong. (May 6, 1866, JD 11:232-33)

Apostates always considered Mormons. There is one peculiarity about the "Mormons," and the opinions men have in relation to them, that is not perceivable in any other denomination. Men may be born and raised in Presbyterianism, Methodism, or any of the numerous isms by which we are surrounded, and afterwards dissolve the connection with them and forsake the practice of their doctrines, and they will no longer be known by the name of the people to whom they formerly belonged; but this is not the case with those who have once been "Mormons." "Mormons" they were, and "Mormons" they will continue to be; the name will stick to them, however much they endeavor to get rid of it.

Although every action of their lives may be at complete variance with the doctrines of the Church and the practice of its members who are in good standing, yet, in too many instances, they are saddled onto the whole people, and they have to bear the reproach of the acts of men who have no more claim to the name of Latter-day Saint, or "Mormon," than Satan has to the title he was known by before he was cast out of heaven. (May 24, 1856, WS 116)

Wickedness may be committed by men who are members of the popular sects of Christendom, but the society of which they are members is rarely, if ever, charged with their wickedness; the opposite to this is too frequently the case when the offending party has been a Latter-day Saint—the Church must bear off all his transgressions, though he may have been excommunicated for years. "Mormonism" and its believers are despised; yet, men evidence, by their actions, that they expect more from it as a system and from its followers as practicers of its precepts than they do from any other system or society extant. (Oct. 11, 1856, WS 223)

All sinners to be cut off. "Mormonism" does not countenance wickedness of any kind; however loud a man may protest about being a "Mormon" and believing in "Mormonism," unless he endeavors to live holy and pure and to set a good example unto all by whom he is surrounded, he is not one with The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A man who commits sin cannot have the presence of the Spirit of the Lord; and, though an official action may not have been taken in his case, yet he has virtually cut himself off from all participation in the blessings of his religion, has ceased to bring forth good fruit and becomes a withered and dried branch only fit for the burning. (Mar. 20, 1857, WS 365)
