Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 46

Evil Spirits and Secret Combinations

Try the spirits. The Apostle John has written these words, "Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God." (1 John 4:1.)

This counsel applies to Saints in these days as it did in those unto whom the Apostle John wrote. It is right that Latter-day Saints should try every spirit which manifests itself or seeks to obtrude itself among them, not by seeking after it, but when it makes its appearance to see and understand by its fruits whether it be of God or not. It is necessary that we who live in these days should be careful not to be deceived. . . .

The Latter-day Saints should be careful not to entertain spirits which are not of God—spirits of delusion, spirits which lead men into darkness and error and which, if they follow, will lead them to destruction.

The adversary is very busy endeavoring to lead astray the children of men. In every possible way he seeks to seduce them from the path that the Lord has marked out. He appeals to them in the manner most likely to deceive them and brings influences of various kinds to bear upon them. If our eyes could be opened to see agencies he employs to effect his ends, we would be astonished. These agencies are invisible, but mankind are surrounded by them.

When we think that one-third of the hosts of heaven were cast out with Lucifer and fell with him and still are his angels, we can form an idea how numerous they are. Their punishment was like his, that they could not have a tabernacle of flesh and blood. Filled with anger and hatred, like their leader Lucifer, they have ever striven to destroy the family of God, to destroy those who, through obedience to Him, retained their first estate and had the privilege of entering upon their second estate, the probation which we now have. They operate upon the Latter-day Saints when they can, and by all their cunning arts seek to destroy the purposes of God. (Aug. 1, 1889, JI 24:360)

Many evil spirits at work. The Saints, at least, should understand that there are many spirits which are exerting their power among men and seeking to obtain an influence over them and that if they would escape from their effects, they must be upon their guard. But how many are there who are sufficiently careful upon this point? How many of those who have embraced the Gospel are jealously watching every avenue of their hearts lest a spirit which is not of God should enter therein and obtain power over them?

Does the man who finds fault with his brother in the Priesthood and grumbles against and condemns the President understand that when he does so he is giving place to a spirit which is not of God and which, if not expelled, will obtain such power over him that he will be led by it out of the Church and far from the path of righteousness? Or does the woman who scandalizes and talks about her sister know that in so doing she is giving utterance to the thoughts and feelings of a subtle, untruthful and delusive spirit which, if she retains it, will lead her to destruction? When men and women give utterance to such expressions and feelings, the evil influence is at work; they are being operated upon by it, though they themselves may not be aware of it; indeed, the great danger to the individual lies in he or she not being aware of the character of the spirit that is operating upon and leading him or her to commit the evil which it cannot accomplish itself, without the aid of human agency.

So long as evil spirits can obtain possession of living, human beings and influence them according to their wishes, so long has evil a tangible existence upon the earth. If there were no tabernacles for them to operate through—no men and women who would allow them to use their bodies (the great object of their desire, because of their own great lack of earthly attributes)—evil and sin would have no existence upon the earth. . . .

The shocking character of evil spirits. If those who allow such spirits to possess and influence and speak and act through them were to behold them, with their eyes enlightened by the Spirit of God, in all their repulsiveness, they would be shocked at the character of the visitors they had entertained. But the first approaches of such influences are so insidious and insinuating that those to whom they introduce themselves are not aware of their character and the hideous train that they will call to their assistance and encourage to follow them, when once they have obtained an entrance into the human heart.

When an Elder or a Saint (through being off his guard and not suspecting the nature of the influence that is operating upon him) suffers himself, by any of the numerous temptations and fascinations which such spirits know so well how to use, to be diverted from attending to the duties of his ministry and religion with a perfect heart and an eye single to the glory of God, he has but little idea of the wicked troop which will follow the entrance of this unsuspected visitor at the avenue which he has left unguarded unless he instantly expel it and bid it begone. . . .

A law pertaining to spiritual influences. The day is fast approaching when the nature of spiritual influences will be fully recognized and understood and when man, by listening to the teachings of God's Spirit and Priesthood and obtaining a correct knowledge of the laws which govern them, will be freed from the power which in the days of his ignorance they have wielded over him. . . .

There is one law pertaining to spiritual influences which should be clearly understood by every Saint and that is, the Spirit of God will not dwell in unholy temples; there must be absolute purity, either existing or being cultivated, in every tabernacle where the Spirit of the Lord dwells constantly. It will plead with man as long as there is any disposition left within him to do right and he does not, by gross transgression, drive it entirely away from him; but it will "not always strive with man." (D&C 1:33.) If he would cultivate its acquaintance and cherish and seek to be governed by it, he would have it as an unfailing source of revelation and knowledge and peace and union and love, until he would be filled with the power of God and all the Divine attributes. But if he gives heed to and encourages other spirits, it will be grieved and forsake him; it will not divide its power nor share its sceptre with such as they. (Apr. 9, 1864, MS 26:233-34)

The rise of spiritualism. Not only has faith in spiritual manifestations grown in the hearts of the Latter-day Saints, but something of a similar character has grown up in the midst of the world. The pendulum which had swung in one direction, in the direction of extreme unbelief, of extreme incredulity, concerning everything of a spiritual character, after the organization of this Church, after the restoration of the everlasting Gospel in its ancient purity and power . . . began to swing in the other direction, in the direction of a credulity, and willingness to have something that might be traced, or that could be attributed to a spiritual origin.

Some fifteen or sixteen years after this Church was organized spiritualism began to make its appearance, and thousands upon thousands of people were ready to receive anything that any charlatan chose to bring before them as the result of spiritual manifestations, until the whole nation of the United States, as well as some nations in Europe, were humbugged by the most extraordinary statements and ideas set forth by those charlatans. . . . But the same willingness to receive the truth, the same unwillingness to receive the Gospel and the blessings and gifts of God has continued to be manifested, and this belief or credulity concerning spiritualism has not had any favorable effect upon the people in causing them to receive the truth as it is.

Now, there is one power and one power alone . . . through which godliness and the power of God and the gifts of God can be made manifest with any degree of safety—that is, through the Priesthood of the Son of God. Take that authority away from the midst of men, and they would be left precisely in the same condition that the world was in at the time of . . . Joseph Smith. (Oct. 7, 1883, JD 24:341-42)

Increased power of Satan. Satan has always had great power among those who have rejected the Gospel. Men do not come under condemnation until they hear the truth and the testimony of the servants of God and reject them. That portion of the Spirit of the Almighty which they have previously possessed then leaves them, the light which they have had gives place to darkness, and the adversary has great influence over them for they become his servants. This is one reason why he has more power among wicked and corrupt persons when the Gospel is upon the earth than at other times.

Spiritualism Satan's plan to deceive. Soon after the Prophet Joseph's death "spiritualism," as it is called, was made manifest; men and women began to receive revelations, not from the Lord Jesus but from spirits, and great wonders began to be shown. . . .

What a cunning plan this is of the devil to deceive people and prevent men and women from obeying the teachings of Jesus! He will give them power to do these things without believing in Jesus, without repenting of their sins and being baptized or having hands laid upon them. He makes it very easy for them and tries to lead the world down to destruction by this means. "Broad is the gate and wide the way that leadeth to the deaths; and many there are that go in thereat . . . ," but "strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leadeth unto the exaltation and continuation of the lives, and few there be that find it." (D&C 132:22, 25.)

If we obey God, He will prepare us to dwell eternally in His presence; for, by obeying Him we will be made pure and holy and be free from sin, and He will give unto us His Holy Spirit and the gifts of the Spirit. These gifts are not like the power of Satan. Of what use or benefit is it to a person to see a table tip, to hear music played, to be carried out of one window into another? Is a man any better for all this? Or, are those who see it profited? Satan gives this power to mankind to delude them and lead them from the true path; but they are not benefited by it.

When a man or woman, or a boy or girl receives the Holy Ghost, it brings peace, joy, love and happiness; and the person who is in possession of this Spirit has a feeling of kindness and charity towards all mankind. His mind is enlightened and the things of God are made plain unto him. Society is benefited and the world is purified by its bestowal. (Oct. 8, 1869, JI 4:164)

Strong delusion and lying spirits. There is one thing worthy of note in this connection and that is that when Joseph Smith first proclaimed to the people that God had spoken from the heavens and sent His holy angels to minister to him and bestowed upon him the knowledge and authority necessary to build up the Church, he met with opposition and ridicule on every hand. . . . He said the time would come when there would be strong delusion and lying spirits permitted to come forth among the people. He declared that God had restored the Priesthood to the earth and the ordinances of the Gospel and had established His Church in its purity and that those who did not believe the testimony of the servants of God and obey it would be given over to hardness of heart and become subject to evil influences that were known nothing of previous to the establishing of the Church and the restoration of the Priesthood.

Years elapsed before this prediction was fulfilled, but it was eventually verified. . . . What has produced this change? Why, it is the very thing which Paul said would come. The people in his day would not receive the love of the truth that they might be saved; "Therefore," said he, "for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." (2 Thessalonians 2:11-12.) They would not believe the testimony of the servants of God; therefore, they were given up to hardness of heart and spiritual blindness. When these things overtake them, they are ready to fall in with any spirit of influence that will manifest itself amongst them in an extraordinary manner. . . .

A wicked and adulterous generation. The Elders of this Church have proved the truth of the words of Jesus that it is a wicked and adulterous generation that seek for a sign. You will generally find that they are wicked men who ask for this kind of evidence. A wicked man is not satisfied with the truth or with the testimony of the servants of God nor with the calm, heavenly influence of the Spirit of God which rests down upon those who receive the truth in honesty. No, such a man wants a sign; he wants to hear somebody speak in tongues or to see the eyes of the blind opened or the deaf made to hear, the dumb to speak, the lame to walk or the dead raised to life. Something of this kind he must have; the testimony of truth, though borne with angel's power, has no effect on such a heart. He wants something to convince his outward senses.

Thousands of such have rejected the Gospel of life and salvation as they did in the days of Jesus. They then rejected the testimony of the servants of God, and they hardened their hearts against it. But as soon as something came along that gratified them in the way they wanted—something that could tip a table or give some other singular manifestation of power, such as feeling invisible hands laid upon them or hearing music played by invisible performers or something of this character—they were convinced immediately that it was possible for spiritual beings to communicate with mortals, and now the Spiritualists number their converts by millions; they probably number more than any other denomination, if they can be called a denomination. They boast of their success.

A bogus or counterfeit Priesthood. In this manner the nations of the earth are being subjected to strong delusions; and you will find that as the Kingdom of God increases and as the work spreads abroad and the Priesthood gains power and influence in the earth, these systems will gain power and influence in the earth . . . and strong delusion will increase and spread among the inhabitants of the earth. They did not make their appearance until this Church was organized and the testimony of its truth had been borne. As soon as the genuine Priesthood was restored the bogus or counterfeit made its appearance, and as this work increases in strength and potency in the earth, so will these delusions of which I speak, until those who reject the truth will be bound up in a strong delusion and delivered over to hardness of heart. It is written that the Spirit of God "shall not always strive with man" (D&C 1:33), and when the truth is offered to men and they reject it, that spirit will be withdrawn and another influence and spirit will take possession of them, and they will be led captive by the adversary. (Jan. 31, 1869, JD 12:368-70)

Spiritualism counteracts Gospel. Spiritualism professed to make it easy for all to obtain spiritual manifestations. No faith in Jesus, no repentance, no baptism, no laying on of hands needed to obtain them. Purity of life was not essential. The wicked and the reprobate, as well as those of better lives, could receive spiritual communications. In this way Satan used spiritualism to counteract the influence of the Gospel. If the servants of God held out the promise that the Holy Ghost and the gifts promised by the Savior would follow obedience to the ordinances, spiritualism could be pointed to as a means of obtaining signs without the use of ordinances.

The prevalence of spiritualism has had the effect to remove many of the objections which were urged against inspiration; and though the world has not been disposed to accept the Gospel, the force of the attacks upon the Latter-day Saints because they believed that the Lord did inspire men and that the gifts of the Spirit were bestowed in our day has been greatly weakened through the widespread acceptance of spiritualism. (Mar. 1, 1893, JI 28:162)

A rule for detecting spirit of evil. I will tell you a rule by which you may know the Spirit of God from the spirit of evil. The Spirit of God always produces joy and satisfaction of mind. When you have the Spirit you are happy; when you have another spirit you are not happy. The spirit of doubt is the spirit of the evil one; it produces uneasiness and other feelings that interfere with happiness and peace. . . .

When you awake in the morning and your spirits are disturbed, you may know there is some spirit or influence that is not right. You should never leave your bed chambers until you get that calm, serene and happy influence that flows from the presence of the Spirit of God and that is the fruit of that Spirit. So, during the day you are apt to get disturbed, angry and irritated about something. You should stop and not allow that influence to prevail or have place in your heart. (Mar. 23, 1873, JD 15:375-76)

Astrology and its evils. Man is prompted by an innate disposition to seek for a knowledge of the future. When properly controlled, this desire results in good to himself and his fellow-creatures. When he has a correct knowledge of God and his laws, he is prompted to seek for the Holy Spirit, and when he obtains that, the anxiety of his soul is legitimately and fully gratified. But when he is ignorant of God, he is liable to have recourse to practices which bring him under the bondage of superstition, and he is debased and rendered unhappy thereby.

Astrology is one of the means which has been used by men from the earliest ages to pry into futurity and obtain its secrets. Before Abraham emigrated from Chaldea, that country was famous for its astrologers. It is called the mother-country of diviners, and especially of judicial astrologers—that is, those who pretended to foretell moral events, as if they were directed by the stars. To such a degree of power did this class of men attain in that country, that they formed the highest caste and enjoyed a place at court. So indispensable were they in Chaldean society, that we are informed no step could be taken, not a relation could be formed, a house built, a journey undertaken, a campaign began, until they had ascertained the lucky day and promised a happy issue. Some have claimed Egypt as the land where astrology had its origin. But, be that as it may, the people of that country, at a very early age, encouraged its practice as well as other arts of divination.

We find frequent allusions in the Bible to astrologers. Isaiah, in foretelling God's judgments upon Babylon, says in relation to them—"Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame." (Isaiah 47:13-14.) With all their pretended knowledge, they could not save themselves, much less their city and nation. They perished, miserably perished with their countrymen, despite all their figures and horoscopes and arts of divination. Every nation which fostered or trusted in them has similarly perished. Assyrians, Egyptians, Grecians, and Romans, were all numbered among their believers. Through their agency, those people sought the knowledge of the future. But their knowledge was only partial; just enough of it mingled with the falsehood which they revealed to deceive their credulous victims, and lure them on to destruction.

Our object in alluding to this subject at the present time is, to put our people on their guard against this system. . . . Our words are addressed to those who patronize them, who in their credulity imagine that they can be benefited by what they tell them. If we could have influence with them, we would warn them of their danger. They tread on slippery ground. Those who practice this system are either complete apostates, or are on the verge of apostasy. Those who patronize it, if they persist in doing so, will go the same way. No man who practices astrology, or seeks to obtain knowledge through its agency, can retain his confidence in the means which God has appointed, by which the knowledge of the future can be imparted. He will, sooner or later, deny the faith. Like table-rapping, writing mediums, etc., it is a means which God does not acknowledge, but which he has condemned.

There may be some truth in the system. The hold it has retained of the human mind for so many ages could not have been, probably, had it not possessed some correct principles. But it is that truth which makes it the more dangerous. The devil will, at any time, tell nineteen truths, if by so doing he can make the people believe one lie. Under such circumstances the nineteen truths strengthen him, and are of far more use to him than lies would be. But such knowledge as Daniel possessed, obtained by him through the proper channel, was of far more avail in the day of need, in revealing the Lord's purposes, than all the astrology of Chaldea. (1868, MS 30:166-67)

Divination. "And the magicians did so with their enchantments." (Exodus 8:7.) No doubt of it; those were palmy days for diviners; Egypt was in all her glory, had attained to an intellectuality which, if it did take a different direction to that of our day, will certainly bear comparison with it. It was in the direction of divination that the current of mind ran; nothing of importance was undertaken either by king, priests or people, without first obtaining information respecting results. To satisfy the requirements of the age, a class of men arose who made it their business to gratify the public taste by cultivating their powers of mind with a view to get an insight into the future.

It is not fair to assume that these men were mercenary in their motives, although some may have been so; they seem to have devoted themselves to study with a determination and disinterestedness such as usually characterize the earnest inquirer after truth; they were temperate in their lives, and even mortified their bodies by an abstemiousness which would have been trying to the sensualist; and this was all done with a desire to find favor with the gods "to whom all secrets are known."

Men of this stamp are likely to get information from the unseen world; and, in their researches after truth, as they understood it, they could hardly fail to stumble upon some of the principles which influence, if they do not control, human actions, and arrive at a knowledge of some of the great, but simple, natural laws which lie at the foundation of things. No stone was left unturned by them in their pursuit of that kind of knowledge they sought after—magic in the use of numbers and cabalistic characters, divining by omens, as the flight of birds, traces of which practice remain with us in the old saying: "One crow, good luck; two crows, sorrow," there is luck in odd numbers, etc. . . . Many very curious things were discovered by the magicians, as they were called, the memory of the some of which has been preserved to this day by tradition and in the "learned books" by those who dabble in the same "sciences." But it appears to have been more by communications with the unseen world that they obtained intelligence concerning things about to transpire on the earth.

Not that such kind of intelligence was at all times reliable; it was not so; but that a great many things were revealed which did prove true, there is abundant evidence on record. This was, indeed, the secret of the success of the "soothsayer," or, as the word implies, truth teller, for by an infatuation which appears natural to man, that which really occurred was believed to be the result of the prediction, and that which did not happen was attributed to a lack of faith in the people.

But that great wonders were wrought by the skill of the ancients in divination there can be but little doubt; it could not all have been deception any more than it is now. They may have had, as they have now in Asiatic countries, their sleight-of-hand conjurers of the "Wizard of the North" genus. Still, the fact of their having deceivers or imitators shows that the popular belief was in favor of those things being possible, and it is strong evidence that real miracles were performed. Not that there were then, any more than there are now, miracles in that impossible sense believed in by the ignorant, something done without a cause; but there were acts performed which were the result of natural operations not then understood by the masses. There is strong presumptive evidence of the fact that the prophets of Baal, for instance, did at times obtain fire from some supernatural source to consume their sacrifices, or it is not reasonable to suppose that four hundred and fifty men would have been so unwise as to expect such a thing. It was in the presence of Elijah that they failed, for which there must have been a reason; the sequel informs us what the reason was.

It is not logical, then, to deny to those ancient magicians the powers which both sacred and profane history ascribe to them; neither is it charitable to attribute it to venal or corrupt motives. As a class they were kept about the courts of kings and great men; great things were expected of them, and no doubt were realized; and it appears that they did not fail except when they were in the presence of beings who had higher power than themselves.

By taking this view we get rid of many difficulties which present themselves to the reader of ancient history; we can understand how it happened that in the Court of Babylon "the magicians, astrologers, sorcerers and Chaldeans," were baffled in the presence of Daniel, and to come nearer to our own times, the powerlessness of such men in the presence of Jesus and His disciples.

As to our denying the existence of great powers of divination in ancient times, because we cannot understand how they were attained to, it would be quite as just to deny the existence of these things now for the same reason. If the ancients had their soothsayers and astrologers, the moderns have their fortune tellers and Zadkiels; if the former had their necromancers, who held communion with the spirits of the departed, so have the latter—millions of them—in the "spiritualists." If they believed in sorcery, many now believe that their cattle or themselves can be "bewitched." If they had those who by their incantations could command the sick to be healed, in these days there are "Zouaves" and mesmerisers. If they had their witch of Endor to call up the shade of Samuel, there are those now who claim to call up Moses, Julius Caesar, or any one else when wanted. If they shut up their mediums in the secret recesses of the "adytum" to commune with the dead, there are in our day "seances" in which [men] are shut up in a cabinet, certainly for a less laudable purpose than the ancients sought in the secret chamber, which was to get information.

Now it is reasonable to believe that all these things are by the same spirit, for the works are the same. Never did this spirit shine forth more conspicuously than when the authority of the living God was upon the earth. With that authority, if the spirit of divination is not co-eval in the heavens, it appears to have always been contemporaneous on the earth, and it has always been antagonistic to that authority. Fifty years ago there was a great lack of faith in the supernatural; it is not so now. Men had by science endeavored to explain away all the phenomena ascribed to spiritual influence; nobody, comparatively, believed in the spirit of prophecy, either in a good or bad sense. There were no mediums, no "seances," no spiritrapping and table turnings, no "interior revelations," no divination in its many forms.

Now these things are fashionable. How is it that this spirit which has slept for ages is again evoked? "Like causes produce like effects." It is the antagonism brought to bear against the authority of God which calls forth these manifestations; when that is not on the earth, the spirit of divination slumbers. It is only when Prophets and Apostles are among men with a view to bring about the Government of God, when this power as well as this authority are made manifest, the power of the opposite is needed to deceive. (June 26, 1869, MS 31:414-16)

Oracles. Truth in astrology? There may be; probably if there were not nobody would believe it. . . . Now, what are the facts? A man believes in astrology, or planchette, or "intuition," or magic, or clairvoyance, or mesmerism, or any other "ism"—it is his oracle. He bows before it, and it becomes his oracle. He bows before it, and it becomes his idol; the more he will reverence it. Will he seek the true God? No. He will be weaned from any former attachment, when he ceases to drink of "the sincere milk of the world." To him there is no prophet but his prophet; no God but his, He may not have descended to this depth today, but it is only a question of time. Who consults any of these oracles to do good? What are the motives which actuate men to seek for information? "I want to be great, to be rich, to know who loves me," or, "who hates me," or "who wrongs me." Do any consult them with a view to be more useful members of society, to enable them to become better men and women socially, intellectually, morally? None.

Where, then, is the good of such "sciences falsely so-called"? If you are afraid to go to law unless the planets are propitious, it is because your course is unjust; if you are afraid to marry for the reason that "Venus is not well aspected" in the heavens, it is because you have doubts concerning the Venus you have chosen on earth; if you are afraid to plant today, because the configuration of the planets says no, it shows you lack confidence in the Being who causes the plants to grow.

But have the planets no influence on earth? Yes. The stream of light which flows upon this earth from countless myriads of suns, centers of other solar systems, help to sustain life both in animals and vegetable. The sun is by no means the only luminary which is engaged in ministering to man, and it is highly probable that the light derived from those planets circulating in this solar system, although only reflected light, may bring with it some of the qualities of the planet from which it is reflected. Perhaps those "hot and dry" and "watery and cold" qualities which the ancients noticed as qualities of certain planets, are really necessary to the perpetuation of this planet. At all events we may be assured of this: He who "made all things well," and pronounced everything "very good," did not create, and certainly would not perpetuate, any withering, pernicious influences, such as are ascribed to the rays of light which innocently fall upon the earth from the planets of our solar system. (July 3, 1869, MS 31:437-39)

The path of safety. Now, the only safe course for you and all mankind to pursue is to obey the Priesthood, to listen to the teachings of the servants of God and never murmur against them. Then God's power will increase with you, and you will add knowledge to knowledge, light to light and be brought back into the presence of God. Then, when false prophets arise and wonderful works are performed by them through the power of the evil one, you will not be deceived; for you will know that they are not of God. Though they may call fire down from Heaven, you will still cling to the Priesthood of God. Apostates and all who fight against the Priesthood are liable to be led astray by the miracles and wonders which are performed by wicked men, for they have no guide; they have forsaken the true path and the authority which God has bestowed. (Oct. 8, 1869, JI 4:164)
