Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 47

The Law of Tithing—A Law of God

The earth is the Lord's. All who have any faith in the existence of a Supreme Being will acknowledge that the Lord has given man the earth to dwell upon, has furnished it with animals, vegetables and every element necessary for man's existence, comfort and happiness, that He can bestow upon man few or many of these blessings, as seemeth good in His sight, that, in fact, we and the earth and the fulness thereof are His, and that there is nothing that we call ours that is not in reality His. So, He can not only claim a tenth of the earth, and its contents and products, but even the whole. The Latter-day Saints think, therefore, that in paying a tenth they only pay a slight interest for all they enjoy. (July 15, 1863, MS 25:473)

Law of tithing for man's benefit. The law of tithing does not, when obeyed by man, add to God's comfort, contribute to His wealth, increase his happiness or furnish Him with that of which He would be destitute if it were not obeyed; but it is given to man, and he is required to obey it that he may receive the reward and that he may acknowledge by this act—by this payment of the tenth of his increase—that all he obtains is the gift and comes from the beneficent hand of God and that he is dependent upon God. . . .

A neglect of tithing led to Israel's disaster. When Israel served God, and were strict in observing this law, He blessed and prospered them, and His favor was shown towards them; but when they neglected this law, His anger and indignation were kindled against them, and one of the most fruitful causes of disaster to Israel was their neglect in this particular. . . .

There is something connected with the law of tithing that, when men do not have faith in God, appeals to their selfishness; and for a people to be wholehearted in its observance, they need faith in God. When Israel began to decline in faith in God, their selfishness increased, and their determination became stronger and stronger to grasp everything within their reach and to retain everything they gained possession of; and as this feeling grew, tithing and freewill offerings were withheld from the house of God, and in consequence of this the blessing of God was also withheld. . . .

Non-tithe payers unworthy members. I thank God for the revelation of this principle. I do for this reason—it appeals directly to man's selfishness. It makes men sacrifice their selfish feelings and causes them to show faith in God. If a man has not faith in God, he is not very likely to pay tithing or make many offerings. To use a common expression, he looks after "number one" and self-interest rules him. Such a man is an unworthy member of the Church of Christ.

Tithing benefits all. When every man pays his tithing and witnesses unto God that that law is honorable in his sight, what is the result? Is anybody impoverished by it? No! Are we as Latter-day Saints any poorer because of the tithing we have paid? Not one cent. When that tithing is properly appropriated, it is expended in works which add to the wealth of the entire community. It contributes to the erection of public edifices; it adorns those edifices and creates a fund that is exclusively devoted to the work of God and that helps to build up and to make the community prosperous and respectable in the earth. It is a mighty engine, or would be if properly wielded, in establishing righteousness and truth in the earth. . . .

Lands to be made fruitful. I honestly believe, if the people of the United States would observe this law of tithing, devoting a tenth of their substance to the service of the Most High, that . . . the fertility which formerly prevailed there would be restored. And when the day shall come, as come it will when we shall go back—and we expect to go back to Jackson County, Missouri, and to lay the foundation of a temple, and to build a great city to be called the Centre Stake of Zion, as much as we expect to see the sun rise tomorrow—I say, when that day shall come it will be found that that country will have its old fertility restored, and that and all the lands that the people of God will occupy will be healthy and fruitful; the land of any people who will honor God by obeying this law of tithing will be made fruitful to them; God will bless their industry, and they will rejoice and prosper therein. . . .

Those who have prospered most are they who paid their tithing honestly. And I have noticed it, as an individual, that when men close up their hearts in this direction and neglect their tithing and their offerings on fast days for the benefit of the poor, they lose their faith. This is one evidence of the loss of faith and confidence in the work. (Sept. 8, 1872, JD 15:146-55)

A protection against apostasy. The liberal tithe payer binds himself and his family more firmly to the Church. This of itself is an extremely desirable result. Whatever a man or a family can do to bind themselves more closely to the work of God is a great advantage in times of trial and temptation. Being thus bound by the interest they have taken in affairs, they are more likely to withstand temptation.

I remember having a conversation with President Young, at the time of the apostasy a number of years ago of certain prominent merchants from the Church, concerning their apostasy. There was one merchant who was approached by the others and solicited to join them in their attack upon President Young and the Authorities of the Church, but he resisted their approaches. There was no apparent reason why he should not have yielded as much as they did to those influences that prevailed with them. In speaking of this President Young said he had had occasion to examine the tithing record of the merchants, and he had found that this man of whom we were speaking had paid more tithing than all the rest together. He attributed his escape from apostasy to this fact, and said that the Lord had blessed him with power to withstand temptation and remain true to Zion. This is an interesting fact, and one full of meaning and instruction. I think that the faithful tithe-payer will not be found among apostates. (Oct. 1, 1899, JI 34:599-600)

When people neglect this duty, it is evident they are losing their faith and their zeal in the work of God, and are in a position to grow cold and indifferent concerning it, and to lose the Spirit of the Lord. . . .

Men and women who pay their tithing attach themselves more firmly to the work of the Lord by so doing, and Satan has less power over them than he would have if they neglected this important duty. (Feb. 1, 1898, JI 33:125)

Payment of tithing necessary. I say to you that in your non-payment of tithing you have stopped your progress and you have disobeyed a command of God just as much as if you had refused, after you had been baptized, to have hands laid upon you, just as much as you would have done, after having received the Gospel, had you refused to go into the temple and have saving ordinances administered to you there, such as the ordinance of marriage for time and eternity and other things. You may or may not think as I do, but I know I have taken the correct position in this matter. (Apr. 1900, CR 57)

A profitable principle. I pay tithing because I think it is a profitable thing in every direction. I regard it as a good investment. But I do not do it for that alone. I do it because God has commanded it. I have always known it to be a correct principle since I was old enough to reflect upon it. I have paid tithing, therefore, from principle, believing that it not only benefits me spiritually (which is the most important of all) but that it enables me to go to the Lord in faith and ask Him for that which I need.

Many years ago I was in a very tight place financially, and I determined to put aside all I could as tithing. One day the Bishop of the Ward met me on the street and said: "Brother George, you are paying a pretty good tithing." "No, Bishop," said I, "I am not paying the tithing of that which I have received; I am paying the tithing of that which I would like to receive." And sure enough the next year I had as much income as I had paid tithing on the previous year.

Now, men will say that merely happened so. Well, all these things happen, don't they? I was relieved from my difficulty, and I had my faith confirmed. I have tried to follow that principle a good deal since. (DEN, Aug. 18, 1899)
