Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 48

Temporal Affairs and Economic Prosperity

The parable of the "unjust steward." The parable of the "unjust steward" is to be found in the 16th chapter of Luke, and according to our opinion it conveys an exceedingly important lesson.

To begin with, it should be understood that the Lord has entrusted us all with a stewardship. He has placed under the control of man the elements of the earth, to do with them as seemeth good to him. This stewardship—that is, its extent or its value—may vary and does vary in each individual case. Some of us as stewards have large possessions and a large share of the elements which belong to the earth. Others have a smaller share. But we are all stewards, and undoubtedly will be required at some time in the future to account for the manner in which we use these stewardships.

In the parable referred to (Luke 16) our attention is directed to the case of one who was about to be deprived of his stewardship by his master. He was accused of having handled his master's goods in a wasteful or perhaps dishonest manner, and he was thereupon required by the master to give an account of his stewardship. Then he felt himself driven to the necessity of doing something that would be of benefit to him when he should lose his position. He argues to himself: "What shall I do? for my lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I cannot dig; to beg I am ashamed, I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses." (Luke 16:3-4.)

Then he proceeds to exercise his authority as a steward, for he had not yet been deprived of it, to make himself friends out of the debtors of his master. He calls them all before him and says to one: "How much owest thou unto my Lord?" And upon being told, he reduces the amount one half, giving what would appear to be a receipt or an amended bill to the debtor. The obligation of the next debtor he reduces twenty per cent; and while the record does not expressly say so, the inference is that he proceeded in like manner through the whole list of debtors—the presumption is that he made similar settlements with all of them.

Everyone will be able to understand that in this manner he could accomplish that which he had set out to do—make to himself friends; by virtue of the stewardship which he still held he had used his master's property to gain favor for himself with his master's debtors. And he was commended for this, "because he had done wisely." (Luke 16:8.)

Friends of mammon of unrighteousness. The Savior, concluding the parable, enjoined upon those who were listening to Him: "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitation." (Luke 16:9.) The book of Doctrine and Covenants uses the words: "Make unto yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness" (D&C 82:22), which in meaning is the same as the language used in the New Testament.

Now, herein is a great principle and a great lesson. Men have received stewardships, and some are entrusted by our Father with much of the "mammon of unrighteousness"—in other words, with worldly possessions and perhaps wealth. Being only stewards, and having in their hands or under their control the possessions with which the Lord has entrusted them, they can, if they are wise men, employ these possessions in doing great good to themselves by assisting and befriending those who by virtue of works of righteousness may not fail in attaining unto "everlasting habitation." They can by conferring earthly benefits make to themselves friends who may be in a position to receive them into everlasting habitations in case they themselves should fail in reaching that which they desired.

This may seem like strange doctrine, but it is nevertheless true. For instance: Those who conferred favors upon the Savior when He was upon the earth would certainly not be forgotten by Him in the eternal world. After His resurrection He was restored to the full power which He possessed before He took on a mortal tabernacle; and He was in a position so exalted as to be able to confer benefits on those who had shown kindness to Him. Abraham, the father of the faithful, "hath entered into his exaltation," the Lord tells us in the Doctrine and Covenants, "and sitteth upon his throne." (D&C 132:29.) A similar statement is made as to others. It applies to Prophets and Saints of both former and later time. Shall not these worthy persons be in a position to reward by some favor, or friendship, or intercession, or benefit, those who befriended them with the "mammon of unrighteousness" (in whatsoever sense the term may be used) when they were upon the earth? And if they are in a position to do this, is it likely that they will fail to make return for kindness previously shown them?

No doubt, if the full history of all the Prophets could be read, it would be found that in all ages when men of God were on the earth there were persons who used the wealth or the other means in their possession to benefit and assist these servants of the Lord in the labors that devolved upon them. It was surely so in the case of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Sometimes the people who have been thus moved to act in a friendly manner or to extend material aid have not had much faith in the Gospel; sometimes they have been total unbelievers and have not been strict in living according to the precepts laid down for the guidance and salvation of the children of men; yet they have been moved upon to render assistance to the servants of God.

We have many instances of this character in mind in the case of the Prophet Joseph. Those who acted toward him in this manner made a friend of him with the means or the "mammon of unrighteousness" which they held in their possession; and there can be no doubt that in the great future, when he will have attained to his exaltation and received the power that will be conferred upon him, he will be in a position to extend favor unto those who had conferred benefits upon him in the exercise of their stewardship in this life. It will be reckoned unto them for good, and not for evil; they will be commended because they "had done wisely," and thus in many instances will it be shown that "children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light." (Luke 16:8.) (Apr. 1, 1900, JI 35:219-20)

Inheritances in Zion should be prized. One beautiful feature in the teachings of the servants of God in the early days of the Church, and one which has been repeated more or less all through our history, is the importance of having an inheritance in Zion, which really means the possession of a portion of land upon which to live either in a city or in the country. The teachings of the Prophet Joseph and of the Prophet Brigham, and in fact of all the first Elders of the Church, have been of a character to impress upon the people the value and sacredness of inheritances.

When mobs drove the people from their homes, they still looked upon the land which they had received, or which had been set apart to them as inheritances, as land that ought not to be sold or in any manner alienated; and to this day there are thousands of acres in Missouri, and probably in Illinois, that have never been sold by the Saints who owned them, and their present occupants have only a tax title to show for them.

I have fancied, however, that in latter times there has not been that feeling of reverence for inheritances, neither have they been esteemed as of so sacred a character, as was the case in the earlier days of the Church. Men part with them more lightly and for more trivial causes than they did in former days. A money consideration has seemed to have great weight in some of the people's eyes, and they have not looked upon their inheritances as something that should not be parted with but on the contrary as any other property, to be sold or bartered whenever it might suit the convenience of the owner or might inure to his profit. This, it seems to me, is a wrong conception, and wherever it prevails, it is likely to be followed by bad consequences. Of course there may be, and doubtless are, occasions when it may be wisdom to part with land; but the Latter-day Saints, of all people, should attach value to that which they have obtained as an inheritance in Zion. They should not look upon their possessions as the ordinary man does upon his, but should feet that there is an obligation connected with the ownership which ought to be observed. . . .

Avoid living by speculation. Our children should be taught not to live by speculation, not to live by the various devices which are too common in the world, but to live in an honest, legitimate and healthful way, and seek to draw from the elements with which God has furnished the earth all that is necessary for support. The earth was created as a habitation for man. We should love it as our birthplace, and put a high value on any portion of it that we may possess; and when a boy or a girl obtains a portion of it, he or she should be taught to cling to it and not part with it lightly. This feeling should be cultivated among us as a people, and the effect upon the character of the people will be very healthful. (Feb. 15, 1895, JI 30:107-9)

Wastefulness a great sin of this age. Wastefulness is one of the great sins of the age and above all of the land we live in. God has so abundantly blessed this continent with the precious things of the earth that its inhabitants do not rightly value His rich gifts to them, but use them with careless hands, thoughtless heads and ungrateful hearts. This is sinful; the Lord did not make anything to be wasted, and He is angry with those who thus abuse His gifts.

In the works of God nothing is wasted or without its use. What is not good for man is often good for beasts, and what is no use to either man or beast supports vegetable life. That which is poison to the animal creation is the food of the trees and the shrubs, and the refuse of our food is the richest element for those plants which, when grown to ripeness, become our most choice and health-giving viands—the grain and fruits we so much delight in.

But because God is so economical in the works of nature, and makes everything count for good for the whole, it is no reason that we should be wasteful and careless with those things that are of use to us. Neither can we urge as an excuse that we have plenty and to spare, when so many thousands have not enough.

Teach children thrift and economy. Every wise parent will strive to teach his children true thrift and economy. True economy is using the right thing for the right purpose, and using just enough to accomplish the work, and no more, "He who is taught to live upon little, owes more to his father's wisdom, than he who has a great deal left him does to his father's care." The teachings of the wise father will be remembered through life; the riches of the careful father will probably be squandered more rapidly than they were acquired, if the riches be unaccompanied by wise teaching.

Boys and girls are often reminded that "wilful waste makes woeful want." This is a truth. Wastefulness is the mother of poverty. If we would be rich in the things of this world, which are all the gifts of our Eternal Father, we must use that which is placed in our charge with care and wisdom. If we do not, His blessing will be withheld from us. But some of us do not know how to put our time, our talents and our property to the best possible use. We waste our time, hide our talents and let our possessions go to ruin. Therefore, we must be taught. (May 23, 1874, JI 9:126)

Learn to save. The habit of saving should be taught children at any early age. They should in youth receive lessons of self-denial. In this view the habit of tithe-paying, apart from the blessings which follow obedience to the law itself, is most excellent. It teaches economy; it inculcates self-denial; it enforces the necessity of saving. To be sure, it is a law of God to be observed and obeyed for its own sake. But its value, in adding to the inclination to be thrifty and careful and saving, is also very great; and it cannot be taught to children too early or too earnestly.

They should be impressed, as an inducement to saving, with the importance of making provision for the future. It is a very humiliating thing for a man or a family who may have been in the possession of means to be compelled to depend upon neighbors or friends or public charity for support. It is a most pitiful sight to see persons, when advanced in years or for other reasons incapable of performing much labor, destitute of the means of livelihood and forced to depend upon others for their living. In many cases such a condition may be unavoidable; but there are many other cases where it is simply the result of improvidence.

It is most unwise for persons or families to fall into the habit of consuming their entire income. A portion of the earnings should be regularly laid aside so that if sickness, want of employment or old age should throw them upon their own resources, they will have something other than charity to depend upon. Young couples in marrying should repress the inclination for display. They should learn to live within their means—not to consume all that they earn—and to commence in the beginning of their career to lay aside a portion of their income each week or month. Then, they should guard against any idle fancy which might prompt them to draw out and expend the means which they have saved. By cultivating the habit of saving they will, without becoming avaricious, find pleasure in self-denial, and have pleasure without being miserly in seeing their savings gradually increase. Men and women who pursue such a course as this can feel an independence and a consequent happiness that they cannot enjoy if they follow the contrary course. (Mar. 15, 1900, JI 35:190-91)

Stay out of debt. The man who borrows and puts himself under obligations to his fellow-man is to that extent the slave of his creditor; and when short of funds and unable to meet his engagements, he is often compelled to submit to humiliation and be goaded by those whom he owes. It is a most painful position for a sensitive man to occupy to be in debt without the ability to meet his obligations when they are due. The Latter-day Saints have been taught that when they borrowed they should be sure that, when the time came for the payment of the debt, they would be in a position to liquidate it. (Sept. 1, 1893, JI 28:536)

Debts of honor. A man's verbal promise should be as good as his written obligation, and it would indeed be a happy condition if we were in a position where we would need to make so few promises concerning financial obligations that we would not forget them, but promptly meet everything that is due. . . .

Debts of honor are just as binding as are legal obligations. Doubtless our readers have heard of the case of the impecunious English statesman who would dodge corners to avoid meeting his creditors. One day a man who held his note saw a sum of money paid to him, and immediately thereafter stepped up to the debtor and presented his note for payment. "I cannot pay that," replied the statesman, "for the money I just received I must pay on a debt of honor. You have my note and that will hold good until my other obligations are discharged."

The creditor looked at him for a moment and then said, "I will make my debt one of honor," and immediately destroyed the note.

"That being the case," was the response, "I must pay yours first, as it is of longer standing."

The burden of debt. We advise our young people to avoid the distresses of debt, to live within their means and to economize to such an extent that from their incomes they can save some little against a time of need. If you would only talk with some men whose credit has been strained because of indebtedness, we believe the lesson would be impressed upon your minds never to be forgotten, that debt is a burden which prevents peaceful, restful nights and fills the mind with anguish during the day time, thus preventing the development of those finer sensibilities with which every creature is endowed, retarding also the growth in spirit which is possible to those who owe no man anything. (Feb. 1, 1896, JI 31:81)

Plan of salvation embraces both temporal and spiritual. The plan of salvation embraces everything that belongs to men in the flesh on the earth. In the mind of our God there is no distinction between that which is spiritual and that which is temporal. He uses this phrase in revelations to us because He adapts Himself to our condition and to our mode of looking at affairs; but with Him there is no distinction between temporal and spiritual things.

There is no distinction between spiritual salvation—of course, with some qualifications—and temporal salvation. Our bodies are as dear in the sight of God as our spirits. Our spirits cannot be separated from our bodies to have us perfect. The body and the spirit are the soul of man—not the spirit alone, not the body alone, but the body and the spirit. And God gives revelations for the temporal salvation of His children—that is, for the salvation of their bodies—and they are as important in their place as His revelations concerning their spirits.

Hence it is that the Latter-day Saints are a practical people. We have offended the religious world because we deal so much in temporal things and speak so much about them, as though they were a part of salvation. Well, we view them as being a part of salvation. But, it gives offense to many, and they think that it is improper for men who are ministers of religion to meddle with such things. We have had that to contend with from the beginning, especially since we gathered together.

It has been necessary that there should be care bestowed upon the temporal salvation of the people, and the leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have been animated by the Spirit of God to do this, and to provide by counseling in the greatest wisdom that they could obtain, for the deliverance of the people from evils which threatened them. . . . There was a time when it was absolutely necessary that the people should be counseled upon many points which affected their temporal salvation. (Dec. 31, 1893, DW 48:163)

Direction in temporal matters. The policy of directing the Latter-day Saints in the management of their temporal business has been a duty which the Authorities of the Church have never failed to discharge from the days of its organization until the present. The Prophet, Joseph Smith, wise leader as he was, knew what would be for the good of the people, and, during his life-time, he urged his views upon them with all his energy and influence. It was his province to teach the people upon every subject connected with life here and hereafter. There was nothing that pertained to their welfare and elevation, and redemption from evil, that he considered outside of his Priesthood. . . .

He found it necessary at times to give very stringent counsel to the Saints, and to threaten with excommunication from the Church those who did not deal with the people on the plan that he prescribed. (Feb. 1, 1870, MS 32:66-67)

Labor a blessing to mankind. It has been argued that labor and toil are the consequences of God's curse, and that they who have to labor for their daily bread are accursed also. But is it so? When man was immortal, before Adam fell, God placed him in the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it. No curse had then fallen on this fair earth; all thereon had been pronounced by the Great Creator "very good." (Genesis 1:31.) Yet, Adam had to dress and cultivate the garden; for though the earth then did not bring forth weeds and thorns and thistles, yet it required man's watchcare and superintendence to keep it in order.

When Adam first disobeyed God's command, and sin and death were brought into the world thereby, God told Adam that He would curse the ground for his sake, and that he should eat his bread by the sweat of his brow. Yet, we do not read that God cursed his labor, or made it dishonorable. True, the ground was to bring forth thorns and thistles, but labor was to subdue the earth and cover the place where these thorns and thistles grew with fruit trees, flowers and grain.

Labor, instead of a curse, has been a blessing to mankind. No bread is so sweet as that earned by honest toil. Labor is happiness; no heart is more joyful than the one busy with the works of love and duty. Labor is health; none are more vigorous than the laborer. Labor is life; without it we should stagnate, and the generations of man would soon cease upon the earth. Without it arts, science and civilization must perish; in fact, all human life, except that of the rudest and most savage kind, must perish also.

God has set the example. Labor is eternal and divine. In six days the Lord made heaven and earth. The labor of this earth's redemption will occupy the Millennium and stretch into eternity. The world, with all its fellows, is the handiwork of God; and the worlds yet to be will manifest the wisdom and creative power, the skill and labor of divine beings, and worlds will multiply and systems grow. . . .

That in which God has set us the example cannot be ignoble or degrading. It was He who made this world with all its wonders. Can we, for very shame, call our fellow men vile, vulgar or contemptible because they help to beautify this same earth that our Heavenly Father has framed? Shall they who build the cities, till the soil, or in any other way help to make this earth habitable and glorious, be esteemed less than they who simply partake of the blessings without aiding in the struggle to obtain them?. . .

No young man or young woman should be ashamed of useful labor. . . . It is one of the greatest lessons taught by the Gospel that all must be workers. Let us so strive that our labor shall not be in vain, but that our every effort shall count for good, and that our knowledge of some trade, profession or art, while developing our own powers and talents, shall benefit to the uttermost the people and the work of the most high God. (Mar. 14, 1874, JI 9:66)

All needful labor honorable. All work that the world needs doing is honorable, and all men who do it, and do it well, are honorable also. . . .

No trade that men are called to engage in for the happiness of the world is disreputable. It is the way in which the man supplies the world's needs that makes him what he is, honorable or dishonorable. He who does what he has to do, and does it aright, is the peer of every other son of Adam, be he prince or peasant. Honor and honesty are confined to no class or caste. He who decries any necessary labor because he is engaged in some other branch of this world's industry, or belongs to some other station in life, is short-sighted and slow of understanding.

The rich and poor are needed, as the world at present exists, but the rich should not oppress the poor, nor the poor wrong the rich. The day will come in the history of God's Kingdom when there will be no poor in the midst of the Saints, as the time will also come when there will be none sinful nor corrupt therein. (Feb. 28, 1874, JI 9:54)

Gospel opposed to idleness. Connected with our temporal labors there is probably no point of more importance than the providing of employment for our people. The spirit of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ is opposed to idleness. We do not believe that a man who has the spirit can rest content if he is not busily employed. (Apr. 8, 1887, MS 49:291-92)

Half-heartedness not a virtue. It is a safe rule of life for us all and as wise as it is safe to never do or say anything except that upon which we can honestly ask the approval and blessing of God. . . . Furthermore, that upon which we can ask the blessing of God, we should do with our might. Half-heartedness is not a virtue, especially in serving the Lord; nor is it a recommendation in our daily contact with our fellow man. . . .

We all should have something useful to do, and we all should do it well. Each of us should choose an honest calling and then endeavor to be perfect in the calling we have chosen. To do this we must esteem no detail too trifling that has a bearing upon our success. It is not wise to despise small things, for "trifles make the sum of human things"; and little by little, step by step, seldom by giant strides, we progress towards the perfection of goodness or retrocede towards its sad opposite.

The key to success in business. All true business principles are based on justice and the rights of every party to a transaction. Success in business does not so often arise from that inclination to overreach, by some miscalled smartness, as in the prompt use of opportunities. There is more in the use of opportunities than in the measure or amount of them; however bright the sun may shine we cannot see the path we should take if we keep our eyes shut. Promptness, punctuality, honesty, industry and civility are key words to success in the labors, the duties and business of life.

Be prompt; then you will be first in the market. Be punctual; then others will put confidence in your word. Be honest; there is no excuse to be otherwise; it wears the best and triumphs in the end. Be economical; wastefulness is one of the great sins of the age; it should be remembered that a gain usually requires effort and outlay—that which we save is clear. Be polite; nothing valuable is lost by civility and kindness. Be industrious. . . .

Withal, trust in God and keep His laws. None of us can afford to omit this whatever our rank or occupation. It will add lustre to our talents and give strength to every action of our lives and shape our course to the greatest usefulness here and to the brightest happiness hereafter. (Jan. 9, 1875, JI 10:6)

Possession of wealth not purpose of existence. The Lord has sent us here for a wise purpose. He has given us these glorious tabernacles, complete in all their parts, and given unto us laws which are necessary that we should obey to redeem these bodies and pass safety into His presence, to dwell there in the midst of eternal burnings. This is the mission He has given unto us to perform on the earth, and a more glorious mission could not be given to the sons and daughters of God.

The possession of prosperity, boundless wealth in gold and silver, fine raiment, magnificent dwellings, horses and carriages, and all these things attainable on the earth, are but secondary matters compared with it. They are merely auxiliaries to aid us in accomplishing our destiny and are not given unto us to set our hearts upon, or for us to consider our time well spent in looking after them and nothing else. We ought to value riches no more than we do the earth on which we tread, the air we breathe or the water we drink.

The man who seeks after the perishable things of this life and allows his mind to dwell upon them to the exclusion of the things of God which pertain to his eternal salvation has failed to comprehend the mission God has assigned him. (Oct. 23, 1864, JI 10:347-48)

Is it right that we should be prudent, that we should take care of those gifts and blessings which God has given unto us, that we should husband our resources, that we should be economical and not extravagant? Certainly, this is right; this is proper; we should be culpable if we were not so. But with this there is also something else required, and that is to keep constantly in view that the management and care of these things is not the object that God had in sending us here; that is not the object of our probation. (July 25, 1880, JD 22:100)

God has made us all stewards. He has placed means in our hands. What better use can we make of this substance than to build up His Kingdom upon the earth, to help establish His righteousness, and to devote everything that we have to the advancement of His cause? And He will reward us. He will receive us into everlasting habitation, and He will increase His glory, honor and power upon us. (Mar. 26, 1893, DW 46:484)

The Church our greatest interest. Now, there should be no interests outside of this Church that to us are of greater importance than the interests of the Work of God. We should have no interest separate from it, and all that we have and are should belong to that Work. We should use every faculty that we have for the advancement of the interests of the Church of God, and never feel that we have separate and distinct interests from it. We will find this the best and safest preventative against apostasy.

So long as a man feels that all he has, and all that he ever hopes to possess, belong to the Kingdom of God, and he feels to use all for the advancement thereof, there is less danger of his apostatizing than there otherwise would be. He is identified with the Work—he forms a part of the great structure—and there is no distinction between the man and the Kingdom, because he is completely absorbed in it; therefore, such an individual—so long as he retains that spirit and feeling—is very unlikely to forsake the Church of God. (Jan. 5, 1863, MS 26:212)

Love of God must predominate. The Lord has bestowed upon us the temporal blessings which we have for a wise purpose. We should use them aright and not set our hearts upon these perishable things. We should hold them as the gifts of God, subject to His counsel. The man who sets his heart upon riches cannot serve the God of Israel. No man can serve two masters, Jesus said. He said it 1800 years ago; it is true today.

Whenever you see a man serving mammon, you may know he cannot serve God as well. There cannot be a division in these services; half-hearted service cannot be acceptable to the Lord. We must serve God with all our hearts, our love and affections reaching after Him, and the things of this world must be looked upon by us as secondary considerations. They are good enough in their place, right enough to be attended to, but subordinate always to the love of God. That should be the first love, greater than every other love.

A man that loves a wife, a man that loves a child, a man that loves anything upon the earth more than God, is not a true Latter-day Saint. . . . He cannot serve God and mammon together. One love must predominate; it must be superior to every other love, and that is the love of our Heavenly Father, the keeping of His commandments and attending to the ordinances of salvation which He has revealed to us. (June 27, 1881, JD 22:288-89)

Seek for true riches. One of the most remarkable things in human life is the love which mankind have for the things of the world. Take, for instance, money. Men will risk their lives and their salvation, they will commit the most cruel and wicked acts, even murder itself, and trample upon all affection and do the vilest things for the sake of money. Yet, when they get money in this way, it can only be kept, at the longest, until death, and, in many instances, even while they are living it slips out of their hands as water does when a man tries to grasp it. However rich a man may be, even if he had the wealth of a nation in his hands, when he dies he leaves it all behind.

Is it not strange, this being the case, and everybody knowing it to be so, that people will love money and frequently do such wicked things to obtain it?

This love of money is one of the great agencies through which the devil strives to destroy the work of God and to ruin the souls of men.

The love of the world and the love of God cannot exist at the same time in the same bosom. A true Latter-day Saint loves God and His work more than he does the world. . . . He strives to conquer the love for the perishable things of the world that seem a part of fallen human nature. He looks forward to a higher, a purer and a more eternal life than that which he now possesses. (June 1, 1881, JI 16:126)

The key to perfect happiness. There is no person living, however rich he or she may be, who is entirely satisfied. There is something that he or she does not have that he or she would like to have. It is not given to men and women on the earth to be entirely satisfied, if they seek for satisfaction and happiness in worldly things. There is only one way in which perfect happiness can be obtained, and that is by having the Spirit of God. Whoever has that, whether rich or poor, whether old or young, whether honored or obscure, whether in adverse or in prosperous circumstances, is happy; for it produces joy and peace in the bosom of the one who possesses it. But without it a person cannot be truly happy, even if he or she should have the wealth of the world at command. Give such a person a palace to live in, and every luxury that money can procure, with carriages and horses, and servants to perform every service, and yet he or she will not be happy as the poor man or woman who has the Spirit of the Lord.

Love for worldly things a great evil. The love of worldly substances is an evil which has always troubled mankind. People always have sought to obtain this substance; they still seek for it, because they think it desirable and that it brings happiness and gratification. . . . One of the greatest causes of the downfall of young women is their fondness for dress and display. . . . Statistics . . . show that more women are led astray by this cause in this country than by any other. How horrible to think of that women would part with virtue for the sake of fine dress! And it is the same with men. To gratify lust, to wear fine clothes, to have money to spend, men will sacrifice virtue and every manly quality.

Corrupting influence of wealth. We dread the increase of wealth among the Latter-day Saints, for the reason that it has a corrupting effect upon men and women. If we could be organized as God designs we shall be, we should not have these fears; but at the present time our society is in the same condition as all society is in Babylon. Each man works for himself and for his family. If he is a good money-maker his own family alone, in the most of instances, gets the benefit of it; and as wealth increases among us, we are divided into classes as the people are in Babylon.

Should this continue to be the condition of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, it could not fill its mission on the earth, for sooner or later it would become like the society of the earth from which its members have been gathered. The corrupting influences of riches has destroyed many nations; it would have a bad effect upon us. . . .

Wealth is a blessing when properly used. It adds to comfort; it contributes to happiness, and it enlarges usefulness. But when it is improperly used, it becomes an injury. When people set their affections upon it, are made vain and proud by it, think themselves a little better than their neighbor because of it, then it becomes a curse. When men and women and their children can dress better than their neighbors, can live in finer and more elegantly furnished houses, can have better education and finer horses and carriages and, because of their advantages, took down upon others who do not have them, they are in an unfortunate position and are to be pitied. With such feelings wealth does not bring happiness. (June 1, 1882, JI 17:168)

All to benefit from talent of business men. The time must come when the talent of men of business shall be used for the benefit of this whole people, just as the talent of President Taylor, just as the talent of President Joseph F. Smith and that of President Wilford Woodruff, and that of the Twelve Apostles, and that of the leading Elders of this Church; as their talent is used for the benefit of Zion, so must the talent of men who are gifted with business capacity be used in like manner—not for individual benefit alone, not for individual aggrandizement alone, but for the benefit of the whole people, to uplift the masses, to rescue them from their poverty. That is one of the objects in establishing Zion, and anything short of that . . . is not Zion. (Oct. 8, 1882, JD 23:281-82)

The trial of prosperity. We are to be tried in all things, and sooner or later we must be tested by prosperity and plenty. Many people who remained faithful Latter-day Saints while they were poor may be unable to stand when they are rich. Riches has a very corrupting effect upon the human heart, and it requires a very pure people to be as honest, virtuous, humble and upright when surrounded by luxury and wealth as when they are in poor and destitute circumstances.

Yet, the Lord has said that the riches of the earth are His; He has promised to give the earth and the dominion thereof to His Saints. But He will not give these to His people to destroy them. No; they must learn to use but not to abuse these blessings. They must not put their hearts upon them or be corrupted by them.

But how can the Saints be saved from this? If other people and nations have been corrupted by wealth and luxury and gone to destruction, is there not danger of the Latter-day Saints meeting with a similar fate when they become rich? If they were to feel and act as many other people, there would be great danger of their going as they have gone and are going. But the Lord has revealed the Gospel to save them from this fate. . . .

We are stewards. If you always remember that your lives, your ability, the food you eat, the water you drink, the clothes you wear, the earth you tread, the air you breathe, are all the Lord's, you may be useful. Of course, if you know that all these things are the Lord's, and that He has placed His servants to teach you His will, you will do what He tells you, through those servants, with the means that you may have. Then, whether you are rich or poor will make no difference. All your property, whether much or little, will be disposed of by you as He may dictate. You will look upon yourselves as stewards, and if you have a hundred dollars in your hands, you will say, this is the Lord's, and if He wants it, He can have it. If you have a million dollars, you will feel the same. And where people have this feeling, riches cannot hurt them. Latter-day Saints must have this kind of faith and feeling, or they cannot build up Zion and be the people the Lord is desirous they should be. (Apr. 15, 1871, JI 6:60)

Must cleave unto God. When we have an abundance of everything that is necessary for our comfort and convenience, we do not feel our dependence upon our God as we do under other circumstances. When times are pleasant, when there is no persecution, when there are no arrests made and no disposition to send the people to prison, or to commit other acts of infamy or outrage upon them, then there is not the same feeling of anxiety and the same desire to seek unto God and to beseech Him for His power to be extended to us that there would be or is when we are in peril. When in peril we feel that we must cleave unto God, that we must seek unto him earnestly to receive His aid and deliverance. (May 26, 1889, DW 38:709)

Prosperity brings great dangers. Our Prophets have predicted that when the time should arrive for this people to be tried with prosperity, then they would be in great danger. I have heard this prediction uttered hundreds of times, until it has almost become like an old story with us. I heard the Prophet Joseph say, when he was living, that the time would come that this people would be tried with abundance; but he warned them to be careful of these things.

The Lord has told us, through the revelations which He gave to Joseph, that it must needs be that the riches of the earth were His to give to His people; "but," He said, "beware of pride, lest ye become as the Nephites of old." (D&C 38:39.) This was the warning God gave to us years ago, and it has been repeated in our ears from that time until the present, and still there is a great necessity that we should treasure it up in our hearts and often reflect upon it. . . .

Here we are, and the world are seeking to mingle with us, and they are becoming uncommonly gracious unto us, as a people; they can smile upon us and be kind unto us. They would have us believe that they welcome us warmly to their smiles and friendship.

Friendship of world dreaded. There is danger in this; this is the danger that the Prophets have dreaded. It is an insidious danger that comes creeping like a snake through the grass and pounces upon us before we are aware of its proximity. But stir us up, as a people, by persecution and abuse, and there is no power on earth we would not unitedly stand against. Through the help of God we have successfully resisted every power that has been arrayed against us. Let the enemy come out against us as an open antagonist, and he finds us an impenetrable phalanx that cannot be moved.

Our danger is not in this; but it lies in our being found asleep and off our watch tower, unsuspecting and unprepared for the enemies' most subtle attacks. It is in scenes like these that we are required to be the more watchful, and in times like these that we are required the more to have the power of God upon us and the revelations of Jesus Christ in our hearts, or we are sure to be overcome. . . . There is danger, and there is a necessity for us to be up and have our eyes open to the signs of the times and the danger that menaces us and that threatens to ensnare our feet.

Indifference weakens resistance to evil. I have no fears if we will only obey the counsel of God's servants, if we will only listen diligently to those things which they impart unto us and honor their teachings and be attentive to our duties. But when I see Saints indifferent about their meetings, passing their Sundays without caring whether they hear instructions or not, and their religion becomes a secondary consideration with them, then I am afraid for such individuals, because they are not in a position to resist the attacks of that tempter, who is continually watching to destroy us and the Work of God from off the face of the earth.

Must meet and overcome trials in all things. The Lord our God is working with us; He is trying us, probably with trials of a new sort that He may approve of us in every respect. If we have set out to obtain celestial glory, the precious and inestimable gift of eternal lives, there is no trial necessary for our purification and perfection as Saints of God that we will not have to meet, contend with and overcome. Such trials will come in various shapes, on the right hand and on the left, whether they be in having everything move on prosperously, or in adversity, hardship and the laying down of our lives for the truth, until the design is fully accomplished and the dross of our natures is purified and these earthly tabernacles are redeemed from everything that is groveling and low and brought into entire subjection to the mind and will of God. (Oct. 23, 1864, JD 10:346-47)

Provide good houses. A woman looks upon a house as a matter of much more importance than a man does. It is her home, And when I see wives in houses of a poor class when their husbands might build better, I think their husbands do not understand woman's nature as they should do. Women with families should have good houses, and husbands should labor to get them, and then leave them to adorn them and make them comfortable and desirable. Children like to have a nice house, because they can invite their companions to it. Men should strive to make their families comfortable in this way. It is their duty to do so. (June 20, 1883, JD 24:225)

Lord watches over treasures of earth. Unless the Lord is willing to grant us wealth, it will be impossible for us to get it. He can lock up or unlock the treasures of the earth at His will. Years before any gold or silver mines were discovered in this region, President Young used to say publicly that he could stand in his doorway and see localities where there were the richest kind of mineral deposits. Yet, he did not seek to obtain these treasures. He doubtless knew it would be useless for him to attempt it. The time had not come for the Saints to possess them. In a sermon which President Young delivered June 17, 1877, he said:

These treasures that are in the earth are carefully watched, they can be removed from place to place according to the good pleasure of Him who made them and owns them. He has His messengers at His service, and it is just as easy for an angel to remove the minerals from any part of one of these mountains to another, as it is for you and me to walk up and down this hall. This, however, is not understood by the Christian world, nor by us as a people. There are certain circumstances that a number of my brethren and sisters have heard me relate, that will demonstrate this so positively, that none need doubt the truth of what I say. (JD 19:36-37) (Feb. 1, 1880, JI 15:30)
