Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 49

America—A God-Inspired Nation

America kept hidden by Lord. This is a sacred land. It is a land choice above all other lands upon the face of the earth. It was kept hidden from the nations for long centuries, and the reason for this has been given to us; it was that the land might not be overrun by the nations of the earth, and that it might be reserved for the great drama of the last days. It is a remarkable thing, and we would be incapable of understanding the reason why this land had been hidden for so many centuries from the knowledge of the nations of the earth if the Lord had not revealed it. . . .

The knowledge of it was completely hidden, as completely as if it did not belong to our globe. Navigators sailed to and fro; but through the long centuries that elapsed from the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel, when the inhabitants of the earth were scattered, until the time that Columbus, inspired of God, went from court to court, pleading with the governments of nations to give him the means to penetrate the ocean and find what he supposed was the Indies—during all that time the knowledge of this land was kept from all the nations of the earth.

Is not this wonderful? How can we account for it? There is only one way, and that is the way the Lord accounts for it; He tells us through His servant that the knowledge of this land should be kept from all the nations of the earth, because if it were not they would overrun the land. It was a land too choice to be left unoccupied, possessed of too many of those elements that enrich individuals and peoples. The nations of the earth would have swarmed here by the hundreds of thousands, and there would have been no place found upon the land for the people who now possess the land. There would have been no room for the Church of Christ, no room for the Kingdom of God, no room for the gathering of the millions that will yet come to Zion, to build up the Kingdom of God on this land to prepare the way for the establishment of the New Jerusalem; for this is the favored land upon which the New Jerusalem will be established.

We, therefore, can see today how the Lord has prepared the way for the gathering of the people from all the nations of the earth, and how His providence has been over this choice land above all other lands. There is plenty of room here, not crowding upon anybody, not compelled to come as conquerors have in other ages who have overrun other lands and driven out or destroyed the people who occupied the land, in order that they might possess it. No necessity for this, for God has made abundant provisions.

This land reserved for restoration of Gospel. He has kept in reserve this glorious land, in order that in the last days His Kingdom could be established, and that under the inspiration which He should give a government might be founded—a government of liberty, a government of freedom, giving to all the utmost liberty they could desire, and promising to those who should possess the land many precious things; for He has told us that none should be brought here except they should come by His permission. Therefore, the emigration that has come from the beginning, and that is still coming, comes by the permission of the Almighty. He is watching over it, and He will control it and bring to pass His purposes in connection with it. He has told us that if we will only worship the God of this land, Jesus Christ, we cannot be brought into bondage or into captivity by any other nation.

America's future depends on righteousness. The powers of Europe may band together and indulge in hopes of conquering this nation; but the Lord has said—and it will be fulfilled if we do right—that they will be defeated in all their schemes, and this shall be a land of liberty unto the righteous. This nation of ours, so glorious in its past, so glorious in its prospects of the future, will stand and never be overthrown, unless the inhabitants of the land reject Jesus Christ, the King and the God of the land.

Now, we know the conditions upon which victory will be assured to us as a nation. If this nation had listened to Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, if they had been counseled by him, God would have adopted this nation and its government, and made it His, for the promises are to that effect. Now, what the future will be depends upon the conduct of those who possess the land and upon the administration of affairs in the land. (Apr. 10, 1898, CR 84-85)

A blessed land. This land is a blessed land unto all the inhabitants of the earth who will act righteously, but is and will be cursed to those who will not. There is a curse and a blessing upon the land. No nation can prosper in this land that works unrighteousness, and it is a painful thing to say that our own nation, unless it repents, will meet with disasters sooner or later. It pains us to say this, but it is true. God has said it. It will be true about us. This land can only be blessed to us if we work righteously. Let us turn round and oppress the weak and do wrong, and God will curse the land to us. There will be trouble in the land among the inhabitants of the earth as long as they work wickedness, just as sure as God has spoken.

A God-inspired nation. There has been no nation prospered as our nation has. No government was ever framed by man that is so strong and so good and well adapted to the happiness of human beings as our government is. There never was a better instrument framed for the happiness of man than the Constitution of the United States. The men who framed it were inspired of God. The men who fought the battles of the Revolution were the same. Washington was inspired of God; he was sustained by the almighty arm of God; and the defeats that the mother country received were in accordance with the plan of God. This land was kept for this purpose. For centuries it was hidden from all the nations of the earth. . . .

Those who contended for liberty in early days were men who desired to serve the Lord. They may have been mistaken in many things, but they were zealous in this and devoted to it, and many of them were willing that every human being should have the rights that they contended for themselves. (Nov. 20, 1881, JD 23:102)

Christopher Columbus—a God-inspired man. It is an easy matter to talk now about the discovery of America and imagine how easy of accomplishment it was; but at the time the voyage of Columbus was performed it was the most daring adventure that could be thought of. It required the inspiration of the Almighty to enable Columbus to perform such a voyage. Attempts have been made to prove that Scandinavians discovered America long before the voyage of Columbus. Whether they did or not, it is of but little moment, so far as the nations of Europe are concerned. It was the voyage of Columbus that opened the new world, and that made clear the pathway by which this continent could be reached and be peopled by the white races of Europe.

The Book of Mormon thus speaks of the discovery of the continent in the description of the vision which Nephi had of the future: "And I looked and beheld a man among the Gentiles, who was separated from the seed of my brethren by the many waters; and I beheld the Spirit of God that it came down and wrought upon the man; and he went forth upon the many waters, even unto the seed of my brethren, who were in the promised land." (1 Nephi 13:12.)

It is a remarkable fact that investigation has proved that Columbus declared that he was called of God to make this voyage. He professed to be the messenger of the Blessed Trinity, called by God to discover countries in the West. There were many ideas connected with this in his mind which were incorrect. He does not seem to have conceived the idea that he was to be the discoverer of a new continent; but he supposed, and probably during his life was never undeceived on that point, that the lands which he had discovered were the eastern part of Asia. Among the arguments which he used to convince Queen Isabella, who was a strong and ardent Catholic and zealous for the propagation of that faith, was that he was called by God to fulfill certain important prophecies before the destruction of the world. All the blessings of the "true faith" were to be brought from Spain to peoples not yet known, so that all nations might be gathered under the banner of Christianity.

Among his records is found the following statement: "I have associated with scientific men, clerical and lay, and the Latin Church and the Greek, with the Jews and Moors, and many others. To that end the Lord gave me the spirit to understand. In the science of navigation he endowed me richly; of astronomy, and also geometry and arithmetic he gave me what was necessary."

On another occasion he wrote: "I came to your Majesty as the Messenger of the Blessed Trinity. . . . Notwithstanding all the troubles that befell me I was certain that my undertaking would succeed, and I held firmly to this opinion for all else will perish, save only the word of God; and indeed God speaks very clearly of these lands by the mouth of Isaiah in many passages of holy writ, and He declares that the knowledge of His Holy name shall be spread through the lands from Spain."

It required such a man as Columbus, inspired of the Lord, to accomplish this great work. His ideas were ridiculed and scoffed at, but he never relinquished them. With that perseverance which the Lord gives to those whom He raises up to accomplish great works, he could not be discouraged.

King Ferdinand never took a warm interest in the scheme of Columbus; and the honor of aiding this man, upon whom Nephi saw the Spirit of God descend, belongs to Queen Isabella, a noble representative of her sex.

There is a story that the crew mutinied against Columbus and were determined to turn back. They were frightened at the distance they had sailed, and saw no prospect of discovering the land which Columbus assured them they would find. A compact, it is said, was entered into between Columbus and the mutineers, by the terms of which Columbus was given three days' grace. If in that time the ocean did not reveal its secrets, he was to turn back. It is stated that on October 7th, when the voyage had lasted a month, Columbus was induced to steer no longer due west, but to turn in a southwesterly direction. Columbus yielded reluctantly to his clamorous and faint-hearted crew in thus changing his course, and then signs of land near at hand began to multiply, and everyone was on the lookout, in the hope of being the first to see the shore, for the Queen had promised a reward of 10,000 maravedis (about $30 of our money) to the man who should first set eyes on the long-sought-for land. They landed on one of the islands of the Bahama group.

It is stated that if Columbus had been permitted to pursue his original due west course, he would have first reached the coast of North Carolina. But it was ordered otherwise. Had he done so, the present United States would have then been the heritage of Ferdinand and Isabella. There was a Providence undoubtedly in this, guiding his movements. . . .

In all these events the Latter-day Saints can see the hand of the Almighty. To them every step taken has a meaning. They can perceive how plainly the Lord guided this man and these nations in order to bring about the fulfillment of His purposes. No people on the earth can truly take greater interest in the celebration of Discovery Day [Columbus Day], than the Latter-day Saints. (Oct. 15, 1892, JI 27:626-27)

A most glorious government. It is true that it has not always been a land of liberty to the Latter-day Saints. We have suffered from wrongs and oppressions. The principles embodied in the Declaration of Independence—that glorious instrument which was proclaimed on July 4th, 1776—and afterwards embodied in the Constitution of the United States, are broad and liberal enough to satisfy every reasonable human being and, when carried out and maintained, make our government the most glorious for human freedom and the development of human beings of any government on the face of the earth. Under no other form of government could the Latter-day Saints have been protected by the organic law of the land as they have been in America. In assisting the fathers of our country it was the design of the Almighty Father to frame a form of government under which it would be possible for the Church to live and enjoy all those rights which were necessary for the accomplishment of His purposes. . . .

Inspired men raised up. When the time came for the discovery of the land, the Lord moved upon Christopher Columbus and made him an instrument to bring to light the western hemisphere. In like manner the colonies which afterwards became the United States were formed under His direction, His providence was over them, and the seeds of religious freedom were sown by the men whom He led to this land as an asylum of refuge from the tyrannies of the old nations. The love of liberty was fostered until it brought forth the important fruits which were witnessed in the Declaration of Independence, in the Constitution of the United States and in the formation of a great nation.

The men who were the instruments in performing these great works were inspired of the Lord to accomplish that which they did. This is easily perceived in reading the history of those times. In many instances, probably, they themselves were unconscious of the fact that the Lord had raised them up for that end. Thomas Paine, who is known throughout Christendom as an unbeliever in religion, was no doubt inspired to take the part he did in propagating the principles of liberty. If he had been told so, he might not have believed it; but undoubtedly the Lord was with him, and with Thomas Jefferson, who also was skeptical, and other men who had but little or no faith in God. They laid the foundation of this magnificent structure, this glorious form of government, the corner stone of which was religious freedom—freedom for all to believe as they please, and to carry that belief into practice, so long as it did not interfere with the rights of their fellowmen.

A cause for rejoicing. Notwithstanding the wrongs we ourselves may have suffered, we of all people have the greatest cause to rejoice in Independence Day. We should always honor it and revere the memories of the men who "pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor" on that memorable 4th of July, to maintain the cause of liberty. They made sacrifices for posterity, and they did so with true courage and unyielding determination. God was with them in their counsels and in their battles, and He gave them power to accomplish the purposes for which they started out. They were a poor people, destitute of resources, but they were sustained by the Lord, and were able to hold their own against the mightiest nation then on the earth, and to obtain from that proud power a recognition of their rights and of the government they had framed.

Our children should value the labors of the fathers of the country, and honor the day which they made so glorious by their Declaration of Independence. . . .

Blessed above all other lands. Again we have another mighty nation possessing this land. What nation can compare with ours in its growth, its prosperity, and in the power which God has given to it? The growth of this nation is simply marvelous. . . . Wealth has increased to an unexampled extent in a very brief period. Everything that could be desired to make a nation great and prosperous and happy has been bestowed upon this American Republic.

If the people would live righteously and serve the God of the land, there would be no limit to the blessings bestowed upon them; but if they turn to iniquity and yield to sin, the judgments of the Lord will assuredly fall upon them, and it will be with them as it was with the nations that have preceded them. . . .

A nation so favored of heaven as this is, a people inhabiting a land so greatly blessed above all other lands, cannot reject the Lord, who gives them these blessings, without incurring His displeasure. While He gives the most glorious promises to the righteous, on the other hand He threatens the severest judgments if the people turn to iniquity.

One advantage that we have is that we have been informed of these promises and these threats, and we can receive the fulfillment of the promises, if we live according to the conditions upon which they are based. If we are righteous, we must prosper. Nothing can prevent it. But should we be unrighteous, we shall be scourged.

We need have no fear as to the final results. Unrighteousness will bring its punishment, nor will it be deferred. The wrath of God will be poured out upon the ungodly. But, those who keep the commandments of God can rejoice in blessings present and prospective. (July 15, 1891, JI 26:445-47)

Hand of Providence manifested. In looking back on the past history of our race, there is to be discovered the hand of Providence very visibly manifested in every event that has taken place for centuries. We can see the providences of God leading and guiding the affairs of men to the grand consummation effected by the men of '76. He is a dull student of history who fails to recognize in all the events which have taken place the hand of an over-ruling Providence.

When we peruse the history of the nation from which our forefathers sprang, we can see how visibly God over-ruled circumstances to raise up a free people. From the days of Magna Charta down to the Revolution of 1688, events were shaped to bring to pass the emancipation of the human mind from the thraldom under which it had groaned.

The Reformation came in; men's minds were prepared for it. There seemed to be a peculiar combination of circumstances favorable to the development of religious inquiry. Men were disposed to throw off the shackles with which the human mind and intellect had been enthralled; they were disposed to examine and investigate and reject that which did not appeal to their reason and which was not sustained by their judgment. . . .

We believe that the Declaration of Independence was inspired by Almighty God, and that the men who framed and proclaimed it were raised up and inspired for this special purpose. This is the estimate which we place upon these documents; hence, it will be instantly perceived that we can do nought else than uphold them, carry out their principles, and hand them down to our children as the most precious legacy we can bequeath to them. . . .

Every nation benefitted by the Revolution. It was not America alone which felt the benign influences resulting from the efforts of the Revolutionary Fathers. Every nation in Christendom and upon the face of the earth has been benefitted to a greater or less extent by their struggles, sacrifices and victories. . . . From the throes of our Revolution, from the sufferings and sacrifices of the Revolutionary Fathers, was begotten a spirit of liberty that has spread throughout the earth. Nations afar have felt it; its leaven has entered into their political systems, and has had a tendency to relieve the oppressed; and so long as this Republic endures, so long will the love of liberty be cherished in the hearts of the down-trodden of every land, and they will be benefitted to an extent they would not realize were this government not in existence. In fighting, therefore, the battles of American Independence the Revolutionary Fathers fought the battles of mankind; they fought for liberty in every land, and the example which they gave to the nations never has nor never will be forgotten. (July 24, 1871, MS 33:483-85)

The Declaration of Independence should be familiar to every child of our land, and the principles which it announced should be engrafted in the minds of all. They should be preserved by us in their original purity and transmitted to our children after us without being in the least impaired. (June 15, 1881, JI 16:138)

Founding Fathers not ordinary men. We reverence their memories and desire to emulate their great example in risking all for right. To our view they are more than ordinary men; we recognize in them the direct instruments of Heaven, chosen and inspired to raise aloft the standard of liberty under which men from every clime and of every creed could dwell in peace and security, so long as they did not interfere with the rights of their fellow-men. Others, while watching their struggles and progress, could see the foundation being laid of institutions to secure to mankind the largest possible amount of liberty and happiness; but we go beyond that. We know that the Almighty; through the agencies of the revolution, prepared the way for the establishment of His own Eternal Kingdom—that Kingdom in which the grandest prophecies of human freedom ever sung by angel, Prophet or inspired tongue will be realized. (July 4, 1870, DNW 19:259)

Foundations for stable government. The teachings from the platform and in the schools have been that the men who framed the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, and who took part in the councils and battles of the Revolution, were especially inspired and sustained by the Almighty, and that those instruments are the foundations upon which stable government for all time, upon this continent, must rest. Joseph Smith, whom they took upon as a Prophet, taught this; and since his day others have constantly repeated the teaching. Persecution never weakened their attachment to the principles of free government, and, when they fled as religious exiles to the Rocky Mountains, they did not forget they were American citizens. They hoisted the Stars and Stripes, and announced their determination to live under the Constitution of their fathers. But they claimed for the Constitution powers which others did not think it possessed.

When expelled from a State under an exterminating order of its governor, they held that the Federal Government, by virtue of the Constitution, had the power to protect and re-instate its citizens in their rights. Martin Van Buren, when appealed to as the chief executive, thought differently. The State was sovereign and could not be reached; and he replied: "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you." (History of the Church 4:40, 80.) The people claimed then, as now, for the Constitution, that it was designed to protect the humblest citizen in every right of liberty and of worship that did not disturb good order or interfere with the peace and happiness of others. (Oct. 24, 1881, MS 43:676)
