Various authors, Writings of Early Latter-day Saints

Bathsheba W. Smith, Letters, LDS Church Archives

Bathsheba Wilson Bigler Smith, 1822-1910 Letters to George A. Smith. Church Archives.

Source: Letters of Bathsheba Wilson Bigler to George A. Smith, cited in Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982). LETTERS OF BATHSHEBA WILSON BIGLER SMITH

Mr. George A. Smith Nauvoo, Illinois, October 12th, 1842

My Dear Companion, I sit down this morning to write you a few lines--and feel thankful to my Heavenly Father that I have the privilege. We are well this morning and in midling good spirits. Some little disappointed. I had given way to a faint hope that you would return with Brother [Brigham] Young. Your father said he [thought] it was likely you would, but I was sadly disappointed when I found not a single line from you. Brother Young hallowed to me and told me you was well and if I wished to send you a line to bring it to his house this evening. Truly that much was a satisfaction to me.

George Albert was sick last Saturday and Sunday. He had quite a fever. I was very uneasy about him. I was afraid he was going to have the fever. I took him to the fount and had him baptized and since then he has not had any fever. He is about well now. Looks a little pale. I anointed him with oil a good many times and washed his little body with whiskey and water which was burning with fever but it did not do the good I wanted it should. I have written to you, this will be four times but William did not take one I wrote for him to take. Brother [George J.] Adams said he would] take one for me, but I did not much expect it would reach you there. But I have thought since it has. Whether you write or not I will be very apt to trouble you with a line every time I have the chance. I saw your father Friday. They were all well. Had received a letter from you. I do not know what to write that will be the most satisfactory to you. Brother Young will tell you all that is going on.

I have got my corn and fodder secured, broom corn, [sunflower] seed and beans likewise. Melissa and me did it. Gilbert I expect will dig my potatoes. Uncle George is going to Keokuc [Iowa] to live. Brother [Wilford] Woodruff to [be], I expect my most [sociable] neighbor. Their baby has been very sick. Mary Ann has the ague [some?] since Jacob went away. Nancy's children has been sick. Thadeas is now sick. [Jeremiah] is very low with the fever. Brother Alpheas and Jesse Harmon have gone. Appleton [Harmon] intends to go tomorrow. Mother Johnson sends her best love to you. Melissa likewise, and so do I. Brother Lightle says he has bespoke a man to plaster my house and he will find lime and sand and hair. I think of getting the two rooms plastered. Brother Canada was here last [Saturday] but one. Said he would bring some wheat here and get it growned [ground] and let me have some flower. Said he would bring a half a bushel of salt and some sugar. I stay at home. Am afraid to go to meeting. Been a visiting once at mothers. I have had so many melons and my dear was not here to help eat them. Oh I am so lonesome, all alone only [except] baby. (The writer guiding the baby's hand) I is a good boy. I write to you. G. A. Smith, Jr. (I do not no whether you can read baby's writing). BWS. [on margin] Write every chance. You do not know how I want to see you.

Mr. George A. Smith, New York City, New York; Sabbath morning, Nauvoo, July 16th, 1843.

My Dear [husband], I sit down this morning to address you with a few lines and I pray my Heavenly Father that these lines may find you in good health and spirits, and likewise the rest of the brethren. My health is midling good at present. I have had a very severe cold but have got nearly over it. The baby is quite sick with a cold. He had a very hot fever last night. Father will lay hands on him as he goes to meeting. There are a great many complaining with colds. It is called the influenza. Caroline has been sick with a cold but is better now. Sister [Vilate] Kimball told me Doctor [John M.] Burnhisel was a going to New York the middle of next week. He said he would carry letters to New York for us. I have not much to write for I have not heard much since you left. It seems a long time although I think I have got along quite as well as could be expected. Your Father visits us everyday. They were all to dinner one day with me. We had a plenty beans, peas, beets, and such like things. [Oh] if you could have been here we would have been quite happy.

I wish I could have been with you and stayed until you started for it seemed such a long time until the boat came. I thought perhaps you would come home again a few minutes, but I was disappointed. I wanted to see you very much. I would have gone to you if I could. [Oh] my Dear it is nothing to cry when one feels as I did when I saw the boat going down. I was pleased to think you would not have to wait any longer, but then how could I bare to have it carry you off so rapidly from me. I watched it until I could not see it any longer then I held my head for it ached. Soon your father and mother came in. George A. cries pa. He feels bad. He wants to see you. He often goes to the door to see you. When we say where is Father, he will say a da pa. Brother [Alvin] Hor has brought me a load of wood. Everything has passed on smoothly since you left as yet. I want to hear from you very much. Trust I may soon. I will close for the present.

Sabbath morning, July the 23--Dearest Albert, as Doctor Burnhisel has not gone as yet I again have the privilege of writing to you this morning. My health and spirits are good. George A. has had the measles in addition to his cold and cutting teeth. He has been quite sick but is getting well fast. He begins to play and crawl about again. I expect he was exposed to the measles on the fourth of July. I have not went to meeting since you left but stay at home. Sickness has kept me, if nothing else, but I think home is the best place for me, this hot weather. Joseph [Smith] preached last Sunday. I should liked to have been there very much. He preaches again today.

Brother Far gave me a letter you sent me last Friday. He said you were all in good spirits. I shall not attempt to express the joy that I felt when he gave it to me. When I read you had been sick, I felt very bad for I feared you had not got over it yet or you might take cold again. I expect it was the influenza the same I had. I began to be sick the day you left, Saturday, Sunday and Monday I was quite sick, but thank the lord I am well again as usual, and think my baby will be soon. I hope and pray you are well by this time. I should be pleased to spend this afternoon with you. It seems to me I could not wish to enjoy myself better than to sit under the sound of your rich and lovely voice and hear you unfold the rich treasure of your mind. Even the sound of your footstep would music in my ear. I almost forget I am alone, whilst I fancy to myself how happy I should be. The baby is waking. I must quit writing for the present.

Wednesday, July 26th. Dearest George A., I am well and in good spirits but want to see you very much. I cannot help liking to see the time roll away. Little George Albert is nearly well. Has three more teeth. Sister Ridge and Barton are both dead, died in Fortmaddison [Iowa]. Our folks have had a letter from Jacob [G. Bigler]. He writes he has gained the lawsuit. Their is no telling when he will] get the money, for the land will have to be sold perhaps on six or twelve months credit. Our garden stands the drought as well as any ones I have seen. We have had two or three small rains since you left. Our well holds out first rate. All the neighbor's come here for water. I saw Sister [Phebe] Woodruff yesterday. She said she would write by mail for Dr. Bernhisel kept putting off starting so much. I think he will go soon. She said she would write some for me so that would answer without me writing by mail.

August 11th, 1843. Tuesday morning.

Dearest, G. A. we are all well this morning with the exception of Melissa. She has the measles but is getting better. I received your very kind letter yesterday. I was very happy to hear you were well and in good spirits. Amasa Lyman is sick. Your father's about like you was last winter. John is a going to school. They are all well. They are all very kind to me. I feel in good spirits. Think it will not be long until I see you. I think I shall be able to get the house plastered soon. Dr. Barnhisel has given up going for a while yet so I will send it by mail. He has disappointed us all very much. We will try to be good children whilst you are gone. G. A. can go up stairs alone, but cannot walk quite yet. Yesterday I received a skein of yarn sent to you by Rosell H. Smith, Brown County, Illinois. Your father says it is your cousin. Doctor [Levi] Richards was here yesterday. Says tell you we are all alive in Nauvoo only [except] those that are dead. He said tell you he had been hear, then he laughed. I think he [thought] of what he said to you. Remain as ever yours sincerely B. W. Smith.

Mr. George A. Smith, Boston, Massachusetts., Nauvoo, September [12th], 1843.

Dear Husband, I sit down to write to you again to inform you that we are all well at present and in first rate spirits. I received a letter from you yesterday, you wrote me in Philadelphia which gave me great satisfaction, for a line from you is the sweetest morsel I can possibly get. I should like to have been with you and have seen the things you wrote about much, but I feel like I should be satisfied if I could see you without seeing anymore. The time rolls away tolerable swiftly. I hope it is half gone. My prayer is that you may get home before cold weather sits in.

We got the letter you sent to President [Sidney] Rigdon last Sunday which we was much pleased to get. When I get a letter first all the rest come to hear it. The brethren's wives have all been to see me this week. They are all well. I do not think there is much sickness. There is not in our neighborhood. We have had several good rains or midling good rains. I think our garden will be tolerable good. Our potatoes are poor. Vines are quite good. We begin to have plenty of melons which make many hearts rejoice and ours are made glad. We have a plenty of tomatoes. George Albert feasts on tomatoes and melons. He begins to walk and talk. I think I shall wean him before you get home. He has had the bowel and cankel complaint very bad but is well now. I think it hindered his walking. He has only six teeth as yet.

Our well is dry. We have to go to the Bishop's for the last few days. Our cow does midling well. She does not go in the [drove] for she cannot get anymore on the prairie than she can get at home. She comes home every night very well. With your father's [and] others help I shall be enabled to get our house plastered next week. Expect I have got it lathed upstairs with the exceptions of the largest room overhead. I got 10 bushel of lyme of [William?] Nyswanger and Uncle [Isaac] Morley got sand and made the morter yesterday. I had money to get hair and nails with the exceptions of one pickoon [picayune] which Melissa let me have. Josiah let me have fifty feet of lumber and Amos did the carpenter work. Brother Moss is sick. He cannot plaster the house. Brother [Samuel] Flag says he will. Ickabad got me a gallon of whiskey for pickles. My cowcumbers do well. He said he would get some flower and honey and candles as he could as well as not, but has not as yet. I am about out of flower now. Father has brought nearly one bushel of [meal] since you left. Have plenty as yet. Caleb promised to bring me home the flower he borrowed this week. I think there is not any danger but I shall get along.

Father and I thought perhaps you would get this before you left Boston and if not no harm done. I have had a fine ride in Joseph's big carriage. Went six or [eight] miles out. Amasa Lyman and family are at your Fathers. Have been there two or three weeks. Amasa was very sick but is so as to ride out now. His wife has the ague and fever. The children have had it but are well now I believe. Perhaps your father will want to write some. Mr. Brown and Melissa talk so fast and so much it bothers me to write. You must excuse this and look over all my imperfection. I am as ever yours in time and for eternity. Bathsheba W. Smith.

[There follows a short note to George A. Smith from his father, John Smith.]

Mr. George A. Smith, Boston, Massachusetts., Nauvoo, June 15th, 1844.

Dear Husband, I again take my pen to inform you we are well, and most earnestly desire this letter may find you so. We are just done mopping and cleaning the house. Melissa has made or fixed three fine flower pots. We have got some new window curtains. We are a going to have a good dinner. We have some apples a stewing for pies. Sister [Catherine] Clawson has just sent word for us to not get dinner, for she would send us some roasted veal. Oh how I wish you could take dinner and chat an hour or two with us at least. We have been to the post office again and again but cannot get one word from you. How I do wish I did know you were well. I think I will get a letter tomorrow. I expected one certain last Wednesday. I sent but no letter. I thought you must be sick or you would have written, for I have been uneasy about you for you had to ride in the rain so much. At last I thought perhaps you had written to your father and thought he would send it to me if you were scarce of money, but the roads have been so bad, the bridges are most all washed away that it is all most impossible to go to or come from Messedonia [Macedonia] here. Or perhaps the roads are bad [other] places so that the mail might be hindered. I flatter myself with these and other things that you are well and so I [thought] I would write to Boston and perhaps you would get it.

Uncle Asel Smith has been here and ate dinner with us. He says his family are well. He said he was much pleased to see us so well, and getting along so well. I have not heard from father's for some time. They were well the last I heard. Father sent me a quarter of a dollar he got for your books. George has gone to sleep and now I can finish my letter. He is quite well. Can walk nicely, begins to talk considerably, begins to look healthy, eats hearty, laughs a good deal, is not half so much trouble stands on his stool to eat, has a plate to himself. Will not sleep with me more than half the time. Some time he will come in the bed an hour or two and be satisfied, but if I take him to bed with me it is against his will. So much for George. He often talks about you. I think he will not forget you. We have had a great deal of rain since you left. Almost everyday for seven weeks it has rained, a great many hard rains. Our cellar has water a considerable here than the offset or the highest part. The well is very full likewise. We have had the garden plowed. It looks very well but would [do] better if it did not rain so much. The worms trouble all the neighbor's gardens, but have not mine but little. A great many people have had more or less out of our garden such as lettuce, onions, radishes and greens. Indeed I do not know what they would have done if it were not for us. But to get anyone to work in it is like pulling eye teeth. Our early potatoes are getting quite large. The corn is in tossel. Cabbage looks well. Vines rather poor. Tomatoes in blow. Beets quite large. Will soon have peas. A good many of our flowers are in blossom. Our cow has had the hollow horn. I believe she is well now. I have sold six pounds of butter since you left.

Their has been some excitement in town, but I do not feel alarmed. The lawites [William and Wilson Law and their associates] had got their printing press a going. Had printed one paper [Nauvoo Expositor], and a scandalous thing it was. The City Council examined its lease and found it a nuisance so the [authorities] went and burned and destroyed the press. This made the Lawites mad. They tried to get a mob but failed. Joseph and those that were concerned in it have been tried but were cleared. The Laws and a good many have gone and are going off.

I have not been to meeting since you left on the hill. I have been twice down to the meeting in Joseph's storehouse. I do not go anywhere much. My health has been quite good ever since you left. I enjoy myself pretty well. Would better if I could hear from you oftener. I received to [two] letters dated May 13th and a few lines May 21st. I have written three times. I do not know whether Sister Woodruff will write or not. I saw her this morning. She was well. I hope I will see you in two months from this day the Lord willing. Be of good cheer and come home when you think best. You may be sure I will be pleased, let that be when it will. May the Lord bless you and bring you home safe in health and prosperity. I remain yours affectionately. BWS [This follows a short note by Melissa Bigler]

Sister [Phebe] Woodruff has not received any word from [Brother Woodruff] since the 21st of May. She and I see each other and counsel about writing and wonder why we cannot get a letter. Give my love to Sister Lloyd. Tell her I would be pleased to see her. We have had rain everyday this week and I believe it will continue longer by the looks of the time. B. W. Smith.

[There follows a note from Phebe to Wilford Woodruff]

Mr. George A. Smith, Newark, Kendall County, Illinois, July 6th, 1844.

My Dear Husband, I sit down this morning to let you know we are all well, and in as good spirits as could be expected considering all things. We have strange times since you left. You will no doubt hear before this reaches you, of the death of our beloved Brethren Joseph and Hyrum Smith. They were killed at Carthage on the 27th of June and on 28th they were brought home and such a day of mourning never was seen. It pains me to write such a painful tale, but the Lord has comforted our hearts in a measure. The Governor [Thomas Ford] begins to open his eyes. He says we are a law abiding people and he has pledged himself and the faith of the state that he will protect us. The mob has tried to get the governor to get force to exterminate or drive the Mormons but he refuses. We feel as though he would try to redeem his character. Brother [John] Taylor was wounded but is getting better, is quite weak but quite cheerful. Brother [Willard] Richards was not hurt. They were both in jail at the time of the massacre. I will not write any more on that subject as I expect you will hear all the particulars before this reaches [you]. I received a letter on Thursday from you dated June 14th and this morning your father sent me two letters from you one dated June the 14 and one dated June 21. I cannot express my joy on receiving these letters. I was pleased to hear you was so well and got along so well and had turned torg [toward] home. I was sorrow to hear you had not heard from home. I have written this makes five times since you left and I write thinking probably you will not get this. You, and the rest of the Twelve are sent for. I expect you will get hear about the same time the rest will. They were sent for to come home as soon as possible.

Brother Adams has gone to Boston and [Jedediah] M. Grant to Washington. Joseph told Adamson margin to go and tell the Twelve to come home when the tragedy was over and a good many more things, which he should preach on Sunday before he was killed, but the people did not understand it. Adams said he was a going to speak in parable. I have understood he said he did not understand all himself but it is explained now. I want you to take good care of yourself and not let the mobbers get you. I shall pray for you much. I have not really wished you here since our troubles but I cannot say I have not wished myself with you. A great many [old] women expected our city to have been in ashes before this time but I have not been bad enough scared to make me tremble, though I have had some bad feelings.

George A. is well as usual, has the bowel complaint some but much better in health than he was when you left. He has been sick once or twice but generally tolerable well. I think he will know you when you get home. We get along very well. I have my health very good. Our garden looks quite as well as anyone's I have seen. We have had potatoes three or four weeks. We have had several messes of boiled corn. Our peas are about write to eat. Wish you was here to help eat them. You must excuse this letter for we have had everything you could think of talked about since the flood and the worst pen I ever tried to write with by all odds. Sarah and her children are here and others have been here since I commenced to write. Your father came out and [family] last Friday. Stayed until Monday. They were all well. Thought all would come out right at last.

Jacob [Bigler] and Jesse came home in a week or to after you left. Brought some dried apples but not any money. I got one bushel of him. We have a plenty to eat. Do not be uneasy about us but come home as soon as you can and see how we get along. Oh my dear I do want to see you come home. I pray the Lord to bring you home safe. Jacob was married in four weeks after he came home to Miss Ama [Amy Loretta] Chases of Nauvoo. I have written everything up to the war in my letters to you. I received the five dollar note you enclosed in your last. I will put this in the office and wish it may reach you. You are excusable for not writing oftener. I did not think it was your fault, but I thought on account of the rain or the mob for the mail did not come in regular. Four mails come in this week. The cause of this I have [not] learned. I have sent twice a week to the office almost ever since you left. Tell the good folk to send you home as soon as possible.

Sarah and Melissa sends their love to you. I will close by saying may the Lord bless you with food and raiment and with health and friends and preserve you from all evil and the hand of wicked men. I remain as ever yours for time and eternity.

Bathsheba W. Smith.
