Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Preface

Often members or near members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, youth and young adults in particular, ask me (in the words of Peter: 1 Peter 3:15) for "an answer" and "a reason" explaining my testimony or my beliefs. They seem to seek not a sermon so much as a probing inquiry as a means of obtaining the "what" and "why" of beliefs. However inadequate my responses are, my intent is to "strengthen [my] brethren in all [my] conversation." (D&C 108:7.) The questions thus asked are not like the questions Zeezrom put to Amulek with a desire to confound. Almost always the questions are asked for the best possible reason: in order to get an answer. (Alma 11.)

This undertaking is a series of direct answers or depositions responding to actual questions often put to me in correspondence in question-and-answer formats or are representative of concerns advanced in private conversations. The giving of a deposition suggests a formal, legal setting, of course, which this book is not. But a deposition is a way of preserving testimony, a device for discovering and eliciting evidence.

A major caveat about what this book is not is in order. The questions treated here are of such an order that volumes could be written about most. This format obviously permits no definitive development of answers and the responses make no such pretense. The format lends itself to some flexibility as to topics and a somewhat conversational style. Brief responses, therefore, are not an attempt to be glib, but to give some concise reasons and insights into the author's views. My answers and reasons are not of the high quality Peter urged, but are given, as Peter suggested, "with meekness and fear."

The device of using two questioners suggests two types of questions: first, those from the First Questioner, or Questing Believer (the true believer), who seeks additional counsel, and, second, those of the Second Questioner, or Near Believer, who probes and presses because he wants to believe but also does not want to be "taken in."

The author's hope and deep prayer is that the answers presented here will be a stimulus for the reader and will help him in further formulating his responses to the realities of life by using the marvelous and emancipating gospel of Jesus Christ.
