Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

First Session

First Questioner: Since a belief in a literal devil is so unfashionable in this age, how much a part of the gospel of Jesus Christ is a belief in the reality of Satan?

The Disciple: Very crucial. Fashion first undercut belief in the literalness of the devil and then sought to undercut belief in the literalness of Jesus Christ. The one prepared the way for the other. When the adversary can get us to disbelieve in but serve him and to disbelieve in but not serve the Lord, he has achieved a double coup. The adversary doesn't mind being thought of as anachronistic, belonging to another age, if he can control this one.

Second Questioner: But wasn't he merely role playing in the preexistence? Why should his punishment be so severe? After all, he was "an angel in authority in the presence of God," a "Son of the Morning." Didn't that entitle him to proffer his own proposal?

The Disciple: It's extremely important to get straight what happened in that premortal council. It was not an unstructured meeting, nor was it a discussion between plans, nor an idea-producing session, as to how to formulate the plan for salvation and carry it out. Our Father's plan was known, and the actual question put was whom the Father should send to carry out the plan. (Abraham 3:27.)

Lucifer knew about this plan, and his very pleading was real rebellion. The scriptures tell us plainly that he sought a throne above the stars and God. (2 Nephi 24:13.) Therefore, he was from the beginning a serious rebel. President George Q. Cannon said, "He was our brother, sitting side by side with our Redeemer, having equal opportunities with him. But he rebelled. He turned against the Father because he could not have his own way." This council was no abstract exercise. It reflected a deep, deep difference. Lucifer, by what he did, told us much more about himself than about his so-called offer. Clearly, he was already becoming an outsider, using (and trying to profit from) an insider's information.

First Questioner: You see no virtue in Lucifer's wanting at least to save everyone?

The Disciple: He wanted glory, not growth; control, not salvation. His ascendancy meant more to him than our agency. The devil is a despot. Incidentally, G. K. Chesterton defined despotism in a way that applies here. He said despotism is a "disease of public spirit," a "drunkenness of responsibility" in which despots have a "wild desire to manage everything." Chesterton said despotism trusts men "too little."

Being a poor loser, Lucifer transferred his battle to this world, where he displays his "wild desire to manage everything." The casualty rate in the premortal world was 33 percent, and Satan's harvest will be high here in the second estate. Thus what we see about us is a protracted psychodrama reenacting his power play of the premortal world. He wanted status without service, power without perfection ("I will be like the Most High"), and esteem not earned. Sodom was one of Satan's "finest" hours!

Second Questioner: Isn't that an altogether too simple explanation of the evil in life?

The Disciple: Simple only in the sense that the gospel of Jesus Christ is simple. Just because something is simple does not mean it is untrue. Jacob warned about the danger of preferring complexity, of "looking beyond the mark," and of seeking a tangled theology that people "cannot understand." (Jacob 4:14.)

Let me stress that either becoming morbidly preoccupied with the devil or ignoring his reality is equally unhealthy. The literally hundreds of references to him in all five books of scripture (and in the utterances of modern prophets) validate his reality. We also know where the territorial line is which we must not cross; Lucifer is permissive on most things, but not on granting passports for citizens to leave his realm.

First Questioner: Don't people simply make choices rather than always being drawn by the devil? Are there not some ideas and impulses that originate only with man?

The Disciple: Yes. The Lord distinguishes between the "doctrines of devils" and "the commandments of men." (D&C 46:7.) One may be more sinister than the other or more invidious in its motivation, but the consequences of following an incorrect principle are the same, regardless of its source.

Presumably, Satan expends himself when a real issue or principle is involved, not just in matters involving preferences, although we must be careful even there. He is so subtle that he might try to get one to opt for a flashy car if that would reinforce one's vanity on which he'd like to rely later on when it really matters. He clearly seeks to get us attached to ideas that are pleasing to the carnal mind—as Korihor admitted just before his death in a haunting, terminal burst of truth. Satan will insinuate himself and his ideas into our thoughts and life-style if we will let him. But one of the grand rules even he must obey is that he may not tempt us above that which we are able to bear. (1 Corinthians 10:13.)

The only way we can bind him is through personal righteousness. We'd best recognize at the outset that it is the devil who seeks to persuade us of his nonexistence; and if he can't do that, he'll try to get us to think of him as absurd in appearance and methodology, which is the next best thing. To be thought of as an absurd anachronism but to be the one who is really running many things in this world is, for him, an acceptable outcome.

First Questioner: Luther said that the best way to drive out the devil is to "jeer and flout him, for he cannot bear scorn."

The Disciple: Yes, and Thomas More said that the devil is a proud spirit and "cannot endure to be mocked." Yet I, for one, feel that any response but righteousness is risky.

Second Questioner: You keep citing theology. Isn't that unrealistic? So few today pay any attention whatever to theology. To them, it is almost inconsequential.

The Disciple: The theology of truth about man, life, and the universe does not depend for its validity on acceptance by many, or even any, Only eight people were right about the weather in Noah's time when being right really mattered.

Truth remains central to the human equation, recognized or not. Hence, disciples strive with real urgency to share true theology because everything that really matters is bound up in it. For instance, the decrease in belief in immortality has many side effects. When one sees the second estate as the only existence of man, some will maneuver and cling to life at the expense of principle, because it is all they have left, or so they think. The privileges of the living then take an easy preeminence over the rights, for instance, of an unborn child.

When individuals are without hope regarding life to come, death becomes terribly controlling so far as this life is concerned. The second estate is lived out as if it were a final and concluding exclamation point rather than another comma in the continuum of man's existence.

Under such circumstances, life prolongation takes priority over life enrichment. Things that are sensual, that can be felt now, take priority over things subtle and spiritual. Celebrating our capacity to feel crowds out our capacity to think. Delayed gratification, one of the hallmarks of maturity and civilization, becomes a hard doctrine to follow, since so few are then willing to make present investments in behavior with a view to later yields.

Lucifer, who has no future, thus desperately desires to persuade men that they have no future either. He desires "that all men might be miserable like unto himself." (2 Nephi 2:27.) Misery likes company—especially ultimate misery!

Second Questioner: How "at home" can the thinker be in the Church?

The Disciple: If there is sometimes too little respect for the life of the mind, it is a localized condition and is not institutional in character. The gospel is so mind-expanding, so freeing, that the committed thinker can be truly at home.

The level of education among Church members is better than ever before. There are many more members with extensive academic training serving as stake, mission, and other priesthood and auxiliary presidents than ever before. Our women are better trained, academically, than ever before. I have never seen the climate so good for tithe-paying and testimony-bearing academicians.

Those at home in the world of thought have also gravitated to the top in the world of industry and government, where Latter-day Saints are represented out of all proportion to their numbers.

Second Questioner: Are there not sharp differences between the ways intellectuals view things and the orthodox gospel view?

The Disciple: The orthodox Latter-day Saint scholar should remember that his citizenship is in the Kingdom and that his professional passport takes him abroad into his specialty. It is not the other way around. That fact is true not only for the professor but also for the plumber in his relationships with his union.

The light and truth of the gospel illuminate the whole of the human terrain, and the Latter-day Saint is to be leaven in all situations. Comparatively, the gospel will always be more help to us in better understanding our specialty and in being more effective therein than will our specialty help us to be better Church members, though the latter occurs often.

We sometimes forget that whatever degree of intelligence we attain to is an advantage to us in this life as well as in the world to come!

First Questioner: We do not disdain the language of scholarship, do we?

The Disciple: We disdain jargon of all kinds, but not the language of real scholarship. We must speak to men "after the manner of their language," including the language of scholarship. (See 1 Nephi 3:21.)

I prize my modest academic training; it has been helpful in many ways. I am both impressed and grateful for the Church's deep commitment to education. The gospel is continuing education at its best. However, the gospel isn't simply another building block to be fitted into the tower of truth; it is the tower of truth itself.

Second Questioner: Must LDS scholars be constrained because of their prior commitment to the Kingdom?

The Disciple: No, they are freed by it; they are lifted above the fashion of any age onto a space platform that gives them truths about things as they really are. We can be genuinely friendly with others without being fashionable. Paul reminds us that the "fashion of this world passeth away." (1 Corinthians 7:31.) If we are not ashamed of Jesus Christ and his teachings and truths, he will not be ashamed of us. Our Tutor is concerned with truths and not trends.

Second Questioner: Will not their very orthodoxy prevent LDS scholars from communicating with non-LDS scholars?

The Disciple: No, for LDS scholars can and should speak in the tongue of scholarship, but without coming to prefer it and without losing the mother tongue of faith.

Second Questioner: Yes, but so many truths are prestructured for LDS scholars.

The Disciple: For us all! Scholarship is a search for truth. The fact that a truth is given by God and then is confirmed through scholarship makes it no less true. Premises and hypotheses that help in the search for truth are often supplied by the gospel; the process is hastened but is no less exciting.

Second Questioner: It's not only the structuring of thought but of life-style that could hedge in a scholar.

The Disciple: I am not sure what you mean. But the gospel does provide structure in life-style—a scaffolding for shaping the soul especially in the formative years. So shaped, later in life the individual can stand resolutely in holy places and on holy issues and not be moved.

Actually, the Church, the family, and life combine to give us an appropriate blend of challenge and refuge, of search and sanctuary. Besides, if it is to conditioning that you object, what of the pervasive and paternalizing conditioning by the world? Life is not neutral! Consider the issue of pornography, on which the Church has taken a very strong stand: it's the very conditioning that is underway that must be decried and resisted. Ronald Butt, writing in the London Times, noted how pornography is desensitizing:

"The history of the Roman arena instructs us how the appetite of a people can be created by what is fed to it—the upper classes of Rome were systematically addicted by their rulers to the frenzy and titillation of sadistic violence by a steady progression from less to more until the Roman character itself was conditioned to a coarse insensibility to suffering."

This takes us back to those two basic forces—good and evil—again. The struggle is real, and the Church must teach and lead its people because it loves them. There is no detente with the devil. He knows that weak individuals make great dominoes. He knows that the collapse of individuals precedes the collapse of systems. This is how he has brought down senates and civilizations; he destroys societies by destroying individuals. We must build societies by building individuals—not the reverse.

Second Questioner: How patient with others can those be who really feel they have the absolute truth?

The Disciple: Absolute truth calls for absolute love and absolute patience. We obviously fall very short of that, individually. With love, longsuffering is possible. By contrast, the insecurity of falsehood tends to produce a greedy immediacy along with conspiracy.

It is helpful to me to remember that men live together in the presence of much of the same divine data. Believers and disbelievers see the same stars and sunsets and have the same access to the wonders of the physical world and universe, each of which witnesses in its own way about the order in all things. All can see the heavens moving in their majesty. The cosmos cries out convincingly that God lives, for those with eyes to see and ears to hear.

Second Questioner: But individuals see the data so differently.

The Disciple: Yes, as God made us free so to do, but some do not own up even to the small spiritual stirrings within them; they are not, as you would put it, intellectually honest. When in the later Judgment there is access to the seismographs of the soul, I predict there will be some very interesting recordings that can be introduced as evidence. Agrippa had such a moment. Probably Pilate also. We are often in the presence of a good and powerful person, or truth. Sometimes it is not until later that we remember our hearts burned within us, but the record will so show.

Second Questioner: But believing calls for so many assumptions, does it not?

The Disciple: Yes, but actually it is the disbeliever who struggles under a larger load—immense incredibilia. The arrogance of atheism is that it asserts things, so many things, just happened to favor life here on this planet for "me"! How provincial! How insular!

Second Questioner: But for some, faith seems like an end, a destination, not a means.

The Disciple: Faith proceeds on to promised knowledge. It develops us and it delivers us to new data. Skepticism starts with some unprovable declarations and ends there too. It looks about and declares man to be alone and settles down for the long night. Faith senses we are not alone and moves us to action, to discovery, and to knowledge.

Initially, gospel concepts and their underlying assumptions are simply too large for us to manage without faith, without the witness of the Spirit, and without the revelation of the Holy Ghost. Just as the disciples with Jesus saw a blind man and inquired about causes (had he or his parents sinned?—see John 9:2), so we run the risk of applying our logic or of extrapolating from our finite experience. In these and other ways, it is important for us to trust our Guide, for he has walked the path before us and knows it perfectly. Trusting takes faith, but faith is evidence that precedes even more evidence.

First Questioner: Is happiness the grand outcome, but only to be experienced in the next world?

The Disciple: The Prophet Joseph Smith said that human happiness is the grand object and design of existence, but we won't have happiness in a final and full way until we have a fulness of all things in the next world. Alma even calls the plan of salvation "the great plan of happiness." (Alma 42:8.)

First Questioner: How much real happiness is possible in this vale of tears?

The Disciple: That depends directly on our righteousness. The saints of the first century A.D. in the Americas were described as follows: ". . . surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God." (4 Nephi 16.) Even in the period around 70 B.C. (which saw much intergroup warfare), the righteous and faithful were happy. Indeed, Alma wrote, "But behold there never was a happier time among all the people of Nephi, since the days of Nephi, than in the days of Moroni." (Alma 50:23.) Fortunately happiness is not totally dependent on what those around us do, therefore.

Second Questioner: Even so, I see some sad-faced members of the Church, don't you?

The Disciple: Too many, of course, but not among those who have received "his image" in their "countenances." (Alma 5:14.) None among those who've gotten outside their confining circle of selfishness. Indeed, the Brethren are happy while they cope with serious and somber problems. Someone said it is too bad we don't preserve the small talk of great men; so, too, the humor of holy men who serve as special witnesses.

First Questioner: Why must one work so hard, so constantly at something like prayer?

The Disciple: Prayer should be second nature in this second estate. But the law of work operates here, too, and constantly. Further, the adversary never uses any of his annual leave. There are many interceding influences. For instance, we are often not only too slow to get on our knees but too quick to rise from them, as if prayer involved physical calisthenics.

We are also too quick to requisition further blessings when we have yet to express real thanks for past and present blessings. Sometimes I remind myself of the experience most of us have had of being in a stalled car. Someone gives us a shove and we are so busy taking advantage of the shove—getting our car working again—that, at most, we thank our benefactor with a wave of the hand or a honk. This tendency may be understandable but it is regrettable. If we wish to deepen our relationship with God, there must be time for two-way communication. We are better askers than listeners.

The door to the vault of the treasures of heaven cannot be opened casually any more than the powers of heaven can be controlled except by righteous principles. The vault door has a combination lock: one tumbler falls when faith is present; another as a result of personal righteousness; the final one only when what is petitioned for is (in the judgment of a perfect and loving Father) right for the petitioner and expedient in the judgment of God. Were it not so, we would be spoiled and ineffectual children. Our eternal security depends on the security of that vault. If the tumblers fell too easily, so would we.

Second Questioner: Prayer is such a private thing. I am much more concerned with men's public acts than their private morality, aren't you?

The Disciple: The notion of private morality is a great heresy. What goes on in our heads and our homes is clearly—if subtly—related to everything else in our lives. Sickness of spirit in a family is carried to the office or classroom just as surely as the flu.

There are no victimless crimes, no private wrongs. For every wrong act there is at least one victim, the doer, and secondary impacts that we just don't have the sophistication to measure. We can't have it both ways: extolling and exhorting over the interrelatedness of things in nature (with which we must truly be more concerned as stewards of this planet) while, at the same time, denying the ecology in human nature. Some inconsistently try to cover their face when sneezing to avoid infecting others, but are like a megaphone when telling a dirty joke.

Only a schizoid society could sanction the delusion that there is a private morality apart from public morality. There isn't an "indoor" and an "outdoor" set of Ten Commandments!
