Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Second Session

First Questioner: Our critics accuse us of constant conditioning in the classroom and at home.

The Disciple: Life is conditioning. It is not a neutral experience. Life is not a limpid pool on which we just float motionless; it is an often-stormy sea with crosscurrents and riptides.

Neither are the critics neutral; they'd prefer to do the conditioning themselves. But God is a caring and loving God who wants to bring us back home with him; happily he is no detached observer. You must expect, too, that in an increasingly standardless society, the assertion and advocacy of any real standards will be a genuine irritant to many.

Second Questioner: Does not, however, the Church assert itself on some issues in a way that seeks to tilt the outcome in its favor?

The Disciple: On moral issues the answer is yes—with, happily, a broad definition of morality. Membership in the Church does not bring loss of political citizenship, nor the constitutional rights that go therewith.

Second Questioner: But clearly we cannot legislate morality!

The Disciple: No, we cannot pass a bill declaring all individuals righteous and assume that all people will then meet celestial criteria. But legislation can clearly affect the climate in which individual morality either flourishes or declines.

First Questioner: Is such climate-building basically all that a legislative body can do, morally?

The Disciple: No, for legislative and executive departments can mandate certain minimum standards of behavior. That is much more than tone-setting. Murder and child-beating are thus not only unacceptable but illegal and punishable as well.

What we are seeing now in so many situations is a more rigorous setting of standards for commercial relationships, but also a simultaneous, cheek-by-jowl retreat from standard setting in personal behavior. This is somewhat like building more lifeboats and de-emphasizing swimming lessons. Rescue work involves both, but prevention by self-discipline is more efficient and less costly than correction by external controls. Living one preventive principle is better than a hundred remedial governmental programs.

To assume that because all things cannot be legislated, therefore nothing can be legislated, is a dangerous delusion. Take something as simple as child labor laws, which helped to correct some of the grim abuses in child labor decades ago. Now, ironically, we are in a situation in which there are often too few chances for youth to work. Parenthetically, our very affluence has created many incentives not to work; more and more idlers are eating bread that belongs to workers. The secular way in which we seek to solve one problem perpetually creates another. Work is a basic need, not only economically but also spiritually. Sometimes we are too clever by half.

Incidentally, those who say dogmatically that morality can't be legislated turn about and say dogmatically that total welfare can be legislated! In the long run, the welfare state operates against human welfare, particularly our precious agency, but the pathology may take a few decades to become visible. I'm reminded of the vaunted guns of Singapore, which "guaranteed" the security of that port city. The trouble was, the guns fired seaward only, and Singapore was taken by land. Such myopia is not the exclusive property of military planners, but among all planners without principles.

First Questioner: What of the difficult doctrines?

The Disciple: The scriptures call such teachings as these "hard sayings"—hard not only because they stretch one conceptually, but also because the "guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center." (1 Nephi 16:2.) These doctrines are subjects on which it is sometimes difficult for us to speak clearly and simply, but it is impossible to remain silent indefinitely.

Second Questioner: Perhaps, too, these teachings are hard because of a lack of clever and sophisticated articulation in setting them forth?

The Disciple: Every true disciple really wants to give persuasive testimony. Sometimes prophets have been forbidden to write certain things. (Ether 13:13; 3 Nephi 27:23.) Alma wished that he could leave an angelic affidavit, with power and force. Other times we cannot speak but "the smallest part" that we feel. But we are weak. I will, however, concede cleverness to the world and keep my gaze fixed on correctness of concept. Cotton-candy concepts are soothing to the taste, but there is no nourishment in them.

The "commandments of men" dissolve as soon as they are touched by a little heat and pressure. So many secular solutions are really soothing slogans; there is no real substance to them.

Second Questioner: Be more particular, will you?

The Disciple: Take the matter of law enforcement. The secular world spends billions to cope with consequences of lawlessness springing from faulty families and timid school curricula that ignore the need for specific training concerning the need for law at the front end of human experience. Poison the headwaters, however, and filtration plants downstream will never purify fully. In such a setting, does the sound and constant emphasis of the gospel of Jesus Christ on family and morality surprise you?

Second Questioner: Please amplify regarding this shyness you spoke of in school curricula.

The Disciple: Liberal education once included some concern for, and the study of, morals. Science cannot stand alone in steadying our civilization. John Wise wrote in 1717: "Those persons who live in obedience to reason are worthy to be accounted free: They alone live as they will, who have learned what they ought to will."

Second Questioner: But is there an agreement as to what can be thus taught?

The Disciple: The absence of consensus about curriculum of the kind we are discussing is, in itself, an indicator of what President John Silber of Boston University has called "counterfeit democracy." The failure to agree means that actually an agreement has been reached: an agreement to do nothing, to let curriculum drift, and the drift will always go in one basic direction. I am not speaking of the teaching of sectarian theology, but of basic morality, such as honesty in all its dimensions, or what John Adams called "the principles of humanity and general benevolence." One wonders, in schools filled with increasing violence and theft, how often there has been a genuine and skillful intellectual confrontation of students on such specific standards, rather than just confrontation. Of course such efforts might be met with derision and laughter. But students will assume that what we do not defend we do not think worth defending. Also, by even appearing to throw in with the world, we throw off those who may just be making their first tentative moves toward faith and spiritual stability.

Wasn't it Sadie Thompson in Rain, the prostitute on the verge of reform at the hands of a minister, who concluded after his bitter betrayal that men were pigs, and all men were the same. Men are not all the same, but it seemed so to Sadie and likewise to far too many women in our own time. If we let go, we are not only accountable for our own fall, but also for those we knock loose from their faith and for those who let go when they see us let go.

Second Questioner: How can a just God sanction a human condition in which there is so much suffering?

The Disciple: As already stated, God prefers men to be happy. But freedom comes first, and with wrong use of agency comes misery. Better that men make themselves miserable (with a later chance of redemption by longsuffering) than to remove freedom in order to remove the risks. You see, we are back to that great premortal difference again.

Some ask a related question: "Can we have happiness only on God's terms?" My answer is "Yes!" But God's terms are not arbitrary or capricious; these terms are built in, a part of the structure of the universe. We'd just as well face them.

Second Questioner: You speak of suffering as a result of human error in the choices individuals make. I ask rather about suffering as a result of disease.

The Disciple: It is very real, and so much of it is unnecessary. When societies have kept all of God's laws, suffering of the specific type you describe seems to be minimal. Scriptural historians give it no mention. We do not read of any psychiatric wards in Enoch's Zion, nor of plagues in the post-Christ culture of the Nephites. Meanwhile we rejoice over our medical breakthroughs that lessen suffering in our day.

Wars tend to be as much a major cause of suffering as disease. Wars are spawned and supported most often by evil men with evil desires. I, for one, would rather have had some of the dictators of this century taught and trained in rich, nourishing family home evenings than to have tried to constrain those men by influencing the constitutions or structure of their governments. Wars have many causes, but for far too long we have sought to deal with the causes that lie outside man. Someday a real history can be written that will tell us how many misshapen mortals came from homes fatally flawed and who then made the whole human family an enlarged audience before and on which they acted out the drama of that original deficiency.

Second Questioner: But in the rhythm of war and peace, victory and defeat, revenge is often in the very air of a defeated country!

The Disciple: What a great time for the fulness of the gospel to also be "in the air"! "Vengeance is mine, and I will repay." (Mormon 3:15.) "And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." (Matthew 5:41.) "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." "Thou shalt not bear false witness," "Thou shalt not kill," and so on. What, as you put it, was "in the very air" of a country is usually also "in the very air" of dinner table discussions in homes just as American college campuses in the sixties reflected more than Vietnam.

Second Questioner: You are being unrealistically idealistic!

The Disciple: What is more realistic than the gospel of Jesus Christ? One can almost hear Lucifer complaining in the premortal council about how the plan of salvation was too idealistic and about how we'd never use our free agency wisely. In blending the ideal and the real, the gospel pays man the superb, prospective compliment of saying that what should be, can be. What is more germane?

Second Questioner: Please do not reverse our roles. We are to ask the questions.

The Disciple: The exclamation points at the ends of your sentences seem to call forth the question marks at the ends of mine.

First Questioner: The gospel is supposed to be good news. How can you square that with the feeling some Church members have of being perpetually inadequate?

The Disciple: A preamble, please. The gospel is the best news ever in this world. The sons of God shouted for joy in the first estate when the plan for the second estate was unveiled. But part of that plan called for the personal memories of the first estate to be obscured. It is a deliberate but temporary amnesia, a fortunate forgetting, that permits us to be tested fairly and to learn much, if we will. Though we have forgotten that we agreed to the structure and condition of life, which seem harsh at times, we still so agreed—and not passively, either.

Second Questioner: Do you actually assume there are records in the preexistence, as some say, that will show we are aware that we made such commitments?

The Disciple: Orson Hyde goes so far as to suggest that we made covenants "before we left our former homes, that we would come here and obey the voice of the Lord, through whomsoever He might speak. . . ." He suggests that there are witnesses to the covenant into which we entered, and observes, "It is not impossible that we signed the articles thereof with our own hands,—which articles may be retained in the archives above, to be presented to us when we rise from the dead, and be judged out of our own mouths, according to that which is written in the books." You can't get much more particular than that, can you?

One wonders if the narrowness and straightness of the way as outlined for us in the councils in the first estate might not have produced in those of us assembled some gasps and even some tremblings. The point is that what we freely contracted for—after open orientation—is that which we are experiencing now. As a result, though our agency seems limited at times, it is like the confining and constraining contracts we mortals make here in which we submit ourselves to certain conditions with a full understanding of their implications.

First Questioner: Yet does not the very rigorousness of the way drain off some of the joys of life?

The Disciple: Some of the artificial pleasures—none of the joys. A pyromaniac apparently gets twisted pleasure from fires, but his fleeting pleasure comes at the clear cost of someone else's pain. Joy is nondeductible; it is an addition to one that does not require subtraction from someone else. Unlike the pyromaniac, disciples are involved with a much different kind of Fire.

Now back to the question about the seemingly inevitable sense of inadequacy. There is simply no way of describing a celestial outcome to those of us in a telestial world without creating a great sense of distance. But direction comes first, then velocity.

Nephi several times expressed his feelings of inadequacy, yet he had a willingness to carry on "notwithstanding my weakness." Like Nephi, we need to be drawn to discipleship—not driven by it. Moses (and Enoch before him) spoke of his reluctance to venture forth to the tasks assigned to him. It is not surprising that we, the weak things of the world, should notice our weaknesses especially under stress, such as the stress of declaring the gospel adequately. We often know more than we can tell. Ammon said, "Behold, . . . I cannot say the smallest part which I feel." (Alma 26:16.) Articulateness is not a pre-condition of discipleship; it is a result thereof. Moses' early need for Aaron as a spokesman simply does not show up in the later years of their rich relationship.

First Questioner: The sense of inadequacy seems to include some guilt too, does it not?

The Disciple: It can. There appears to be a difference, however, between the lamentation of a faithful Nephi (2 Nephi 4) whose heart "groaneth because of my sins," which seems to have stemmed from a life exceedingly well lived but a life ever more conscious of the distance yet to be traveled, and a life in which only the feeblest efforts at service or righteousness are made. The latter suggests guilt growing from too little commitment and progress, while the other anxiety grows out of a consciousness of all that must yet be done, even though much progress has been made.

Second Questioner: But actually, what can we do to manage these vexing feelings of inadequacy?

The Disciple: Here are but a few suggestions:

This is a gospel of grand expectations, but God's grace is sufficient for each of us. Discouragement is not the absence of adequacy but the absence of courage, and our personal progress should be yet another way we witness to the wonder of it all!

First Questioner: How normal is it to mutter at the prospect of a certain task or calling, as so many of us do at times?

The Disciple: Muttering and murmuring are often the expressions of our conscience gone grumpy; it is precisely because we know we need to respond affirmatively (and have some inkling about what's coming) that we let off steam—we start puffing in advance of the climb. These are reactions genuinely to be avoided, since they can precede the keeping of a commandment or the fulfilling of a task with a slothful heart, which is more serious.

Mostly, to avoid muttering, we need to trust more. So many of the things muttered about before turn out to be marvelous experiences later, and we are inwardly, and deservedly, ashamed for having grumbled.

First Questioner: Is not too much anxiety a problem?

The Disciple: Definitely. Jacob was concerned that he could have been shaken and stumbled "because of my overanxiety for you." (Jacob 4:18.)

The gospel is not a religion of repose nor does it let us reside in an Eden of ease. Yet it gives us a certain serenity and peace, which are part of the promise if we know that, as the Prophet Joseph Smith said, our life is proceeding basically and increasingly as the Lord would have it proceed.

First Questioner: How can one know that?

The Disciple: The same way we can know all the things that matter most: through the Holy Ghost, who can stir us to action and remembrance, but who can also give sufficient serenity and peace.

Second Questioner: Isn't that circular; that is, you can know only if you know?

The Disciple: Not circular but lineal. If we are conforming basically to the commandments of God, at that point we will receive certain assurances even though there is much, much yet to do. Greater faith comes by greater righteousness. It is not circular; it is simple. I do not say it is easy, however. It is not easy to be a rescuer of one's fellowmen, especially when those to be rescued make fun of the rescuers. Sometimes the hand to be grasped is not outstretched at all, but features a pointing finger of scorn!

First Questioner: But what of those essentially good individuals who seem, to themselves at least, to have plateaued, almost permanently, at a certain level of performance?

The Disciple: Progress is measured by milestones. What many good people lack are markers that might tell them how they are actually doing. Goals can become a ritual or a fetish, but in the right measure they can give us some much needed reference points. No wonder some seem discouraged! Minus such milestones, we often feel "minus" in our lives.

First Questioner: Be even more direct, will you?

The Disciple: The regular setting of short-term as well as long-term goals is a helpful discipline. Most of us have grand, long-term goals, but we fail to support these goals with specific, short-term goals. I have what I call my "Almost Agendum" of things that, too often, I intend to get done and want to get done. Indeed, I "almost" get these done. Now, by selecting just one such goal per week, there is more momentum and specific achievement. Commitment is causal, not casual, and a drifting discipleship is not real discipleship.

Isn't it interesting how many rich resolves we lay down at the edge of sleep, failing to take them up again with wakefulness? How many specific things go undone because forgetfulness covers what a pencil and paper could have made into a prickly reminder? In this vast zone of good intentions, we house our "almost adventures," some of the great experiences of our lives that nearly happened. We say, of course, we are weary. Often this is true. But aren't we glad Jesus mounted the cross even though he was indescribably weary?

First Questioner: Aren't there risks in unwise goal setting?

The Disciple: Yes. Goals, to be most helpful, need to be or include (1) personal or individual goals, (2) specific goals (a vague goal is no goal at all), and (3) a specific timetable for accomplishment. Then there are these added elements often neglected: the goal should be (4) written (it is less apt to be forgotten and can "vex" us properly); (5) "registered" (if appropriate, with certain others who can urge us on to its accomplishment); and (6) do-able or attainable.

I find that goal setting, when done this way, leads to goal achieving. The chronic failure to achieve goals lowers self-esteem. Show me a failure to achieve a goal, and usually I can show you the violation of one or more of the above criteria. Imposed goals, vague goals, and unrealistic goals tend to produce only partial successes and outright failures.

Second Questioner: This sounds so structured.

The Disciple: It is, somewhat, but can we be serious about eternal progression and be casual about regularizing personal improvement? Most of those who feel inadequate do not lack direction, but velocity. The regular achievement of desirable goals can give our lives momentum, a very important thing, but without overanxiety.

First Questioner: These goals can, therefore, be customized or tailored to each person?

The Disciple: Not only can be, but should be. But with this caveat: Our goals should stretch us bit by bit. So often when we think we have encountered a ceiling, it is really a psychological or experiential barrier that we have built ourselves. We built it and we can remove it.

Further, if the adversary can keep us—as he so often does—busy inventorying our frailties and refusing to inventory our talents and qualities, then we'll never discover what is in the warehouse of our soul. That's where an "outside auditor," a friend, can often help by confirming the presence of things commendable about us. Sometimes in such situations, we are truly surprised. More often, we thought a trait was there all along but have been reluctant to list it.

If there is any common tendency to pad in such inventorying, it is to pad our deficits column. We not only do the latter, but seem especially eager to show everybody the list! We may start out doing this in search of denials, but remember the Korihor syndrome—repetition meant persuasion.

Just as correct principles, when applied, carry their own witness that they are true, so do correct personal improvement programs. But we must not expect personal improvement without pain or some "remodeling." We can't expect to have the thrills of revealed religion without the theology. We cannot expect to have the soul stretching without the Christian service.

The blend of studying, serving, and praying is a powerful blend. Some try serving without the studying of the gospel and lose their moorings, even though some good is being done. Some individuals study to the exclusion of service, which could heighten guilt or desensitize. Study is not a substitute for service, nor is serving a substitute for praying. Each law to be obeyed has its own requirements.

First Questioner: Moods matter, don't they?

The Disciple: Definitely. Sometimes we make unrealistic demands of life. We seem to expect an unbroken string of green lights and a parking space just in front of every destination—with some time left on the parking meter—or else we have had a bad day. Thus, when little things don't go right, our moods darken with regard to the truly big things when there is no real justification for such.

First Questioner: And we are contagious with our moods, aren't we?

The Disciple: Almost inevitably. Get the basically adequate to feel perpetually inadequate, then those adjacent to them (who are ambivalent about even trying) will stop trying; next, the somewhat bad react to the foregoing with glee because it confirms them in their sloth or sins; and the bad will plan further strategy against the remaining in a "take no prisoners mood." Negative momentum is passed along with chainlike consequences.

But what is true about negative momentum is equally true of positive momentum. Hence the real importance, day to day, of good deeds and of giving and receiving deserved, specific feedback. A faltering step forward not only begins to move that one body, but also causes another to venture haltingly, then another. It's all quite natural, especially since feet were made to move forward.

Second Questioner: You make us sound too interdependent. Is there no individual determination or heroism?

The Disciple: Surely. It isn't that random goodness lacks heroism. Rather, in isolation it lacks effectiveness. Sharpshooters can irritate and delay an advancing enemy, but they cannot mount a counteroffensive. Random goodness leads to Dunkirks, not to D-Days.

To be "one," as Jesus prayed his disciples would be, is, frankly, to institutionalize. Christianity is not a confederacy; it is a kingdom. True, the only perfect member of that kingdom is the King, but make no mistake about the kingdom's being a mere great books group, though there are great books in the kingdom—the greatest.

Thus it isn't only that the gospel gets us together; it is that together we can go places we could not go acting alone and render Christian service on a scale not possible when acting alone. It is easier to find and to help "the one" when the "ninety and nine" are securely together.

Second Questioner: Are you going to tell me that theology is pivotal even in such matters as these?

The Disciple: Yes! The world seems almost pathetic in its secular strivings for the brotherhood of man without the Fatherhood of God. We cannot have the one without the other. Understanding relationships is vital! Understanding the plan of salvation is vital, also. We are the clinical material God has given us to work on in this estate. He lets us practice on each other. That means failure, pain, frustration, and deep disappointment as well as success. One needs real reasons, therefore, to persist in such a setting. Mere biological brotherhood is not enough.

We count on our friends to see in our lives the kernels and the chaff but "with the breath of kindness" to blow the chaff away. My friends and associates have strong lungs, for instance, and it helps me greatly.

Second Questioner: Yet our blessings, you say, come only by obedience to law.

The Disciple: I don't say—the Lord does. He is a generous God, for while we are blessed only in terms of our obedience to law, it seems clear that an ounce of obedience brings forth a bushel of blessings. That marvelous ratio tells us much about Father!

First Questioner: Still, some seem deeply discouraged.

The Disciple: Indeed, we can be immobilized by despair. It is a favorite tactic of Lucifer. Each mortal is "endowed" genetically, environmentally, but also premortally. We each have, for instance, at least one spiritual gift. None of the approximately twenty gifts specified in the scriptures is insignificant. Yet, if we despair, then whatever our gifts or talents, we have failed. A gift is no gift until one gives it. Lucifer apparently was and is multi-talented, but his memories of what might have been gnaw at him constantly. No wonder he is an incurable insomniac.

We can't lead, or draw, others to the Lord unless we stand closer to him than they do!

Second Questioner: Is not the gospel quite pessimistic in its description of man as carnal, sensual, and devilish?

The Disciple: No, the gospel is realistically redemptive. Never underestimate the redemptive reach of the gospel. The gospel strikes a truthful and marvelous balance in many ways. For instance, the Lord himself says that "almost all" individuals will abuse authority and power when they have it. That's "almost all"—not even "most" or "many," a searing indictment! Yet God still shares his power with us. The balance comes in the conditions under which power can truly be shared.

The restored gospel avoids the curdled predestinarian view of man; it also avoids the naivete of liberalism with its sometimes excessive optimism. For instance, what we in America have seen in the corruption of governments is partially described in verse 37 of the 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants: explicit attention given therein to the covering of sins, the gratifying of pride, the role of vain ambition, and the passion to exercise control or dominion. "Almost all" of us tend to do these if we are not exceedingly careful. But Jesus' model of leadership is not only loving, but also longsuffering. Under his approach, when our soul is enlarged, it is without hypocrisy or guile.

Second Questioner: Yet some who hold the very priesthood of which you speak abuse it at times.

The Disciple: Sadly some of that occurs, and we believe that each person is accountable for his own sins. There is strict accountability in the gospel. As noted before, the gospel is perfect and the basic structure of the Church is perfect. But Church members are not—back to the clinical material and laboratory of life reality again.

Second Questioner: That sounds rather Darwinistic, does it not?

The Disciple: Not Darwinistic, but realistic. I am touched and impressed that Jesus knew beforehand that a growing but not yet fully strong Peter would, on one occasion, not own up to knowing Jesus. Yet Jesus labored with and loved Peter and prepared him to be the president of the church, "notwithstanding" Peter's weakness.

The gospel not only warns us of our weaknesses, but helps us to overcome them. This requires a mortal setting where real growth is possible. Apparently, God even gives us weaknesses that we may be humble. (Ether 12:23-27.) The humble individual can see and feel things and can admit things, own up to them, in ways that the proud person cannot do. Pride not only isolates one from others—but, alas, from himself and his possibilities.
