Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Third Session

First Questioner: Are not Church members often too caught up in Church chores and in their own family activities to do their civic chores?

The Disciple: Individually this is sometimes true, and it is unfortunate. The gospel of Jesus Christ is anything but monastic. We are here to light the world, to leaven mankind, and this can only be done by some shared enterprises in the spirit of fellowship and of friendship.

Second Questioner: Isn't this sometimes a one-way relationship, however, in that Mormons often befriend people only if the latter are interested in the gospel and the Church?

The Disciple: Given the variety in human behavior, I would assume some members of the Church do approach their fellowmen in that way only. That is most unfortunate. On the other hand, it is very important that we not lose sight of our basic mission. Those who are messengers of Jesus Christ are sent to teach, not to be taught, though obviously the very process of life permits us to learn much from each other as we work together to improve the world around us, politically, economically, and educationally.

With regard to politics, incidentally, the First Presidency in 1968 made these observations:

"The historic position of the Church has been one which is concerned with the quality of man's contemporary environment as well as preparing him for eternity. In fact, as social and political conditions affect man's behavior now, they obviously affect eternity."

The First Presidency went on to note that while the worldwide nature of the Church made it inadvisable for the Church to respond to all the emerging issues everywhere, this did not "absolve members as individuals from filling their responsibilities as citizens in their own communities . . . if our families are to live in an environment conducive to spirituality." In that counsel, members were urged to be "anxiously engaged" in good causes, using the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ as their constant guide.

Second Questioner: But differences in values made such cooperation difficult. For instance, the Church's stand on birth control makes the Church vulnerable, does it not, with regard to the immense problems created by the burgeoning population in the world? With whom can we cooperate on that?

The Disciple: With those who are like-minded, and there are such. The elements of the so-called population problem that are valid pose some real challenges in managing the earth's resources. Unfortunately, several layers of hysteria and some high-flowing rhetoric have now buried other insights about the population problem. Latter-day Saints believe with regard to the earth's resources that "there is enough and to spare." (D&C 104:17.)

The problem, therefore, does not appear to be one solely of numbers of people, but of defective political, economic, and value systems. In a recent book, some Latter-day Saint scholars have offered some interesting conclusions concerning this matter. The book of compilations is titled Population, Resources, and the Future: Non-Malthusian Perspectives. The editors, Howard M. Bahr, Bruce A. Chadwick, and Darwin I. Thomas, wrote: "If our assessment of the evidence is correct, millions of well-meaning, talented people will have been caught up in a movement which focused on the wrong variable." The book discusses some of these other factors, which some, in their concern over numbers, tend to ignore.

Second Questioner: Please be specific, for this is a large issue.

The Disciple: Indeed it is. Too large to be dealt with here, but it is important to point out that the new Malthusians who focus almost exclusively on overpopulation run the risk of being unscientific (ignoring other objective facts) while calling for support in the name of science. The book noted calls forth some much-needed counterpoint to show that even if zero population growth were achieved, many of the problems related to population "would still be with us."

I feel compelled to say that since in our discussion so much has been said to underscore the importance of free agency, distortions about the issue of overpopulation could take their toll in reducing human freedom and dignity, all in the name of an alarmed science.

Second Questioner: Would you cite one—even just one—of these other considerations you say are there?

The Disciple: I like the words of a non-LDS scholar, Fredrich, who said: "After all, children are not just transients in the world's boardinghouse, to be welcomed or turned away at the convenience of the older boarders. And if it is true that every newborn child should have a right to its share of food, it is also true that those who control the food supply should think twice before declaring that they no longer have enough for strangers and newcomers. In other words, the essence of the population problem—so far at least—is not that mankind has propagated too many children but that it has failed to organize a world in which they can grow in peace and prosperity. Rich nations and poor nations alike have grossly misused the world's resources, both material and intellectual; neglected them, wasted them, and fought each other over how to share them. Thus the basic question is not how many people can share the earth, but whether they can devise any means of sharing it at all."

Second Questioner: You are not dismissing the significance of the population challenge, then?

The Disciple: No. But I am saying that where freedom is involved we should always examine the data carefully. I am also dismissing the likelihood that secular solutions are automatically going to be real solutions to these challenges. Science must be as scrutinizing of its own dogmatists as of other dogmatists. Simple goodness, simple faith, simple brotherhood—these will yield more by way of solution than complex and clever plans resting on wrong assumptions. A righteous people who trust in God are far more apt to be blessed with the kind of weather and food and brotherhood that makes famine less likely and sharing more likely than are people who have dismissed the Fatherhood of God and who then make an empty plea for the brotherhood of man. Those who live unrighteously will bring upon themselves the very calamities about which they are complaining in advance.

Second Questioner: The belief of Latter-day Saints about the devil is clearly not the only hard doctrine. You have already made very specific assertions about the doctrine of the preexistence, the reality that we mortals lived as individuals before we came to earth. May we focus on this now?

The Disciple: Individuals have a genetic and an environmental inheritance, each of which is powerfully important. But there is an even earlier bestowal that follows us from our premortal existence wherein our personalities and traits were developed in various ways and in various degrees and strengths. The third bestowal is at least as important as those involving genes and environment. All three combined would, if fully comprehended, give us a true picture of the human personality and how it has been shaped and molded. This would help to explain human differences that are not explainable solely on the basis of genes and environment, varied as these are.

Second Questioner: It's all so outside our usual frame of reference, isn't it?

The Disciple: Yes, the gospel helps us to overcome that provincialism. Much of the so-called Christian world does not accept this teaching, or if they do, their acceptance is confined to a preexistent Jesus only. Just as Christianity didn't begin with Christ in the meridian of time, so other things extend backward even into our first estate as well, and still others forward into our next estate—far more than others have imagined.

No wonder the world has become rather mixed up about it all. When many are missing the first act of a three-act play and are uncertain about whether there will even be a third act, the second act seems such a small and anxious sample.

First Questioner: Understanding and accepting the plan of salvation seem to be the key to so many things.

The Disciple: Yes! The gospel is not shy about strategic truths. We understand, for instance, that the preexistence was an expanse of time in which we developed talents, capacities, and abilities and then brought them in our "luggage" when we came here. We assume, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said, that Mozart developed certain of his talents before he came to mortality, and that Melchizedek came into this world with such faith and spiritual capacity that when he was a child, "he feared God, and stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the violence of fire." (Genesis 14:26Inspired Version.)

If we could see man in continuum, then we could both understand and rejoice more in the plan of life.

Second Questioner: But how can those who do not believe in the preexistence do this?

The Disciple: They can't, of course, and that is one of their real problems. We try to help them by teaching the gospel and hopefully by living the gospel in such a way that we can direct their attention to this great truth on which so many other things depend for clarity and consistency.

First Questioner: But do not the views about foreordination come dangerously close to being predestination?

The Disciple: No, it is a distinction with a real difference. Any serious student of the scriptures can see the interplay of agency and of knowledge. The doctrine of predestination would rob man of his agency. I rather assume, for instance, that Satan's sponsorship of the doctrine of predestination occurred because it came very close to what he preferred in the preexistence; it also gave people an unfortunate excuse for both failure and arrogance here in this second estate. That's quite a different thing from foreordination, such as Elder McConkie described in the instance of President Spencer W. Kimball, "a spirit son of God who was called and chosen and foreordained before the foundations of the earth were laid," and who is "now fulfilling the destiny designed for him from the pre-existence, and promised him, in our presence, as we sat with him in the Grand Council when God Himself was there." Obviously, agency operates. By contrast, mighty David fell from his appointed place because of grave errors. David's fall did not surprise the Lord, but the Lord gave David every chance, just as he did Judas. Jesus knew from the beginning who would betray him in every dispensation, and he stood ready to roll back, wherever repentance was real (as in the case of the city of Nineveh), any prophetically projected dire consequences. Not only readily but gladly!

Second Questioner: This suggests that our blessings in this life may grow out of our obedience in that first estate, just as our blessings in the world to come will reflect our performance in the second estate. Do you subscribe to that seriously?

The Disciple: One must be especially careful about judging the limitations some have in this second estate, since these may reflect divine purposes we cannot understand. But as to callings, foreordination operates. More important than my words are the words of President Harold B. Lee. In his last general conference address in October 1973, he made this observation: "All these rewards were seemingly promised, or foreordained, before the world was. Surely these matters must have been determined by the kind of lives we had lived in that premortal spirit world. Some may question these assumptions, but at the same time they will accept without any question the belief that each one of us will be judged when we leave this earth according to his or her deeds during our lives here in mortality. Isn't it just as reasonable to believe that what we have received here in this earth life was given to each of us according to merits of our conduct before we came here?"

First Questioner: Like the lines from William Wordsworth?

The Disciple: It is much more than the poetry of Wordsworth, beautiful as that is. You are referring, of course, to Wordsworth's "Ode on Intimations of Immortality." President David O. McKay drew to our attention the fact that Wordsworth was somewhat criticized for that poem because it suggested a belief in a preexistence. Under criticism, Wordsworth hedged but finally added, "But let us bear in mind that, though the idea is not advanced in revealtion, there is nothing there to contradict it, and the fall of man presents an analogy in its favor." It doesn't surprise me that men like Wordsworth and others come close to the truth.

I am constantly impressed by how the Lord lifts all people who will be lifted to receive insights of various kinds. Our doctrine, however, comes from prophets, not poets, and the doctrine is, therefore, bound up in revealed truth. Otherwise, we would be left like Wordsworth, only with intimations rather than bold declarations. The quotation by President Lee, by the way, is one of those questions that is really not a question but an assertion.

First Questioner: Is the idea of graded salvation linked to the idea of graded performance not only in mortality, but also in the preexistence?

The Disciple: Undoubtedly, it is. President Joseph Fielding Smith observed rather directly, which was ever his style, that "when tests were made," individuals in the premortal state were chosen on the basis of how they performed in the first estate and because of their "superior intelligence manifest in the spirit world."

Second Questioner: You mean intellectual ability?

The Disciple: No, I mean intelligence—the ability to perceive truth and act upon it, not simply to accumulate it in the abstract for the thrills of intellectual possession. Jesus could never have fully conceptualized the Sermon on the Mount had he not also exemplified its teachings. The Christian's expanded conceptual capacity is tied to his expanded behavioral capacity. Beliefs may exceed behavior (or performance) temporarily, of course, but as the former precedes the latter, so the latter can constrain the former over time; if there is no improvement in behavior, conceptual power wanes.

First Questioner: All of this about the premortal past suggests a rationing or allocatoin of roles and high talent to various stages of human history, does it not?

The Disciple: Yes, it does. Paul was alluding to the fact that in the days of old "the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel" (Deuteronomy 32:7-8, when in Athens he made much the same declaration about how the Lord had "determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:26).

When we say God has a plan, he truly has a plan—not simply a grand scale, but for each of us as individuals, allocating some special talent to this dispensation and some to another. I regard God as the perfect personnel manager, even though he must work with and through all of us who are so imperfect.

I assume, gladly, that in the allocation to America of remarkable leaders like Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, and Abraham Lincoln, the Lord was just as careful. After all, if you've got only one Abraham Lincoln, you'd better put him in that point in history when he's most needed—much as some of us might like to have him now.

First Questioner: Aren't some of the versions of the preexistence somewhat romanticized, however?

The Disciple: Perhaps they have been, yet I am one of those who feels, when we hear truths from someone like President Joseph F. Smith, such as in his letter to Elder Orson F. Whitney, that these are truths to be taken into account. In his letter, published in 1882, President Smith said: "Had we not known before we came the necessity of our coming, the importance of obtaining tabernacles, the glory to be achieved in posterity, the grand object to be obtained by being tried and tested—weighed in the balance, in the exercise of the divine attributes, God-like powers and free agency with which we are endowed; whereby, after descending below all things, Christ-like, we might ascend above all things, and become like our Father, Mother, and Elder Brother, almighty and eternal—we would never have come; that is, if we could have stayed away." This suggests an excellence of environment in our first estate, filled with much that would attract us and retain us had we not seen the necessity of coming here. Each of us in our more sober and spiritual moments can know those situations which President Smith describes as lighting up "our whole being as with glory of our former home."

President George Q. Cannon observed, much as did other early brethren, "If we could understand the glory we once had with our Father in Heaven, we would be discontented in dwelling in this condition of existence. We would pine for the home we left behind us with its glory and its beauty."

First Questioner: I can understand an over-all plan, but is the plan really a plan down to rather minute details?

The Disciple: Yes, or else it would not be a plan. There cannot be a plan for the whole without a plan for each part, and when we understand the gospel plan, as President Brigham Young observed, we will "comprehend that it is the most reasonable way [of] dealing with the human family." We will also, he said, "discern that purity, holiness, justice, perfection, and all that adorns the character of the Deity are contributing to the salvation of men." The great view of God is marvelous to contemplate compared with the distant deity some suggest, a passive "life force" out there somewhere in space.

George McDonald said, "Of all teachings that which presents a far distant God is the nearest to absurdity. Either there is none, or He is nearer to everyone of us than our nearest consciousness of self." (C. S. Lewis, George McDonald Anthology, London: Geoffrey Bles, 1970.)

First Questioner: Does this mean it is important to have a knowledge of God?

The Disciple: It is crucial, crucial! The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "Having a knowledge of God, we begin to know how to approach Him, and how to ask so as to receive an answer. When we understand the character of God, and know how to come to Him, He begins to unfold the heavens to us, and to tell us all about it. When we are ready to come to Him, He is ready to come to us."

How sweet that doctrine is, how logical, how true! It is too powerful for us to understand fully, but in that great intercession Jesus offered for himself and for his disciples, he prayed, "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." (John 17:5.)

First Questioner: An understanding of this past . . .

The Disciple: Is essential. So many present things are bound up in that past. So many present needs will not be met without knowing our past. The world speaks of the importance of belonging. The world speaks of the importance of an identity. Indeed, all the things that really matters in terms of belonging and identity are bound up in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Man is a perpetual vagabond without these insights, glimpsing only occasionally what was, what is, and what will yet be. Hence, that great important definition of truth as being "knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come." (D&C 93:24.) Hence, the encompassing essence of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Jacob promised us that "the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be. . . ." (Jacob 4:13; italics added.)

Truth cuts across all three time zones—our premortal state, our second state (mortality), and the eternal future that is fashioned for us. It is the understanding of these truths that can make men free as well as happy, as well as exceedingly anxious to share such truths with the "splendid strangers" who are all about us every day!
