Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Fourth Session

First Questioner: Is secular scholarship to be feared?

The Disciple: Not real scholarship that ferrets out and upholds truth regardless of its acceptance by others. More and more, for instance, real scholarship will point to the validity of the dispensational view of God's dealings with mankind from age to age. Early in this dispensation such ideas were utterly disregarded. Christianity preceded Christ in the sense that his work did not begin at once, in the meridian of time. His gospel and power and church have been on the earth at many points in history, and we should not be surprised to discover this fact in more and more ancient texts in the future. We shall also learn more and more about temple work's having been practiced and understood periodically. There will be a convergence of discoveries (never enough, mind you, to remove the need for faith) to make plain and plausible what the modern prophets have been saying all along.

Latter-day Saint scholars will show the way by being able to read firsthand such ancient texts rather than relying on secondary scholarship, as was the case earlier in this dispensation. We will be able to reach such texts through a Latter-day Saint lens rather than relying solely upon able Protestant and Catholic scholars, of whom it is unfair to expect full sensitivity to the fulness of the gospel's doctrines and ordinances.

First Questioner: You do not expect incontrovertible proof to come in this way?

The Disciple: No, but neither will the Church be outdone by hostile or pseudo-scholars.

Second Questioner: Is this recent development linked to the role of the Church in the world in this part of this dispensation?

The Disciple: Yes, it is one of several indicators of this period of preparation. The Church is becoming, as foretold, a light that can no longer be hid, a beacon to guide men out of the desert of disbelief. This will be a function not only of the increasing global outreach of the Church, but also because it is an ecclesiastical Everest. It will be seen by thoughtful men and women everywhere as the only real alternative to anarchy or to the gathering forces of anti-freedom.

Second Questioner: As a political force or military force?

The Disciple: No, as a force for righteousness: By stirring memories in many of what is good, honest, and of good report, alerting others helpfully to impending tribulation. By slowing the speed with which some men will reach for wrong solutions. By shoring up the Constitution of the United States on which so many (other than Americans) also really depend. By focusing on the family, that forgotten institution on which all the other institutions depend. By holding fast to chastity.

First Questioner: What, then, is the issue of most moment facing the Church?

The Disciple: As ever, the living and sharing of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Second Questioner: Could you be more specific?

The Disciple: In the words of Amulek, "the great question" which is, or should be, in the minds of many is whether there be a Christ. (Alma 34:5.) Everything hangs on this answer, and all other questions are subordinate. The reality of Christ's Sonship and his literal resurrection become crucial for all men, believers and disbelievers alike. Our task is to declare Christ and him crucified so well that all who dare will respond toward him in the midst of encircling secular gloom. The Savior emphasized this in his question to the Pharisees: "What think ye of Christ?" (Matthew 22:42.) President David O. McKay stressed the importance of the question:" 'What think ye of Christ?' . . . To the Church, and to the world, I repeat this question as being the most vital, the most far-reaching query in this unsettled, distracted world." (Gospel Ideals, Improvement Era, 1953, p. 1.)

Second Questioner: That response seems too broad.

The Disciple: It is intended to be. Just as all the other commandments and all the law hang on the first and second great commandments, so the need for any commandments at all hangs on the reality of Christ and God's plan for mankind. Otherwise, they would be right who declare that every man fares "in this life according to the management of the creature," and that "every man prosper[s] according to his genius, and that every man conquer[s] according to his strength; and whatsoever a man [does is] no crime." (Alma 30:17.) Now that's social Darwinism! Grim. Joyless. It is hell once removed.

Second Questioner: Please elaborate.

The Disciple: Flowing from the reality of Christ is everything else that matters: the realities of immortality (with individuality, accountability), the final triumph of truth, justice, and mercy, etc. Once the reality of Christ is accepted, for instance, then we can accept the truths proclaimed by his prophets. This is the same question put by Paul to Agrippa and by Jacob to Sherem: "Believest thou the scriptures?" The scriptures contain doctrines, depositions, and testimonies in transcripts, trailing over time and cultures.

Second Questioner: You speak of testimony and its importance. Does it not seem that some rest their testimony on fragile things and happenings such as one sometimes hears recounted in a fast and testimony meeting?

The Disciple: Depending on what you mean, perhaps I can respond. Sometimes in a fast and testimony meeting one hears reported an event or instance that by itself is not persuasive or even impressive to others. Care must be taken by the listener, however, to distinguish between the person's basic and original conversion and what is often added evidence or transitory blessings.

When we first cross the border of belief and enter the territory of testimony, that is a highly significant moment. We come through, as it were, a port of entry. The Spirit has borne witness to us that Jesus is the Christ, that God lives, that other truths related to these are accepted by us. Our later experiences do not really represent the recrossing of that border again and again. One does not need perpetual reasons for reentry.

These later reports you mention are most often a result of—not solely a reason for—believing. They are experiences to be shared gratefully as a result of one's adventures further inland in the second estate that corroborate one's convictions. These often reflect spiritual maturity rather than the recrossing of the borders of belief time and again; they are like exclaiming postcards reflecting progress in the journey in an increasingly celestial countryside.

First Questioner: Doesn't orthodoxy carry with it a connotation not only of strictness, but also of such seriousness that joylessness might prevail?

The Disciple: Saints do not have sad or woeful countenances. They are much more interesting than sinners. Sinners are so much the same in their sadness. Sometimes their very flamboyance betrays their sense of sameness. One who knows there is a plan of life and a presiding and loving God has very real challenges and does not escape tragedy, but he can better cope with such experiences.

Humor as a reflection of the incongruities of life can be helpful. The living prophets I have known have all had such a sense of humor.

Orthodoxy is a high and real adventure full of rich variety in experiences and people. There is nothing dull about it. We must be very serious about joy.

First Questioner: You stress the importance of recognizing that life is a test and a proving place. Does accepting that doctrine make the test easier?

The Disciple: Knowing that one is in the midst of a testing time does not make the test any less real. The disciple is not able to wink slyly, as if he could cope with one hand tied behind him. His teeth rattle, too. It's "all out" for everybody, and then we scarcely make it.

The temptations of Jesus were terrifyingly real even though he did not yield. The difference is that those who are (or who will become) Saints reach breaking points without breaking. Often this is the very kind of humble report you hear at fast and testimony meetings—about the passing of one of those mortal milestones.

Second Questioner: Specify, please. Your last answer on the matter of testimony meeting was not fully responsive.

The Disciple: In just one such meeting this is an actual summary of what happened: A brother spoke movingly of his faith in God even though this man's wife had died within the month and had at the last such meeting borne her final testimony. Next, a father who had lost a son in an accident spoke of his deep sorrow but also of his joy at becoming worthy again to get a temple recommend. A sister who had sung in the Tabernacle Choir spoke in a near whisper of impending surgery, which she hopes and prays will permit her lovely singing voice to be used again. A returned missionary spoke lovingly and movingly of his parents, including a mother who had been excommunicated. Two men spoke who had recently survived heart attacks, and while their voices were feeble, their testimonies were strong. And an aging convert sister gave her grateful testimony, perhaps one of her last. Their messages were basically the same: God lives! The gospel is true! It works!

Surely the Saints in such settings strengthen, exhort, and edify each other. Remember, these were words from soldiers in the trenches of life, not communiques from some country club safely removed from the mortal fray.

Second Questioner: Discipleship involves committing oneself to an unusual host of beliefs. Is there any difficulty for you in doing this?

The Disciple: None, really. There is, in fact, only the simple explanation of life in human existence offered in the gospel of Jesus Christ. There is no truly competing explanation.

First Questioner: Do you believe the one explanation simply because you would like to believe it?

The Disciple: I believe the gospel because it is true, not because it is comfortable or unique. The demands of discipleship are too deep and constant. One would not assume the burdens of belief unless the belief were actually true. There are those moments between the point of believing and feeling the weight of it all and the point when blessings come so confirmingly. That is not a cross one would shoulder without actually wanting to follow in the footsteps of One who carried such a heavy cross!

You can see why, since Latter-day Saints have the truth, we are so anxious to share it with others, and why it is so crucial to understand the human condition.

Second Questioner: How do you reconcile the idea of there being one chosen people with the idea of universal brotherhood?

The Disciple: The question needs to be phrased in a different way before it can be answered. First, we need to ask, "Has God ever chosen a certain group of people to do his work?" The designation "chosen," of course, is not just status; it confers great responsibilities upon those chosen to reach their fellowmen. God gives the picks and shovels to the "chosen" because they are willing to go to work and get callouses on their hands. They may not be the best or most capable, but they are the most available.

But let's return to the primary question. If the answer to this question is "Yes, God has, at times, chosen individuals as well as a whole people," then there follows a second question: Is there such a designated people in our time? For those who accept the Old and New Testaments, it seems clear that God selected a people who constituted a microscopic portion of the earth's population to lead out in serving their fellowmen in the manner Heavenly Father prescribed. Such individuals did not choose God, but he chose them.

Second Questioner: There's no dismissing the connotation that the word "chosen" has come to have.

The Disciple: Probably not in the minds of some. Herman Wouk said of God's choosing of the house of Judah that they were "elected to special duties and disciplines." Incidentally, the act of being chosen in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints often means giving up 15 percent or so of one's gross income and a significant portion of what might be called one's "free" time. Being chosen also means being subject to derision and the amusement of others, and sometimes even persecution. Further, being chosen requires one to swim against the cultural stream as often as not. Being "chosen" is an unattractive designation for anybody but those who sincerely seek to do the will of our Father in heaven, since it often includes obscurity of sorts.

Second Questioner: God may have chosen a people in the past, but what is to suggest God has done it now?

The Disciple: Reconsider the situation. Israel constituted, demographically, a tiny portion of the people on earth at that time. Presently, the membership of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accounts for a small percentage of the people on earth at this time. Both are microscopic portions, aren't they?

I stress the earlier observation that those so chosen are not chosen for a life of repose. Remember the line from Fiddler on the Roof in which one of the characters asked God to choose someone else for a change?

With the privilege of being chosen, come heavy, heavy responsibilities. How many men like the chosen Abraham, for instance, would climb Mount Moriah to sacrifice their sons? When Jesus chose his apostles in the meridian of time (privileged and marvelous as their callings were), it meant that each of them in a different way was to give his very life for the cause.

There is a further criterion that ought not to be ignored, one given by the Lord himself in these latter days in which he says, "Behold, there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson." (D&C 121:34-35.) It makes sense to me that the Lord would choose out of the world those who are (or who could become) different from the world and, therefore, could lead the world to a different outcome. We must be different in order to make a difference.

Second Questioner: The commitment to chastity on the part of the Church seems to be deep. Is there really much evidence that the consequences of unchastity and unfaithfulness are as serious as represented?

The Disciple: There is considerable evidence to suggest the soul-searing consequences of unchastity and unfaithfulness. But even if these data did not exist, it would be enough for the disciple to know that the Lord forbids sexual immorality. What we already know about God teaches us to trust him for what we do not know fully.

Writer-historian John Lukacs has said, ". . . the problem of sexual, that is, of carnal morality is at the center of the moral crisis of our times; it is not merely a marginal development." Perhaps for different reasons than those of Mr. Lukacs, the Church of Jesus Christ, like the Savior whose name it bears, has a very strict standard with regard to sexual behavior. You will recall that Jesus in his teachings stresses the wrongness of even mental adultery.

Will and Ariel Durant, who studied mankind and have written a multi-volume history, observed that sex is like a river of fire, and unless it is banked and cooled by a hundred restraints, it will destroy not only the individual but the group as well.

Years ago a British sociologist named Unwin said of his studies of dozens of civilizations or societies that a culture or society could not sustain both great social energy and unchastity for more than a generation.

The soul-scarring experiences of children sired by fleeing fathers also give sad evidence. There are examples from many war-torn countries about those who were fathered and then abandoned. Stranded between two cultures, some such children live lives of rage and resentment as they grow older.

However, the case for chastity is probably still more transcendental than we realize. It probably deals with issues so deep and with truths so powerful that we can scarcely manage them. Hence, it should be enough for us to be committed to this commandment without having to have all of the statistical measurements we might like to have. Meanwhile, we are certainly not without the latter.

First Questioner: Is living up to the ideal so constantly necessary?

The Disciple: Christopher Booker in Trousered Apes makes the point, "When men cease to aspire to the ideal, the good, to self-restraint—whether in their arts or in their lives—they do not just stand still, but actually turn the other way, finding self-fulfillment in self-indulgence, and in an obsession with those three ultimate expressions of the totally self-centered life: sex, violence, and insanity." Our society is not static; it is moving, and the disciple must move against the crush, against the celebration of feeling, for the latter is so dangerous in a situation of standardlessness, for the criterion of pleasure cannibalizes all other criteria!
