Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Fifth Session

Second Questioner: Aren't the requirements for activity in the Church simply too rigorous and too demanding?

The Disciple: Not really, but gospel living is not "softball," it is "hard ball." If we are not prudent and not wise, we can, on our own, overload the circuit, hence the comments made on this matter in our second session. The re-emergence of this concern suggests my failure to respond adequately.

On one occasion, after hearing him preach some hard saying, the disciples of Jesus Christ said to him, "Who then can be saved?" Jesus replied to them in a way that didn't minimize the difficulties or the requirements of discipleship. He said, "With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible." At the same time he reassured his disciples with one of the most stunningly specific promises in all of scripture. (See Matthew 19:16-30.)

If you had asked me, "Can a person accept too many callings in a branch or a ward and get too overloaded in terms of the time left for family, work, community, and so forth," the answer would be yes, in the sense that you ask. But if we ask ourselves, "Am I doing quite enough to help further the Lord's work," then our answer must be no. Most of us can do a better job of managing our time and our talents than we do, but it is important to do as the Lord suggested—to run no faster than we are able. When we run faster than we are able, we get both inefficient and tired.

I am personally persuaded, however, that there are no idle moments, only idle people. I have yet to meet the perfect manager of time. I am not talking about the mere ritual of doing things, but of our using our free agency in such a way that we do the things that matter most, so that these things are not at the mercy of the things that matter least. The Lord will help us before we have reached such limits as we may have.

I have on my office wall a wise and useful reminder by Anne Morrow Lindbergh concerning one of the realities of life. She wrote, "My life cannot implement in action the demands of all the people to whom my heart responds." That's good counsel for us all, not as an excuse to forgo duty, but as a sage point about pace and the need for quality in relationships.

First Questioner: Is it possible to become too subtle with something as simple as the gospel?

The Disciple: Indeed it is, and we must ever be aware that this possibility exists. I don't think of the gospel as subtle, however; I think of it as deep and simple. For instance, some might say that what follows is a subtlety: God can love the sinner and hate the sin. When our desires and our actions go against his plans for us, he must be against us and what we are then doing. But that really means that God is always for us. He never regards man with contempt, but regards many of the things we do as contemptible. In the very moment in which Jesus sent Judas away to do his awful deed, He still loved Judas; His disciple whom He had taught unconditional love, who could not love Jesus, nevertheless could not move outside the range of Jesus' love even in betrayal.

Some truths take a good deal of pondering, but not because they are complex. Because they are so powerful and cut so deeply, we must truly feel their edge—and more than fleetingly.

First Questioner: Can you give another example?

The Disciple: Another example would be the frequency with which in poetic scriptures the Lord equates truth and light. Put a person in darkness and ask him to walk in a straight path and he cannot do it for very long, if at all. We must have the illumination in order to have direction, and the gospel of Jesus Christ gives us illumination and direction, as well as motivation.

The gospel standards have to be upheld even when they are unpopular. The upholding isn't done out of arrogance. It's done so that all who will may avoid the peril of trying to walk a precise path in the dark. Those who have the truth are not preening themselves; they mustn't let their light go out, or others will perish too.

First Questioner: Why is Satan so subtle?

The Disciple: Subtlety is one way in which Satan appears to have been able to influence some religious art. It was George McDonald who observed, "If the Lord were to appear this day in England as once in Palestine, He would not come in the halo of the painters or with the wintry shine of effeminate beauty, of sweet weakness, in which it is the helpless custom to represent Him."

It does not surprise me that Satan would thus try to influence the painting of pictures of a Jesus Satan never saw. Satan encountered no effeminate Lord on the Mount of Temptation. Satan did not go up against a frail Lord in the preexistence, nor was he dispatched out of the presence of a fragile Lord. Indeed, the Lord whom Satan often has had represented in religious art is just the opposite of that Being of whom he is so fearfully jealous. There is no truth in Lucifer's art.

First Questioner: Do you find value in certain writings of non-Latter-day Saint writers?

The Disciple: There are a handful whom I value much. I don't get my theology from them, but phrasings and insights. I would like, for instance, to have written this superb analogy of George McDonald, who said, "Human science is but the backward undoing of the tapestry web of God's science, . . . always going farther and farther away from the point where his work culminates in revelation."

Second Questioner: What, after all, is the need for an institutional church?

The Disciple: Very clearly, a fully institutionalized church is needed, else the Lord would not have established one, both in the meridian of time (in the Middle East as well as the American continent), and subsequently. I have often said that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is organized love and organized concern. We need the saving ordinances administered in an authoritative way, and we need each other. One of the genius features of the gospel is that it does not permit us to escape from our brothers and sisters. We do not draw closer to our brother by pushing others away from us. We are also more effective by joining together in administering help and aid rather than being a frail force for random goodness in the world. We can't be one unless we are at least two; when there are four million of us it is a special challenge—but not insuperable.

First Questioner: Do you wish to develop this further?

The Disciple: There is just too much on record and too many reasons to have an institutional church to question seriously its value and the need for it. People who are inside the Church are in a sense inside something holy, and we can understand it, mostly. It is difficult to tell a so-called tourist more than superficial things about something he remains outside of or experiences only fleetingly. If he really wishes to know, he must come inside. Tourists seldom really savor a place even when inside! It is difficult for nonbelievers to describe the believer's world. The nonbeliever can circle a concept indefinitely—like besieging armies outside a city wall—without grasping it.

What the disciple holds to be holy, when described by someone who does not see it as holy, will likely be seen as amusing, or even strange, and almost always it is described condescendingly. This latter outcome is probable even when there is no malice present.

Truth can be very threatening. We do not read, for instance, that the power structure in Jerusalem ever seriously searched the sermons of Jesus with a view to understanding; the cognoscente concerned themselves with entrapment, not enlightenment.

First Questioner: What of the second coming of Christ? In the revelations given to Joseph Smith, the Lord speaks about coming soon, and that has been nearly 150 years ago.

The Disciple: The Lord's "soon" may be our century. If I were to say to you at 11:35 p.m., "When will it be midnight?" you would say "soon" or "right away."

First Questioner: Yes, but the passage of more than a full century surely suggests, does it not, there may be a lack of immediacy even now?

The Disciple: A hundred years ago, the Jews had not gathered to the New Jerusalem in any significant numbers. A hundred years ago, man did not have the atomic bomb and the capacity to destroy the world by fire. A hundred years ago, we did not have the capacity for germ warfare, which could leave some of the horrible outcomes mentioned in the 45th section of the Doctrine and Covenants. A hundred years ago, the Church was not preaching the gospel in many nations "for a witness." A hundred years ago, the light of the restored gospel was just a glow out in a western American desert. Now it is a light that is breaking forth that can no longer be hidden. A hundred years ago, the Saints did not have their own constitutional rights and scarcely were in a position to help save the nation in terms of constitutional crises.

Second Questioner: These are impressive signs, but not conclusive.

The Disciple: They are to me! Another important indicator is the manner and vigor with which the adversary opposes the work of the Church. Satan can tell time!

It didn't matter a great deal to him when sects contended with one another, some of whose doctrines were wrong. Once the priesthood of God was upon the face of the earth, and God's work began to roll, and the Saints lengthened their stride, we must assume Lucifer's opposition became far more bold and far more direct, as well as deceivingly subtle.

Further, the rate of deterioration in the moral standards of many has accelerated. I fear many of the people are not aware of how far they have gone down the path on which Satan would lead them carefully to hell.

Who would have said fifty, twenty, even ten years ago that we would be taking the lives of unborn babies in the United States at the rate of thousands a month? We are making some delivery rooms not a place of birth, but of deliberate death too. How secure are the aged in a society that is so cruel to the helpless fetus? It is the flaunting of evil, as well as the doing of it, that chills me. Hypocrisy is bad, but at least in those circumstances people want to pretend to be better than they are. Today, some people almost want to show and to flaunt their evil.

While Lot's wife and the small party of which she was a member were told not to look back at Sodom for a very good reason, we in our time have good reason to look back at Sodom!

Second Questioner: Is the Church all that different and distinguishable from the world and its people?

The Disciple: Individually we need to be more different. Collectively, the wheat and tares are to grow side by side until the end comes. Wheat and tares in their early stages are not as distinguishable from each other as at a later stage in maturity. When the wheat becomes more like wheat and the tares become more like tares, the rate of distinctiveness thus doubles. Likewise, as there is a deterioration of standards in the world, the light of the Church shines ever more brightly because other things are growing darker.

The Church is pulling away from the world at a rate that would be noticeable even if the world were standing still in its standards. But the world is pulling away even from standards it once held. Thus the Church and the world are parting company like two speeding cars going in opposite directions. The Church is also increasing in its institutional efficiency as well as in its globalness and multi-culturalness. It is making its mark in many lands and in many more lives than ever before.

Second Questioner: You indicate a convergence of things in our times that have the air of destiny about them. Please elaborate.

The Disciple: First, there is the increasing presence of choice and talent-laden spirits sent now because of what each can add to the symphony of salvation. President George Q. Cannon said these were reserved because they would have "the courage and determination to face the world" and because they would "honor" God "supremely" and would be "fearless" and "obedient" to God "under all circumstances." I am impressed, deeply impressed, with the youth and young adults in the Church, collectively. President Cannon's statement simply underscores, prophetically, what so many of us see and feel in this regard.

Next, there is the increasing convergence, even collision, of the two great forces in the world. President Brigham Young said, "It was revealed to me in the commencement of the Church, that the Church would spread, prosper, grow, and extend, and that in proportion to the spread of the gospel among the nations of the world so would the power of Satan rise." (Italics added.) The very progress of the Church will be an indicator that we should expect retrogression elsewhere in so many ways.

Next, reflect on the increasing polarization also suggested by President Cannon when he said that the warfare of the two basic forces would go on increasing "until it will fill the whole earth—until the warfare that has been inaugurated will occupy the thoughts and minds of all the inhabitants of the earth." (Italics added.) President Cannon called the warfare "irrepressible."

For me, all this spells high drama and sobering circumstances. Most of all, it suggests that serious discipleship is the only discipleship that will be good enough to do the job.

First Questioner: In assessing almost any theology, one is left with the need to make the so-called leap of faith. But Mormonism is not a doctrinal ditch. Comparatively, the acceptance of the restored gospel is a Grand Canyon to be vaulted.

The Disciple: It is the leap of one's life! Since the human predicament, as some describe it, is so very real, the necessary response is a major commitment. It is not solved by merely moving next door. Emancipation from evil involves distance, behaviorally and theologically; the Grand Canyon comparison has merit. But it is do-able.

Fortunately, faith is much more empirical than many realize. It is evidence, though of things not seen. It is a stage in the evolution of evidence that precedes hard knowledge, as Alma points out so beautifully. (Alma 32.) We can actually experiment with gospel principles and accumulate our own personal evidence concerning the things experimented upon. We become our own witnesses as our minds expand and our souls swell. With God we can get across what you call Grand Canyon.

Alma asked of this process, "O then, is not this real?" He likens reality to light, "because it is discernible." Alma even employs the notion of taste. Little wonder an enlightened Joseph Smith on one occasion said of a doctrine and teaching, "This is good doctrine. It tastes good. I can taste the principles of eternal life, and so can you. . . . You say honey is sweet, and so do I. I can also taste the spirit of eternal life. I know it is good; and when I tell you of these things which were given to me by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, you are bound to receive them as sweet, and rejoice more and more." (Italics added.) Alma and Joseph preached the same thing as a result of their trying successfully the experiment of the gospel's goodness. (Alma 32:35.)

Second Questioner: Is this still "believe it because you want to," not "believe because it's true"?

The Disciple: It is believe because you must! The spiritual resonance results from rightness and from reality, not from idle wishes. The experiments involve perspiration and inspiration, labor and love, service and study, each of which yields up its confirming data on the basis of the cosmic law obeyed.

First Questioner: Doesn't the revelation dealing with the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89) make the impending conspiracy prophesied therein a little dramatic?

The Disciple: No. Combine the profit motive with the fanning of human appetite in things narcotic, or near narcotic, and the warning is not too dramatic at all. Suppose those who now profit from cigarettes were to seek dominion over the legalized use of marijuana. You can be quite certain that those who were resistant to calling attention to the harmful effects of nicotine will end up extolling the harmlessness of "pot." There is already a built-in, national constituency favoring such legalization.

Now, if such were to happen, and time and real research were to demonstrate the harmfulness of marijuana, how easy do you think it would be for a whole society to disengage? Whose lock-them-in style does this sort of consequence suggest? Such a condition would be brought about by the very "conspiring men in the last days" who brought us accelerated alcoholism, prostitution, and gambling. Such conspirators will not view with favor a minority of sin-resistant souls who seem to block their path, any more than their evil counterparts tolerated the Old Testament prophets who were an irritating interruption centuries ago!
