Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Sixth Session

First Questioner: One of the challenges of discipleship is for an individual to be in the world but not of it. Is this a play on words?

The Disciple: It is work, not a play on words. This is a continuing challenge because of the duality of demands made upon us. We find Joseph in ancient Egypt succeeding very well at being a chosen vessel of the Lord, rising through adversity to become a virtual "prime minister" of Egypt. He seems never to have compromised himself, and was ever resilient in rising above his challenges and disappointments. We don't have many details of his discipleship, but he was a high-achieving individual, spiritually and professionally. There are those who appear to do this dual thing very well; for others it is a real challenge.

First Questioner: Is there not some danger of fragmentation of the faithful in their trying to do too much in too many different ways at the same time?

The Disciple: Unquestionably. Nevertheless, we can achieve in the world without being compromised by the world. But no one except Jesus has done all of that perfectly. A disciple, for instance, would avoid being in an earthly environment that perpetually presses him to compromise. The same Joseph mentioned a moment ago finally fled out of the presence of Potiphar's wife. Even then, he didn't escape unrighteous judgment, but he refused to become bitter because he had been falsely accused. Chances are that some of us would do well to flee (more often than we do) those settings in which Satan can so incessantly work upon us. By refusing to escape, we can place ourselves in circumstances where temptations could become more than we can bear. It is our obligation to get out of such circumstances.

First Questioner: But aren't we supposed to be a light and a leaven in all circumstances?

The Disciple: Yes, but we are also to avoid even the appearance of evil. Going to "Lucifer's Lounge" is not only risky for us, but may also mislead, divert, or discourage another weaker colleague. It is up to us to use our agency to make certain that we are not tempted above that which we are able to bear.

First Questioner: Can you give us an example?

The Disciple: A good example would be the full-time missionaries who are sent out in diverse circumstances in order to be a light and to carry the gospel message to others. They are given (and follow for the most part) rather strict rules in terms of circumstances they are to avoid and circumstances they are to depart from. The full-time disciple ought to follow similar rules rather than assume that he will be blessed regardless of his choice of circumstances. In coping with temptation we can usually interrupt the temptation by a change of thought, scenery, or circumstance. Almost always we can reduce the temptation. Alcoholics on the road to reform don't hang around bars.

Temptation does not have a crowbar with which to force its way into our consciousness; we decide whether or not we will give place to a thought or impulse.

Second Questioner: But, setting temptations aside . . .

The Disciple: That's not easily done.

Second Questioner: Of course, but what of the multiple demands made upon the time of faithful members of the Church who are asked to serve politically and in civic life, who are asked to serve their families and to do their Church chores? It is that kind of fragmentation that many say they experience.

The Disciple: The highest challenge we have in mortality is to use our free agency well, making right choices in the interplay of time and talents. Time is one of the blessings we are given. Generally speaking, it is we who let ourselves get fragmented too much. It is the result of not establishing (and then persisting in) certain priorities in our life. I am not denying the reality of the challenge you put, but neither do I think it is unmanageable.

I presume, for instance, that a person with many young adult friends could spend almost every night of the week going to wedding receptions, but making a success of his own marriage and family life would be far more important.

A person could get so caught up in making civic contributions to his community that he could lose his family. By the same token, one cannot readily save his family in an environment in decay. Thus we have obligations to contribute to the civic betterment of the communities in which we live.

This sort of question suggests to me the need for us all to be guided much more by the Holy Ghost, which will show us all the things we should do. (2 Nephi 32:3.) By living to merit that kind of daily guidance, we can avoid being caught in time traps, temptation traps, and some civic claptrap as well!

First Questioner: Are there (as you suggest there almost always are) any examples from the scriptures that help us in this regard?

The Disciple: I value the example of the important teaching that Jesus gave on the occasion when he was with Martha and Mary. Martha was filled with what we have come to call Martha-like anxiety about getting dinner on the table and other chores to be done. Mary was drinking in that divine communion with the Savior, leaving her duties unattended, or at least so it seemed to Martha. Jesus, you will recall, gently reproved Martha. He noted that she was "careful" but also that she was "troubled about many things." Conscientious people are often too anxious about being anxious. Jesus commended Martha for her devotion to duty but suggested that she had her priorities wrong. Mary, he observed, had chosen that "good part," and her memories were not to be taken from her. Martha was concerned with getting another meal served. The conversation that night was eternal; the calories were not.

When we get filled with Martha-like anxiety, it usually stems from failure to establish proper priorities. There can be a time and place for certain service. A mother with six young children in her household might not find those years to be the years when she can do as much community service as later on. A man serving in the bishopric may not find those years to be the best years for making a major contribution to the political party of his choice. But he should not excuse himself forever from his civic chores. A student going to medical school can do his basic Church assignments and be an effective husband and father, but those years are probably not the years when he could contribute as much time as he desires to fund-raising for the local symphony.

Basically, if we are properly motivated and are proper managers of our time, there is a time and season for various good causes in our lives. The contributing emphasis, of course, must be upon keeping the commandments and being effective in our family life.

First Questioner: But cannot family life, like any other principle, become distorted?

The Disciple: I suppose it could. We have in the Mafia an unbalanced ascendancy of family. Family-centered crime is still crime. Even a correct principle, when pursued to the exclusion of all the others, can go wild, resulting in tragic imbalance. I don't, however, see too many people who give too much effective time to their family. Theoretically, it could happen.

The constant test of time utilization is like the other tests mentioned earlier. It is real. The very fact that we find pain and struggle therein ought to suggest to us that the test is upon us even now—it is not some future thing. But we must never assume it is unmanageable, greater than we can endure.

There have been times in my life when I have had to trim time commitments. It is somewhat like getting in debt. We can get in over our heads and find it painful to get out. Every now and then we need to examine our time as well as our dollar commitments, to make certain we can deliver on them. Generally, other people are quite understanding if we reach a time of retrenchment.

With regard to helping others, it should be said that the gospel does another grand thing for us: it helps us know what is really helpful. The wrong kind of help—however well motivated or lavishly administered—can be harmful. One does not run about indiscriminately with a jackhammer in times of earthquake, though a jackhammer might be needed at some points.

First Questioner: Are there not those moments of truth when one's discipleship can be in jeopardy because the very assertion of it is apt to be misunderstood?

The Disciple: Definitely. Misunderstanding comes with the Christian's breakfast cereal. Yet one can explain that he is in a circumstance where he is not comfortable with what is happening and he doesn't wish to be misunderstood, but he does want to let everyone know where he stands. I have not always done this as well as I could. There are other times when our very silence is the most articulate expression of our discipleship.

Second Questioner: Isn't the idea of eternal progression a concept that creates almost unrealistic pressures to improve?

The Disciple: You're back to that same basic concern again. Discipleship need not be hectic. The gospel suggests to us ultimate perfection, but eternal progression rests on the assumption of gradual but regular improvement in our lives. In the city of Enoch the near perfection of this people occurred "in process of time" over many, many years. This is also the case with us.

First Questioner: Yes, but some goals seem to be far out of reach, more distant than any star.

The Disciple: Yes, some goals are especially challenging. One may pay a perfect tithing and be perfect in offerings and in attendance at sacrament meetings. Such goals are surely more measureable and more reachable.

The next layer of goals, such as near perfection in our stewardship (whether as a home, visiting, or Sunday School teacher), is still not out of our reach.

Sometimes we make the mistake of assuming that because we can't become the perfect neighbor this year, we can't even start, or do anything else, this year. Many tasks in the Church can be done exceedingly well. I do not say it is easy, but it is possible for home teachers to do their job near perfectly.

By the way, when I see people performing at very high levels of perfection in things like tithing and attendance at church meetings, putting these challenges, in a sense, behind them, they thus permit themselves to reach for the next level of achievement in discipleship. We need those departure points and some baselines from which we can measure, so that we can tell if we are getting better and doing better. If there are no standards, how would we make any measurements?

The Church sets standards for us in many areas, but many of the standards of personal performance must be set by us. An unwillingness to set standards or goals for ourselves, of course, can result in a Mormon malaise, going nowhere—but very anxiously. Setting and achieving goals can give us spiritual momentum in our lives and deserved self-esteem. This pattern of achievement is self-reinforcing and produces a contagion that affects others as well as ourselves.

First Questioner: Sincerity seems so very basic, but isn't more than sincerity required?

The Disciple: Of course, more than sincerity is required, but we must be serious and sincere about our objectives and our goals. One of the inevitable products of insincerity is fatigue—fatigue in interpersonal relations, fatigue with oneself. Even the clarity of our communications is reduced by insincerity. It was George Orwell who said, "The great enemy of clear language is insincerity. When there is a gap between one's real and one's declared aims, one turns, as it were instinctively, to long words and exhausted idioms, like a cuddlefish squirting out ink."

First Questioner: Then insincerity is . . .

The Disciple: Insincerity gets in the way of facing the basic questions. Insincerity is all parry and no thrust. That's why the basic questions must be answered once and for all in terms of our fundamental commitments. If we are sincere and serious about these strategic things, then the smaller things are manageable.

A certain amount of divine discontent in our lives, even productive disappointment with ourselves, can be a spur to further achievement. The essayist Walter Pater said, "The way to perfection is through a series of disgusts." It is when we really know we can do better and are disappointed with ourselves (without being immobilized by a sense of guilt) that we are often in a position to move forward.

The first two great commandments are selfless commandments, but are related to our having a healthy self-esteem. These commandments really don't say anything about meeting one's own needs. They speak of devotion and love going outward to God and to our neighbors. That strategic shift in point of view is accomplished when one's life is sufficiently healthy and righteous that he can look to the needs of others and become less self-centered. That is, of course, one of the milestones in discipleship. One sees that natural selflessness in the life of someone like President Spencer W. Kimball, whose righteousness is such a regularized way of life.

With selflessness comes also the need for us to be humble enough to accept help as well as give it. Refusal to accept help is one of the forms of pride that must be overcome. Having mentioned President Kimball regarding selflessness, it is only fair to mention him in this latter respect as well. There have been critical points in his life where others have helped him and he has been gracious and wise enough to let them help him. One such episode occurred when he was recovering from throat surgery and was not yet speaking in stake conferences. In this case, his tender tutor was President Harold B. Lee, then a senior colleague in the Council of the Twelve Apostles.

Partway through the morning session of a stake conference Elder Lee called upon Elder Kimball to speak, much to Elder Kimball's surprise and dismay. Obedient but understandably anxious and chagrined, he uttered a few lines somewhat inaudibly. In the afternoon session the same invitation was extended, again to Elder Kimball's dismay. He felt he could not do it, and he had so demonstrated that very morning! Yet he was obedient to the catalytic urging of his senior colleague. It was then, President Kimball recalls, that he knew that the Lord intended him to recover the powers of speech sufficiently to carry out his holy calling.
