Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Seventh Session

Second Questioner: Is not Church life almost too busy for any serious, personal introspection?

The Disciple: It need not be. We are given some extra opportunities for institutional introspection when we are interviewed for temple recommends, when we are interviewed for assignments and callings, when we are set apart, when we give or receive a father's blessing or a patriarchal blessing. These are times when we should do some contemplating, some measuring, some soul-searching. They occur at rather regular intervals in most of our lives and could occur even more often if we would let them.

Introspection isn't intended, of course, to be a selfish, sickly sort of thing in which we become preoccupied with self to the exclusion of everything else. G. K. Chesterton advised us to get outside ourselves, to get outside the tiny little theater in which our own little plot is always being played, and to be interested in others even though they are not interested in us, promising that if we would so do, we would soon find ourselves "under a freer sky and in a streetful of splendid strangers."

The individual interface with the institution of the Church constantly gives us a chance to be separated from our selfish concerns. In the kingdom, we are also shown people who have heavier crosses to bear than we do, and we are given chances to help them. Life in the Church helps to put our own personal problems in perspective, and that is very, very healthy. Bearing one's testimony and expressing gratitude are like periodic inventories; counting our blessings is both healthy and invigorating. Counting is better than commiserating.

First Questioner: What, then, are some of the skills and strengths that enable us to lift and to then carry the cross?

The Disciple: First, we must realize that the weight of the cross is great enough without our also carrying burdens that we could jettison through the process of repentance. Paul gave us wise counsel in this regard when he said, ". . . let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily befit us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us." (Hebrews 12:1.) It is much more difficult for us to carry the cross when our back is already bent with the burdens of bad behavior.

Second, the cross is not something we can shoulder and then stand still. Of the Savior we read the following: "And he bearing his cross went forth." (John 19:17.) The cross is easier to carry if we keep moving. Action and service happily require our attention so that sagging self-pity can be avoided.

Third, we must realize that we can only contemplate the cross just so long; rhetoric will not raise it. It must soon either be taken up or turned away from!

Fourth, no natural resource is more precious than time. These mortal moments matter more than we know. There are no idle hours; there are only idle people.

Second Questioner: But people face such differing circumstances in life that perfect justice and perfect judgment seem impossible!

The Disciple: Not for a perfect God who is also perfect in his mercy. Actually, our circumstances and settings often differ less than our responses to them.

First Questioner: Could you please give us some cases of coping successfully and of failure to cope?

The Disciple: Contemplate two walks up, and then down, the slopes of two adjacent mountains—Mount Moriah and the Mount of Olives.

Up one mountain came Judas "with a great multitude" to kiss and to betray the Master. One wonders what the walk down the mountain that night was like for Judas and which was more searing—his lips on Jesus' face or Jesus' words in his ears, "Betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?" (Luke 22:48.) Few scenes of pathos rank with that of a guilty Judas trying to give back the 30 pieces of silver and seeing how those who had used him so fiendishly were devoid of mercy and empathy for him. Judas' soul-slide was not a sudden thing, and his subsequent suicide ranks as perhaps the most self-contemptuous in history.

A contrasting case—centuries before—involved an obedient Abraham who walked up nearby Mount Moriah with his son Isaac: ". . . they were both of them together." Abraham had been told, "Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest." (Genesis 22:6, 2.) We do not know what, if anything, the father and son conversed about on the way up Moriah, but ponder what marvelous moments were later possible when father and son walked together down that mountain!

Significantly, Abraham did not see the substitute ram on Mount Moriah until after the moment that mattered, when he obediently "stretched forth his hand, and took the knife. . . ." (Genesis 22:9.) Sometimes the cross must be taken up just that decisively. There is no time for an agonizing appraisal.

Second Questioner: You will need to elaborate on that more than you have, please.

The Disciple: The scenery and settings of our lives are often quite similar, but things of eternal significance are always going on, even if unnoticed by us; a mere glance will miss the immortality in these moments that matter. For instance, in terms of learning impact, there is simply no comparison between what you and I thought of when we last heard a rooster crow and what Peter thought when he heard the soul-piercing sound of a cock crowing, especially the second time! That sound, no doubt, sent a shudder of sorrow through Peter, but it was godly sorrow, the kind that causes a cleansing and sends us inward to scrub our soul. You and I have heard roosters crowing many times in our lives, but for him, that moment was singular.

When we see each other in the morning, our sleep has often not been the same, even though we usually each say the same "Good morning." Uriah apparently slept very well when, as a loyal lieutenant of King David, he slept with the servants on the floor at King David's door. Uriah was loyal to his men "in the open fields," to his king, and to his wife, Bathsheba. By contrast, one cannot help but wonder how well the conspiring and adulterous David slept that same night! The later lamentations of David suggest that many sleepless nights followed his sending of the uncompromised Uriah to his death—in the "forefront of the hottest battle," where the "valiant men were." Uriah fell, but David plummeted from the privileged place reserved for him in the next world. (See 2 Samuel 11.)

Thus, there are certain mortal moments and minutes that matter—certain hingepoints in the history of each human. Some seconds are so decisive that they shrink the soul, while other seconds are spent so as to stretch the soul!
