Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Eighth Session

First Questioner: You seem to see design in so many settings.

The Disciple: Yes, and if I were a better man, I could see much more.

Second Questioner: Skeptics see it much differently.

The Disciple: Skeptics are not only smug, but are pathetically provincial and insular. Skeptics come to believe strongly in skepticism, and they are very orthodox. Far from being liberating, skepticism leads men into cruel, conceptual cul de sacs.

Second Questioner: But are there not too many differences in various human cultures to see any divine design?

The Disciple: Such differences are actually only local letters in an alphabet of affinity, which, over and over again, spell out purpose, hope, and divine design. Your assertion in the form of a question is the other side of another assumption: some say that cultural similarities are causes to conclude that man is alone. But one must not mistake the fragments of original faith for evidence against that faith. One must recognize doctrinal debris for what it is—remnants of revealed religion, pieces of powerful principles that are as traceable as pieces of ancient pottery.

Second Questioner: All you are asserting is that if one sees things your way, he sees things your way!

The Disciple: There you go with an exclamation point again. Eyes of faith see more distantly and more deeply.

Second Questioner: That leaves those who see things otherwise with a "take it or leave it" explanation, does it not?

The Disciple: Initially, all they must do is to look. The Lord told Moses that the children of Israel needed initially only to look on the brass serpent and they would be healed. (Numbers 21:8.) That is the beginning of salvation. Yet, we should not be surprised if some of our friends do not desire to look through the theological telescope. Like Galileo's friends, they are afraid of what they will see.

First Questioner: Is it not possible for one to look and then lose the vision of what he saw?

The Disciple: Yes. Alma asked some members of the Church how they felt now—at the moment—about spiritual things. (Alma 5:26.) He was simply underscoring the recurring reality of lapsed literacy in spiritual things, a condition for the disciple as much to be feared as arthritis in acrobats.

First Questioner: Yes, one is asked to believe simultaneously so very much, so very specifically, about so many things, is he not?

The Disciple: Partial belief may be enough commitment for partial truths, but full acceptance is the required response for full truths.

Society has much more of a stake in values than many realize. Creeds do count. Concepts do have consequences. Both affect life-style. "Swinging" parents are much more apt to produce self-centered children. Such children impose certain costs on all of society for these failures that occurred in the early years of their lives. Someday society will see the connection between beliefs and behavior.

First Questioner: I was thinking of more strategic things . . .

The Disciple: What is more strategic for civilization than the harvest from the family garden where good humans are best grown?

Second Questioner: You are too absolute. Relativism in one's philosophy of life is sometimes a defense against being taken in by believing too much. It is a deliberate caution to avoid the naivetes of the past, is it not?

The Disciple: Relativism may be the disbeliever's defense, but it is the devil's offense. It involves the denial of the existence of absolute truths and, therefore, of an absolute truth giver, God. Let me, in using the word relativism, be like the character in Alice in Wonderland. He said, "When I use a word . . . it means just what I choose it to mean—neither more nor less." My use of the word relativism is intended to describe those views of life which disallow for Divinity and the existence of any absolute truths. (Notice, by the way, how absolute that assertion is.) Further, relativism is an approach to life that emphasizes situational ethics, a making up of the rules as one goes along. Now, I understand why those who see man as alone in the universe end up in this circumstance; they are free to arrive at those conclusions and then live by them. What is odd is how often they wish to have the righteous indignation of the believer but without any commitment to the possibility of a clearly defined, objective righteousness to set standards whereby man can proceed. So often the relativist wants also the enthusiasms of the believer without his reasons for exulting. Premises have a good deal to do with performance.

At times only a small, satanic sea breeze, now the winds of relativism have reached gale proportions. Over a period of several decades relativism has eroded ethics, public and personal, has worn down the will of many, has contributed to a slackening sense of duty, civic and personal. The old mountains of individual morality have been worn down. This erosion has left mankind in a sand-dune society, in a desert of disbelief, where there are no landmarks, no north, no east, no west, and no south. There is only the dust to despair!

Second Questioner: You make it sound as if the alternatives are "nothing" or "everything."

The Disciple: Do I? Good! Either Jesus' atonement has given all men immortality or it has not. There is no such thing as our being half immortal, is there?

Second Questioner: You keep taking us back to the so-called plan to the purpose of life, when so many see life as purposeless.

The Disciple: It is always back to basic truth when one needs to get his bearings. Life is neither a pleasure palace through whose narrow portals we pass briefly, laughingly, and heedlessly before extinction, nor is it a cruel, terminal predicament in an immense and sad wasteland. It is the middle (but briefest) estate of the three estates in man's carefully constructed continuum of experience.

Second Questioner: Is there no way to have such perspectives without also having to "buy" everything else about the Church?

The Disciple: You don't have to buy anything; it is given freely. Obtaining the "good news" of the gospel doesn't cost a dime. Of course, gospel concepts are all tied together, and its breathtaking perspectives would become compartmentalized and constrained if segmented. For instance, another virtue of accepting the truth about our premortal life is that it gives us much needed perspective about problems here. We are slower to exult and exclaim over what we have created in our little secular sandpile and less likely to become cheerleaders for our own "Stone Age."

Verity is still a cure for vertigo. Perspective would have helped those who worked on the tower of Babel, no doubt an exciting undertaking for a time. Because it was so fatally flawed, we can't be sure who was the more lightheaded—the hod carriers (as the tower's altitude increased) or the architects who designed it!

Second Questioner: How does one escape the feeling that such believing is essentially therapeutic?

The Disciple: Band-aid beliefs are bad. One ought not to believe, for instance, because doing so will improve family life—desirable as that is. One should believe something because it is true. Otherwise, the very next truth placed before us may take us into new territory that seems strange and even forbidding, and where no immediate benefits for believing are visible.

First Questioner: Surely events preceding the Second Coming will bring great stress to the Church and its members?

The Disciple: Great, great stress! As the Church comes forth out of obscurity, we will experience waves of nostalgia, at times, for such advantages as past obscurity conferred upon the Church. Visibility brings with it some stern challenges.

The Lord desires that his people become like a "very great" army that is sanctified, that is "fair as the sun, and clear as the moon, and that her banners may be terrible unto all nations; that the kingdom of this world may be constrained to acknowledge that the kingdom of Zion is in very deed the kingdom of our God and his Christ." (D&C 105:31-32. Italics added.) That acknowledgment will come in many ways, but each will carry with it its own demands on us.
