Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Ninth Session

Second Questioner: If the basic message is so overarchingly important to all mankind, why must there be small irritants that seem so unnecessary and so retardant?

The Disciple: Now I must ask you to be specific.

Second Questioner: Gladly! I speak of the Church's views on women.

The Disciple: I have never sung Eliza R. Snow's lyrics of 1845 in the anthem of appreciation, "O My Father," without being touched by its reverence for womanhood, which is light years ahead of some current, cosmetic attempts to dignify womanhood. The inspired truths for those lyrics came through the Prophet Joseph Smith, but the inspired poetry was Eliza's, as President Joseph F. Smith once observed.

Further, Latter-day Saint men know that in this life and the next, we can go nowhere that really matters without our eternal partners. We men cannot go to the highest reaches our talents and performances can take us without a wife, and the women cannot go without us. It has been so from before the foundations of the world. Priesthood and motherhood are the perfect partnership! Longfellow wrote,

"As unto the bow the chord is,

So unto the man is woman,

Though she bends him, she obeys him,

Though she draws him, yet she follows,

Useless each without the other!"

Second Questioner: Yet some Latter-day Saint women are restless.

The Disciple: There are at least two kinds of restlessness in the Church: the restlessness to see things done well, which grows out of deep commitment to the strategic sense the gospel gives us about life, and the restlessness that characterizes those who are uncertain about whether or not they really believe and whose behavior is seriously, or chronically, contradictory to what they do believe. This second restlessness often masquerades under the banner of intellectual doubts, whereas it is really basically behavioral in nature. There are far more men and women with behavioral problems than with theological problems.

Second Questioner: Some women are unfulfilled, are they not?

The Disciple: Each of us is unfulfilled insofar as we fail to keep Jesus' commandments. But that feeling is not a function of one's sex.

One of the advantages of a woman who is fulfilled is that she doesn't have to spend all her time thinking about being fulfilled. The women I know and admire, who have deep and abiding testimonies, do show some differences in certain dimensions of their life-style, but on the things that really matter, they have made the same choices.

First Questioner: Could you be more specific?

The Disciple: Readily. Latter-day Saint women were voting long before women in other American states. Latter-day Saint women had their own organization, one of the oldest in the world, long before other women's organizations were formed. Latter-day Saint women were at the pulpit long ago. If those things are symbols, then at least they need to be advanced as samples. But that is not the point really. Latter-day Saint women in their roles as individuals, wives, and mothers stand at the points of maximum fulfillment. Their situation is not unlike that noted by Peter, when the Savior said to his disciples, testingly: "Will ye also go away?" Peter answered, "Lord, to whom shall we go? . . . we believe and are sure. . . ." (John 6:67-69.)

The Church desires its women to be educated for all three roles in every possible way. The unintentionally unmarried often pursue careers of importance, and other Latter-day Saint women do too, prior to and sometimes after the family years.

Second Questioner: But the Church's preference is clearly manifest, is it not?

The Disciple: Happily, yes. Most Latter-day Saint women—as do the rest of us—show their values by what they do with their time. They "believe and are sure." If the gospel's powerful teachings about family life did not show up in how Latter-day Saint women live, then these principles would have had too little penetration.

Second Questioner: Yet some Latter-day Saint women still feel put down.

The Disciple: All who are put down can best be lifted up by the Lord. The major problem in the world is sin—sins of omission and commission, among which are the inconsiderations that come to women because they are women. But this particular failing is part of a large family of failings. It is no less real, of course, but neither is it as great a source of human misery as are certain other failings we have as human beings.

There is a real risk that a legitimate concern can become so fashionable that it becomes a fad. In a world in which there is never enough love to go around, in which the critical mass of good people who might leaven life seems to be missing in many places, our real challenge is not a single dramatic campaign against this or that wrong. Our challenge is to increase the level of goodness and righteousness in our lives in order that we may be a light and a source of succor for all those whom we may influence, not simply one category of those who feel deprived in one way or another. The stark truth is that there is more to be done than there are people willing and able to do.

First Questioner: Women are not encouraged to use their agency and leave the home for careers, are they?

The Disciple: No. By the way, malfunctioning fathers are a much more common phenomenon in the Church than are malfunctioning mothers. Often the success-oriented male leaves untended some of his responsibilities to his wife and family. Doing some of the things suggested by the critical will not correct that problem. Having one "sentry" who has gone AWOL joined by another "sentry," the wife and mother, is no help.

Second Questioner: The stress on family obstructs agency in life-style, does it not?

The Disciple: No, it merely sharpens the choices. If man or wife—knowing what we know about not only the importance of family life here, but also how we are part of a real and heavenly family—deserts his or her post, which both are free to do, then they are accountable.

Some of the so-called free spirits one sees in the world are the least free people I know; they are prisoners of their private gripes! Sometimes people are so committed to a wrong course, they cannot admit their premise to be wrong even when it is appallingly obvious to others.

First Questioner: Could you give us a case in point?

The Disciple: On a much more serious scale, of course, there was Cain. He slew Abel and then "gloried in that which he had done, saying: I am free. . . ." (Moses 5:33.) What an absolutely grim insight into how twisted our thoughts can become! Cain was never less free!

Second Questioner: The gospel view as you describe it is so narrow! No wonder it does not appeal to some.

The Disciple: Sometimes narrowing is like focusing—it is necessary in order to see. In that sense only, the gospel view is narrow, like the small end of a telescope. But behold what we thereby see: a universe of understanding, a solar system of sense. To use the words of an overwhelmed Moses, we learn things that we "never had supposed."

First Questioner: Given such vistas and the cataclysmic content of Mormonism, can temporary despair really be avoided?

The Disciple: Thoughtful members can avoid what you describe. We do not have the option Jonah thought he had: declaring the impending destruction of Nineveh and then, as an observer on the hillside, waiting to view the cataclysm. It is exceedingly important that Latter-day Saints avoid both a bunker and an onlooker mentality.

Second Questioner: Our minds are emptied regarding the great premortal council and the differences there (which you say are so crucial). Why?

The Disciple: We know all we need to know from the scriptures, though not all we might like to know. One doesn't need the minutes from that great council to derive the doctrine and direction required. We don't need the full text of Lucifer's speech or speeches, we just need the "bottom line." He preferred his ascendancy to man's agency.

Second Questioner: Your kind of particularity must send skeptics up the wall!

The Disciple: It is not my kind, but divine doctrine that is so particular, as you put it. Incidentally, if you look closely, you will be able to see many so-called skeptics who keep one eye on the dikes of disbelief and who seem to have a small rowboat nearby.

Second Questioner: How can those who do not know or read the scriptures be held accountable for what is in them?

The Disciple: We are accountable for whatever we have sufficient truth concerning. May I combine one great statement with one great question: "Behold the scriptures are before you" (Alma 13:20), and "Believest thou the scriptures. . .?" (Jacob 10:7-10. The scriptures have been before far more individuals than have searched them. To all who do not know of them, we so declare with James that they contain the "royal law." (James 2:8.)
