Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Tenth Session

First Questioner: Is there no final advice for dealing successfully with the devil?

The Disciple: One must not "deal" with him at all. Cain wanted Abel's flocks, and Lucifer lunged at the prospect of making a deal. President Brigham Young once advised, "If you feel evil keep it to yourselves until you overcome that evil principle. This is what I call resisting the Devil, and he flees from me. I strive not to speak evil, not to feel evil, and if I do, to keep it to myself until it is gone from me, and not let it pass my lips." (Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 80.)

First Questioner: Some say the truth is not in Satan. But when he tempted Eve, was not there some truth in what he said?

The Disciple: The serpent is a symbol of Satan because the serpent is "more subtle." (Moses 4:5.) He is a liar and a deceiver, and deceit implies clever use of half truths in order to serve his purposes.

President Brigham Young threw out a challenge on one occasion: "Show me one principle that has originated by the power of the devil. You cannot do it. I call evil inverted good, or a correct principle made an evil use of." Thus if Satan is not creative enough to originate correct ideas, he must distort correct ideas. But he is energetically evil.

Second Questioner: What of the inequality among men?

The Disciple: Like suffering, inequality has many faces and many causes. Let me note one additional cause that is often ignored, however. Inequality is at least in part a function of sin.

Second Questioner: Of sin?

The Disciple: So says Alma! (Alma 28:13.) If, for instance, we were spiritually ready for the law of consecration, there would be no poor among us. (D&C 49:20.) No wonder the Church stresses the law of tithing, a law to prepare us for something higher. The world looks at the principle of tithing and sees a system of revenue; we look at it and see also a system of salvation, an anticipation of consecration.

First Questioner: Since God loves us, you say, with a perfect love, why does he trust us to each other, knowing how much misery that means?

The Disciple: Life is the laboratory of the second estate, and we are each other's clinical material on which we practice. In God's ecology, this structure is the ultimate way to achieve growth and happiness under conditions of freedom. There is much pain, sorrow, and disappointment—much risk—but it is the only way. We are so understandably conscious of the failures and the misery that we need to be reminded more often of the successes, collective and individual. This second estate has produced not only societal successes (Enoch people, cultures in the Book of Mormon, etc.) but it has also produced individuals like Moroni, of whom it was written: ". . . if all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have had power over the hearts of the children of men." (Alma 48:17.)

First Questioner: So much, premortally, has preceded this second estate. Are we not locked in to levels of achievement already?

The Disciple: The past is a good predictor but it is not controlling.

First Questioner: You stressed goals and time management earlier; is there another key to be cited that could help us to adjust upward our achievements?

The Disciple: Both Paul and Alma use the words "give place" as having special significance. Paul warns about what happens if we "give place to the devil." (Ephesians 4:27.) Alma urges us, even if we can do no more than "desire to believe," to "give place" for a portion of the gospel, so that the seed of faith can be planted and spiritual sprouting can occur. (Alma 32:27-28.)

Second Questioner: What do you mean by "give place"?

The Disciple: In our time, thoughts, and allocation of talents, we have to decide what will have priority or place in our lives.

Satan need not get everyone to be like Cain or Judas, though he relishes such dramatic "success." He needs only to get able men like Pilate or Agrippa to see themselves as sophisticated neutrals. Satan does not need to get everyone to become atheists if agnosticism will do. Skepticism is even less preferred by Satan than agnosticism, but it will do—as well as lukewarmism in Latter-day Saints!

Of course, Satan's most devoted followers actually come to love him more than God. (Moses 5:13, 18.) Even though he is exceedingly brilliant, Satan's brilliance is unanchored and contains a fatal flaw: now, as then, Satan "knew not the mind of God." (Moses 4:6.) In our lives, we must strive to know "the mind of God" and to "give place" for such things.

Second Questioner: Isn't mankind the proper study of man, however?

The Disciple: It is very proper study, but not mankind only in that second act of the three-act play noted earlier.

Second Questioner: Don't the different premises of the disciple get in the way of learning?

The Disciple: Apparently not seriously enough to prevent academic and other achievement. The Latter-day Saint record is very good.

Second Questioner: Are all the warnings about learning necessary, however?

The Disciple: I regard the counsel given to the eminent scientist Henry Eyring by his father as very healthy; he said to his son, "Henry, remember you don't have to believe anything that's not true!"

Paul warned about the early Saints being spoiled "through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ." (Colossians 2:8.) Combine that scripture with the tardy but truthful admission of Korihor, an "anti-Christ" and a clever man of devilish dialectic, who said he taught as he had taught because he had been tutored and deceived by the devil, appearing as an angel, because the concepts "were pleasing unto the carnal mind"; and because he had so much success, he really came to believe his words were true! (Alma 30:53.)

Second Questioner: That is hardly a typical case, though.

The Disciple: Because it is a special case, it is also especially illuminating. Classic cases help us to deal with ancillary cases. For instance, the "caving in" to Korihor of so many otherwise good people made his movement and method self-reinforcing; attachment to true doctrines dissolved before him, not because the doctrines were faulty, but for the reasons elaborated. False doctrines are carnally convenient!

I wish we could all sense how often our little pebble of poor performance helps to start, or to sustain, an avalanche. When armies have been routed, it has often been because of combinations of false rumors and the feeling that everyone else has deserted his post, so "Why not me?" It's hard on those who stay at their post but tragic for those who desert or defect. So much of the serious work of salvation consists of reaching those lost batallions who have hung on even though surrounded.

First Questioner: Isn't the very greatness of the prophets such that the seeming gap between them and us is intimidating?

The Disciple: We must not be intimidated by the great capacity of those who have preceded us. We must do our duties as Nephi did, "notwithstanding my weakness" (2 Nephi 33:11), or as Moroni did when he expressed concern to the Lord "because of our weakness in writing" (Ether 12:23).

Apparently, the brother of Jared had been able to write with great power "unto the overpowering of a man" to read. (Ether 12:24.) Moroni felt inadequate in the "propwash" of that prior performance.

By way of consolation and encouragement, the Lord then said to Moroni, "Fools mock but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I will give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me. . . ." (Ether 12:27.)

First Questioner: Would you please share other examples?

The Disciple: The very book of the Acts of the Apostles is like a display window. It compresses two or three decades of history. In it we read of the glorious growth of the church and of major spiritual outpourings, heroism, and persecution of the faithful. But we also see individuals growing. All the confrontations were not with the Sanhedrin; some were like the impasse in the companionship of Paul and Barnabas. Some members failed to live the law of consecration. We see young Paul "cloakholding" at Stephen's stoning. We see initial and deep resistance by some members (and some leaders) to the taking of the gospel to the gentiles. Imperfect individuals were caught in the collision of cultures, etc. So much is there, showing the soul-stretching that went on. Learning, then as now, was sometimes painfully public. But notwithstanding such weaknesses, members overcame, grew, and developed, collectively and individually. That is an important message for us now.

In other scriptural display windows, we see Lehi struggling as an anxious and "trembling parent." (2 Nephi 14.) We see sibling rivalries but also deep friendships like that of David and Jonathan. We see that all conflict is not catastrophe.

We see our near-perfect parents, Adam and Eve, coping with challenges in the first family, for their children, too, came trailing traits from their formative first estate.

We see a legalistic Paul, but later read his matchless sermon on charity. (1 Corinthians 13.) We see a jailed John the Baptist—and there had been "no greater prophet" (Matthew 11:11)—needing reassurance. (Matthew 11:2-4.) We see Peter walking briefly on water but requiring rescue from Jesus' outstretched hand (Matthew 14:25-31; later we see Peter stretching his strong hand to Tabitha after helping to restore her to life (Acts 9:36-46.

Moroni was not the first underinformed leader to conclude that another leader was not doing enough. (See Alma 60.) Nor was Pahoran's sweet, generous response to his "beloved brother" Moroni the last such that will be needed. (Alma 61:14.)

First Questioner: Since suffering is a part of life, does not that mean in coping with suffering that we will run the risks of being too ascetic?

The Disciple: Suffering is caused in many ways, so one general response can hardly be adequate. May I simply highlight some things that sometimes seem to be ignored in such discussions.

Life often seems to be composed of interaction between limitations and opportunities. Indeed, some make opportunities of their limitations. Some experience severe limitations in vision and sight, others in poverty; some by way of mental constraints and others in having authority and power.

Constraints come with life, but there is much unevenness. The limitations of poverty are not absolute, and some persons extract themselves from poverty, yet many of the deaf hear not at all. So many limitations come without explanations that I wonder if we could manage the explanations even if God were to give them to us!

In any event, some suffering seems built into life, while other forms of suffering seem removable under certain conditions—if we are willing to make the effort. Suffering because of sin would seem to be the most movable of causes, but sin is so bound up in the misuse of agency, one wonders if we won't dry up other sources of suffering sooner after all.

Another often overlooked comment: Just as so many things we have spoken about are "graded" in their significance, so is suffering. Paul tells us in his epistles that out of tribulation comes patience, and out of experience, hope. Indeed, this is a special kind of experience—the kind Joseph Smith was passing through when he suffered for Christ's sake and as a Christian. In that setting, he was comforted by the Lord, who said his suffering would be "but a small moment" and that "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 121:7, 122:7.)

It isn't just any old experience that will do. Insofar as the one species of suffering we are discussing is concerned, it is experience of a special kind in which there is a high yield from suffering. An alcoholic can learn in his triumph over the problems of alcoholism. A man can learn hard lessons by emerging from excessive debt. Life is so structured that we can learn in many different ways and in many different situations. But the highest yield seems to come from those experiences in which we suffer as a Christian and for righteousness' sake. There's no democracy among sufferings; some suffering counts for more than other suffering. Therefore, Mormonism is no more masochistic than it is monastic.

First Questioner: Please cite some relevant scriptures, won't you?

The Disciple: Peter said, "For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For that glory is it, if, when ye are buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God." (1 Peter 2:19-20.) Being buffeted when we are right and when we have done good—that's often a test! Peter also cautioned us against having to suffer because of sinning, but added, "Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. . . ." (1 Peter 4:16.)

Second Questioner: You really expect tribulation, don't you?

The Disciple: It's part of the program. Peter also observed, "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened to you." (1 Peter 4:12.) That is another one of those hard sayings, but there it is. Of such sufferings the Prophet Joseph was told that such things would be "but a small moment" and that "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good." (D&C 121:7; 122:7.) Further, often the reassuring witness in such circumstances comes only after the trial of our faith. (See Ether 12:6.) A loving and perfect Father will teach us the lessons we need most to learn, not the lessons we have already learned.

Second Questioner: To turn to another area of concern, I've noticed that the expectations about leaders in the Church, at all levels, seem almost excessive.

The Disciple: Paul urged Timothy to be "an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity." (1 Timothy 4:12.)

Paul speaks of "our examples"; of these he says, "Neither be ye idolaters," fornicators, serpents, or murmurers. (1 Corinthians 10:6-10.)

When Peter urges members to be "ensamples to the flock," he speaks of feeding the flock, of taking oversight of the flock, in which he pleads with the people to be not lords, but examples "not by constraint, but willingly." (1 Peter 5:2-3.)

We can't be examples if we're on an ego trip, if we are preoccupied with our needs rather than the needs of those whom we serve. When our ego becomes swollen, then we make the same mistake made by a fine leader in the Old Testament; he had to be reminded by a prophet that there was a time "when thou wast little in thine own sight." (1 Samuel 15:17.)

Thus, it is not just a matter of abusing power but of giving us all some actual experience in using power wisely. The sense of powerlessness can be devastating, too. Life is structured, and particularly life in the Church, so that we get experience at both ends of the electricity of power: directing and receiving its effects.

First Questioner: Yet does not the gospel emphasize that all individuals matter?

The Disciple: Yes! Yet just as there are swing districts in politics, so there are pivotal persons in the human family. Some individuals are aristocrats in that they can influence more than just one person in decision-making. Thomas Jefferson's preferred aristocracy was one of virtue and talents. We seek an aristocracy of true Saints because we can trust ourselves to their leadership.

The "man of Christ" is such a person. His compassion is authentic, not cosmetic. His concerns are for service, not status.

For "the man of Christ," the words of scriptures are like parachute flares above the trenches of life, illuminating the landscape only briefly, but long enough for him to see the enemy clearly and to make his way along the path he must take—and to help others so to do.

First Questioner: Please say more about the need for enthusiasm.

The Disciple: Enthusiasm needs to be effective enthusiasm. We must distinguish between the contribution and enthusiasm of the cheerleader and the enthusiasm of the player. While cheerleaders serve an important purpose, the real contest involves players on the field or on the court of life. We must not go through life acting only as enthusiastic cheerleaders available for hire; we must be fastened to principles.

Those who think partial discipleship is a real possibility are wrong, just as it is erroneous to think of the gospel as compensating for or substituting for something else; it is the original and only source of full joy.

It is not just a question of refusing to do bad things, which is an important dimension of discipleship. There is good waiting and pleading to be done—which is all about us. What is omitted tells us how committed we are! Weighing the good that is left undone is as vital as weighing the bad that is done. The unmagnified calling leaves so many untouched. Someone else is sadly stranded when a calling is unmagnified: ourselves! Lucifer is not the only one who must live with what might have been. Self-deprivation may be the most common form of deprivation, after all.

Second Questioner: You speak, do you not, of winding-up scenes, scenes that are full of drama?

The Disciple: Imbedded at so many places throughout the teachings of the prophets are specific references to such. There will be some ironies for those who do not endure to the end. Many of us will have come so close but will fail to reach the finish line, and will fail to run the full length of the race about which Paul wrote.

Some, under the pressure of circumstances, may stop being disciples just before it becomes the obvious thing to do.

Some will stop kneeling to pray to our Heavenly Father in the name of Jesus Christ just before Jesus Christ comes. Then it will no longer be possible for anyone to avoid kneeling down!

Paul spoke to the saints at Corinth, reminding them of Moses' journey when he and the children of Israel in the wilderness "drank of that spiritual rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ." (1 Corinthians 10:4.) But Paul notes that many were spiritually "overthrown in the wilderness"; likewise in the wasteland of modern civilization.

But in the midst of it all we are left free. God gives us breath to blaspheme as well as to praise him. Because he is a loving Father, he gives us muscles to smile or to sneer.

Second Questioner: There are those who stoutly maintain that the Church's demand for obedience is inconsistent with its emphasis on free agency.

The Disciple: We are in a universe of physical and spiritual laws; it is these which demand obedience. It is actually enlightened obedience to follow freely those laws which produce the desired result of happiness here and hereafter. That course is hardly blind obedience.

First Questioner: Please elaborate with examples, will you?

The Disciple: One is free to not travel the straight and narrow path; he is free to move along it very slowly; he is even free to turn off or go back. What his freedom can't do for him is to create different conditions for traveling on the straight and narrow path or to create a substitute route to exaltation.

Freedom does not always multiply options. A scientist wishing to create water must use two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen. "There is a law. . . ." We can't say to God, "I will have discipleship, but without chastity" or "I will consecrate myself, but leave my wealth intact."

Freedom does not free us from law.
