Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple ( 1976)

Eleventh Session

Second Questioner: In spite of the successes of the Church, isn't righteousness losing the battle when a global assessment is made?

The Disciple: There is a parting trend in many respects. As noted earlier, the good are getting better while the bad, or near bad, are getting worse. There is always some "traffic" going away from God; there is also some "traffic" moving toward him. Only he would know the net balance at a given moment.

My own impression is that conditions and people, generally, are worsening. If so, this should not surprise us, given what we know about events to precede the Second Coming.

I do like to impose a caveat on myself, however: There could be a period, a plateau, during which some improvements occur and some slackening in the rate of decline is visible. If such a pause were to happen, it would, of course, be better than no pause at all. More people and nations might hear the gospel. Some of the reform instincts involving secular institutions could have some play. Selfishly, for my children and their children I would welcome such. Sadly, though, I do not see the presence of either the critical mass of leadership in the various nations nor the social disposition on the part of enough people to make such developments likely. But this caveat to myself is important. We must not be like Jonah and get too much of an institutional or individual ego investment in disaster.

There are so many good people everywhere. What they lack is a rallying point around certain commonly held principles. More and more, the Church can play such a role, but we do not have the necessary influence yet at some places around the globe.

First Questioner: How can Church members avoid falling into pessimism, or engaging in stoic heroism?

The Disciple: Our optimism looks to the ultimate outcome, in which right will prevail. The Lord will reign personally on the earth. Truth and justice will be established. Our interim optimism looks to the progress of the kingdom and not normally to secular institutions, though we should do what we can to help, and rejoice honestly when improvements occur in our secular institutions and situations.

Naive optimism and pervasive pessimism are both to be avoided, therefore. It's not an easy balance to maintain, to be asked to work away in the Ninevehs of our lives without being so conscious of the coming cataclysm that we are not serious citizens of our communities and nations. By living and sharing the gospel of Jesus Christ, we are doing the most relevant thing we can do by way of helping. (There are civic and other chores to be done, of course.) Day in and day out, the gospel is the one thing that is most relevant, and we are to be of good cheer.

First Questioner: In what specific ways are living and sharing of the gospel helpful?

The Disciple: For one thing, by having essentially happy individuals and families we avoid dumping on society that many more alcoholics, divorces, mentally sick, addicts, freeloaders, dolesters, etc.

First Questioner: But Church members are such a small portion of humanity . . .

The Disciple: Yes, but what a few do can matter much. Do you see the importance of our sharing the gospel as effectively and quickly as we can? Look at the socalled large issues of peace, brotherhood, or the need for freedom, food, and health. Each of these finally requires the gospel and the life-style that goes with it. But there is an enormous difference in approach. The kingdom begins with the individual and lets reform radiate outward from him to society and its institutions. The world strives to do it the other way.

Can we really reform Congress without reforming congressmen? Can we really strengthen society without strengthening our families—where we first learn to work, to love, to forgive, and to discipline ourselves in a way that permits us to practice "obedience to the unenforceable"? The latter, incidentally, is a sine qua non for a republic or a democracy.

Naturally, the impact of institutions on individuals and structure matters, but the impact of individuals on institutions matters even more. In any event, we should do our duties without becoming preoccupied with probable outcomes. We may well be surprised at how many can be influenced and helped.

Sometimes our individual candle needs to glow more brightly in a business where certain practices are wrong. Other times a blue-collar member may need to be a force for good and restraint among members of a union. A Latter-day Saint professor can be similarly catalytic, and so on. No one is as illuminating as he could be. No one is using all the opportunities around him to make a better world. Our light may be a little one, but candles have a way of being seen and of being helpful in the dark.

First Questioner: We seem to say the same things at summary points in our testimony bearing.

The Disciple: Because the same truths are being affirmed. Because, like other groups, disciples use code words and semantic shorthand. Thus, when I witness as I now do—that God lives; that Jesus Christ is his literally resurrected Son who has atoned for our sins, guaranteeing us immortality and giving us an opportunity for eternal life; that Joseph Smith was the first of a dozen presidents—living prophets in this dispensation—I am testifying of truths that are pyramid points among many powerful truths. I am saying that precisely because these things are so, many more are true, too. All of which I gladly and yet soberly say in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen!

Second Questioner: A last query, please? You have given hundreds of words of testimony—do you realize that you are accountable for each word uttered?

The Disciple: Yes, it is a sobering thought. But now you are also accountable for each word heard! It is a fair exchange of accountability.
