Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

1

Enduring to the End

To endure is greater than to dare (William Makepeace Thackeray). [^1]

When the Latter-day Saints make up their minds to endure, for the kingdom of God's sake, whatsoever shall come, whether poverty or riches, whether sickness or to be driven by mobs, they will say it is all right, and will honor the hand of the Lord in it, and in all things, and serve Him to the end of their lives, according to the best of their ability, God being their helper. If you have not made up your minds for this, the quicker you do so the better. (Brigham Young.) [^2]

The divine direction given to a suffering Prophet Joseph Smith to "endure it well" should likewise entice serious disciples and cause them to examine those three precious and instructive words.

To endure means not only to last but also to bear up under stress, to "hold fast," even "valiantly," while maintaining the correct course set by God (see D&C 121:8, 29).

The word it refers to the configuration of Joseph Smith's special adversities and afflictions, which of course were added to the general challenges of mortality itself. Each of us has his own customized it with an ample supply of individualized tutoring and stretching challenges that are to be confronted.

The word well in this instance means performing with "grace under pressure" while being of good cheer, including coping with indignities and afflictions, as did Job, without "[charging] God foolishly" (see Job 1:22).

The combined words endure it well thus connote unwearying persistence in discipleship, in fact, a "pressing forward" with "a perfect brightness of hope" (see 2 Nephi 31:20).

Following this relevant divine adjuration, "endure it well," the Prophet Joseph was given counsel that likewise is significant for us individually. First, the Lord provided Joseph with a needed sense of perspective, saying that "all these things" would be for "but a small moment" (D&C 121:7). Second, he made a humbling comparison, reassuring the suffering Prophet that he was "not yet as Job" (D&C 121:10). Along with this came the assurance that Joseph's enemies would ultimately fail as he finally would "triumph over all [his] foes" (see D&C 121:8, 11-22).

Furthermore, the adequacy of Joseph's remaining time in mortality was guaranteed and underscored: "Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less," because "there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (D&C 122:9; 121:25). Joseph received no promise, however, of either immediate or total relief from adversity. Still more time was to be spent in Liberty Jail—along with persecutions and trials thereafter.

Concurrent with the reassurances, though then experiencing harsh abuses emanating from unrighteous political and military power, Joseph was given a starkly contrasting description of how God's power is to be exercised righteously (see D&C 121:34-46).

The foregoing counsel to the Prophet is for us likewise to heed in the midst of whatever we are called upon to endure. We need perspective as to the length of our trials; perspective as regards their comparative intensity; assurance that, if we are faithful, our enemies will not finally prevail, either; and assurance that life's timetable for us is likewise known to God, "according as [our] works shall be."

God said He would structure mortality to be a proving and testing experience (see Abraham 3:25; Mosiah 23:21). Clearly He has kept His promise and has carried out His divine intent. Therefore adversity must be part of the pattern rather than always an aberration. Therefore even our fiery trials, as Peter said, should not be thought of as being "some strange thing" (1 Peter 4:12). Hence throughout the varying lengths of our lives there is rolling relevance contained in the counsel to endure it well.

The challenges differ for each of us. Moreover, the configuration and weight of our own yoke of afflictions vary during the journey of discipleship such as in the differing seasons of our individual lives. Unvarying, however, is the reality that only by taking upon us the yoke Jesus assigns to us, and then enduring, will we learn most deeply of Him, love Him the more, and become more like Him (see Matthew 11:29).

Even though our yoke is tiny compared to His, the bearing process is the same. Still, some of us puzzle over the full meaning of the words, "For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light" (Matthew 11:30). True, as John wrote, "his commandments are not grievous" (1 John 5:3). Likewise, God is quick to bless us immediately in one way or another (see Mosiah 2:24). But the most profound relief waits to be claimed: our afflictions can be "swallowed up in the joy of Christ" (Alma 31:38). Only then the yoke and its burdens truly are eased.

There are many things we can be called upon to endure—such as illness, injustice, the insensitivity of others, poverty, the ironies of life, uncertainty, unpopularity, aloneness, unresponsiveness, being misrepresented and misunderstood, and sometimes seeing one-time friends not only draw away but actually become enemies. Paul reminded us that even the meek and lowly Jesus, though the Lord of the universe, nevertheless "endured . . . contradiction [opposition] of sinners against himself" (Hebrews 12:3).

Thus enduring well is clearly an essential part of mortality's planned refining process. Refining requires heat. Refining also requires time. Furthermore, if whatever constitutes "it" is to be endured well, refining also requires of its recipients a genuine and continuing confidence in the Refiner.

The painful and sometimes protracted process of refining is thus necessary in order to identify, separate, and cast off the dross. Uncharitableness, for instance, is to be burned away "in the furnace of affliction" (Isaiah 48:10; see also Alma 34:29). Our mortal tours in the "furnace of affliction" will vary widely as to frequency and intensity.

How could our personal empathy be genuinely and lastingly established and enlarged without refining experiences in the furnace of affliction? Even so, you and I do not loiter around these furnaces waiting for extra tours in those ovens.

Yet without enduring there could be no finishing or polishing. It is not only the dross impurities that must go but also coarseness of all kinds. This is necessary in order for us to develop the highest forms of personality and character. In fact, the Greek word translated as perfect in Matthew 5:48 means "finished," "fully developed," or "complete." Therefore the dross is to be steadily removed in the refining process, while the precious cardinal qualities and attributes are to be etched everlastingly into one's soul.

While the process is most often gradual, Emily Dickinson noted the role that suddenness can sometimes play:

He stuns you by degrees— Prepares your brittle Nature For the Ethereal Blow By fainter Hammers—further heard— Then nearer—Then so slow Your Breath has time to straighten— Your Brain—to bubble Cool— Deals-One-imperial-Thunderbolt- That scalps your naked Soul. [^3]

Some defining and refining moments do seem to come upon us suddenly. Yet even what may seem to be sudden trials or defining moments may have been building in quiet crescendo for a long time. In any case there is no quick fix and no easy, mortal equivalent of the speedy microwave oven. Even if there were, would we be willing to trade the higher speed for the higher heat? The fiery trials are warm enough as it is. Besides, refining occurs gradually "in process of time."

It follows, then, that you and I cannot really expect to glide through life, coolly air-conditioned, while naively petitioning: "Lord, give me experience but not grief, a deeper appreciation of happiness but not deeper sorrow, joy in comfort but not in pain, more capacity to overcome but not more opposition; and please do not let me ever feel perplexed while on thine errand. Then let me come quickly and dwell with thee and fully share thy joy."

A further consideration is that in God's plan we mortals "are free to choose," among real alternatives (2 Nephi 2:27). In making these choices, as part of the test we face a vexing but necessary and built-in "opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11). Inevitably many foolish and even wicked choices are made, causing a loving God to weep over His children's needless suffering (see Moses 7:28).

In furthering His plan for us, God seeks to tutor and to stretch us in order to refine us so that He can bring us home: "Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21). It is a process in which God has declared of His sobering but enhancing purposes for His children, "We will prove them herewith to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them" (Abraham 3:25).

The plan's developmental objective is clear: we are to "[put] off the natural man and become . . . a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and become . . . as a child, submissive, meek, humble" (Mosiah 3:19).

We must not understand the words "to see if they will do" as suggesting that Heavenly Father did not already know, through His foreknowledge, whether individually and collectively we would do as He has commanded us. This is so for several reasons. First, given God's foreknowledge, He knows the outcomes beforehand. Second, the unfolding of a mortal experience with its trials is, in effect, a means of putting us clearly and incontestably on record as to the degree to which we have risen to meet the challenges of life. This open record is part of the justice of God, whose judgment and fairness will finally go uncontested (see Mosiah 16:1; 27:31; Alma 12:15).

Third, having passed through "all these things," we can thus see and know for ourselves whether or not we have risen to the challenges. If we succeed, we gain in confidence. If we do not, we ourselves will eventually understand and acknowledge that the failures were ours. Otherwise, how would we really know, for instance, that we are truly honest, or that we actually are spiritually submissive in a crunch, and so forth?

The Lord has carefully created this planet—our customized schoolhouse—in order that, being just the right distance from the sun, it would be environmentally inhabitable. Likewise, God has carefully designed the curriculum to be used therein so that it is strictly consistent with His proving purposes and our mortal agency. Walter Bagehot put it well:

If the universe were to be incessantly expressive and incessantly communicative, morality would be impossible: we should live under the unceasing pressure of a supernatural interference, which would give us selfish motives for doing everything, which would menace us with supernatural punishment if we left anything undone; we should be living in a chastising machine . . . the life which we lead and were meant to lead would be impossible . . . true virtue would become impossible. . . . A sun that shines and a rain which falls equally on the evil and on the good, are essential to morality in a being free like man and created as man was. [^4]

There is a fourth and related reason. Though God already knows the outcomes, in order for us to grow as a result of the refining and the enduring that is to take place, nevertheless, we must actually pass through the experiences. There is no free admission to the "fellowship of his sufferings" (Philippians 3:10). Qualifying for the fellowship of his sufferings is something to be earned; it cannot be bestowed arbitrarily.

Whatever the individual details or sequence of the process, we need to endure a mix of trials. Some of these will be short and severe, others long and hard. Speaking of trials, Winston Churchill trenchantly observed that "we must learn to be equally good at what is short and sharp and what is long and tough." [^5]

Divine tutorials, whether slow and stressful or sudden and harsh, call for us to ponder, again and again, the implications of this divine perspective: "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?" (D&C 122:8.) As a result of His having "descended below all things," a magnificent outcome emerged "in that He comprehended all things" (D&C 88:6; see also 122:8). How essential His perfect empathy is to us imperfect mortals!

Stern tutorials can remind us of God's tender assurances and promises:

Â My grace is sufficient for the meek (Ether 12:26).

Â Fear not, little children, for you are mine, and I have overcome the world, and you are of them that my Father hath given me; (D&C 50:41).

Â Wherefore, be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord am with you, and will stand by you; and ye shall bear record of me, even Jesus Christ, that I am the Son of the living God, that I was, that I am, and that I am to come (D&C 68:6).

Â I . . . will be in [your] midst (D&C 32:3).

Â Ye cannot bear all things now (D&C 50:40).

Â Be of good cheer, for I will lead you along (D&C 78:18).

The Lord thus has His own ways of letting us know that He is with us in our individual furnaces of affliction, just as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were not alone in their fiery furnace: "[There was] the form of the fourth . . . like the son of God" (Daniel 3:25).

It is not difficult to accept intellectually that the faithful who endure well a proximate deprivation now will receive the ultimate benefaction later: eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God (see D&C 14:7). But we are here. This is now. The trials are real. Temptations come daily. Can we learn to keep "all these things" in perspective?

Difficult as this can be, this is the course on which our faith must impel us if we are to endure it well. If we do not cling to this perspective, how can we expect to function fully and effectively in eternity without an acquired sense of proportion concerning which things matter most? Otherwise, in the context of a vast universe about which we know so little, how else will we have learned to be safe by being sufficiently submissive toward Him who knows all things? (See 2 Nephi 2:24; 9:20; D&C 130:7.) Otherwise, too, how will we have learned, firsthand, those eternal principles that, when obeyed, ensure everlasting happiness?

Without enduring the in-your-face, personal experiences in the here and now of this life, how useful will we be to Him in the there and then as He continues the "one eternal round" of His grand work and glory (see 1 Nephi 10:19; Moses 1:39)? Thus how could immortality be fully appreciated without an earned sense of proportion and perspective?

Clearly, the perspective particularly achieved by those who endure it well includes learning how to distinguish between what is big and what is small. The eminent historian Will Durant wrote of that human yearning for the perspective "to know that the little things are little, and the big things big, before it is too late; we want to see things now as they will seem forever—'in the light of eternity.' " [^6] Thus, without passing through mortality, how else will we learn to discern successfully what the "weightier matters of the law" really are (Matthew 23:23)? How else, too, will we get the practical and needed experience showing us that "the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6)?

Much refining needs to occur. Unless we endure it well, we will not have the right reflexes needed for the rest of eternity, reflexes we ourselves can trust completely and upon which others also can safely rely forever.

Without our individual refining, therefore, life would become merely a pass-through, audited course—not a course for credit. Only in the latter arrangement can our experiences and our performances be sanctified for our own everlasting good (see 2 Nephi 32:9). Mortality therefore is not a convenient, suburban, drive-around beltway with a view. Instead it passes slowly through life's inner city. Daily it involves real perspiration, real perplexity, real choosing, real suffering—and real refining!

Thus by its very nature the crucial process of refining cannot occur without our enduring. In what other way, pray tell, could our loving Father, who is so deeply committed to our moral agency and likewise to seeing us achieve greater happiness, possibly bring His purposes to pass?

There is no other way!

It is left to us, then, to learn the difference between the two as we grit our teeth rather than grind them destructively.

The refining and enduring process is of necessity painful and protracted. Moreover, the process requires our voluntary participation and our continued cooperation if it is to achieve any lasting results. Even Christ cannot perform our personal refining and enduring for us. He bore that huge, atoning portion—our sins—which we could not bear. Now He offers us His grace to help us endure our smaller portion, the painful refining process in which He separates the sin, which He hates, from His children, whom He loves.

"In process of time" the patina of pride is burnished off. Hearts that were so set on the things of the world, if sufficiently meek, will either go through "a mighty change" or be broken, so "a new heart" can be given (see D&C 121:35; Alma 5:14; Ezekiel 18:31; 36:26). The righteous and covenant-keeping individuals who endure it well will inherit "all that my Father hath" (D&C 84:38).

Ironically, often the most difficult part of enduring is choosing to begin the journey. We can pause too long as we contemplate this challenge or delay too long before we plunge into the process, causing too much needless trembling of the soul. It is vital therefore that we commence and then "continue as [we] commenced" (see D&C 9:5). Remember the story of the ancient crossing of the flood-swollen Jordan River (see Joshua 3:13-17). The Lord first required those who were carrying the ark of the covenant to step into the swollen river to get the soles of their feet wet, "dipped in the brim of the water." Only then did the Lord cause the river to "stand upon an heap," until all of the Israelites had passed over on dry ground. A willingness to get the soles of our feet wet is thus an important initiating step. This is the necessary starting point of the process of enduring and refining. After we so move, then the Lord moves!

Until one is committed there is hesitancy, the chance to draw back, always ineffectiveness. Concerning all acts of initiative (and creation), there is one elementary truth, the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and splendid plans: that the moment one definitely commits oneself, then Providence moves too. All sorts of things occur to help one that would never otherwise have occurred. A whole stream of events issues from the decision, raising in one's favor all manner of unforeseen incidents and meetings and material assistance, which no man could have dreamt would have come his way. [^7]

And there should be no turning back! Frustrated by a cancelled flight from Bombay to Karachi while en route on a tight timetable to meet with expectant Church members in Islamabad, Pakistan, I momentarily despaired. Lamenting with irritation to an airline official, I asked, "What are we supposed to do, go back to the hotel?" The official, more used to coping with airport chaos than I was, said, "Sir, you never go back to the hotel!"

After much perspiration and some inspiration, a substitute flight was found; the rendezvous with expectant members was kept. The official's words, however, are a metaphor for the trek of discipleship. "You never go back."

The words of Peter, Brigham Young, and in other scriptures, then, make clear that trials and adversities are not to be seen as a "strange thing" but are part of the normal pattern of life on earth. Mortality is a proving ground, a test of faith and obedience. By refining the submissive person, it makes him or her fit to return home to God. The course is not easy, but the grace of God is available to help us through it. And those who endure it well while clinging to the iron rod will receive the greatest of all gifts—eternal life.

From the time of Adam onward, Saints of all eras have faced this test in varying external conditions. For us today it is a discipleship to be achieved in a time when, as prophesied, "the whole earth shall be in commotion" (D&C 45:26).

Notes

Chapter 1

---
Notas:
[^1] 1 William Makepeace Thackeray, in John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1980), p. 540.
[^2] 2 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 1:338 (hereafter cited as JD).
[^3] 3 Thomas H. Johnson, ed., The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1960), p. 148.
[^4] 4 Forrest Morgan, ed., The Works of Walter Bagehot (Hartford: The Travelers Insurance Company, 1889), p. 313.
[^5] 5 Robert Rhodes James, ed., Churchill Speaks (New York: Chelsea House, 1980), p. 771.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
