Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

2

Following Fixed Principles amid Commotion

It was revealed to me in the commencement of this Church, that the Church would spread, prosper, grow and extend, and that in proportion to the spread of the Gospel among the nations of the earth, so would the power of Satan rise. (Brigham Young.) [^1]

They are without principle, and past feeling (Moroni 9:20).

They are without principle," Moroni wrote. Without fixed principles and a clear destination, Nephi's metaphor of pressing forward amid "all these things" would give way to plodding persistence or mindless survival. But with gospel certitude his metaphor denotes a determined, zestful stride, even in those moments when there may seem to be nothing to be zestful about. Furthermore, in our day the striding forward "with a steadfastness in Christ" is to be accomplished amid the various expressions of how all things shall be in "commotion" in the world (see D&C 88:91; 2 Nephi 28:20). Much of this "commotion" may be geophysical, with earthquakes, seas heaving themselves beyond their bounds, and other such cataclysmic events. Disciples are also told, "When ye shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified; for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by" (Luke 21:9; see also D&C 45:26; 88:91).

The Church therefore will "spread, prosper, grow and extend," but in a very challenging context, just as President Brigham Young foresaw. Yes, many things have yet to occur before Jesus' second coming, but God can cause events to be compressed. Once the fig trees have put forth their signalling leaves, such as "distress of nations, with perplexity," they do not retract them (see Matthew 24:32-33; Luke 21:25).

The informed chiliast, which a Latter-day Saint should be, is one who firmly believes in the literal second coming of Christ, which will usher in a millennial reign, but who can meet the special challenges involved in both noticing the leaves and enduring the heat of summer that follows. One is urged to notice, lest one be caught unawares. We may note merely two impressive indicators thus far: Has any age had more "signs and wonders" in the heavens than ours already has, with jet aircraft, manned and other satellites, and even journeys to the moon? Has any generation seen such ominous "vapours of smoke" as ours, with its atomic mushroom clouds over the pathetic pyres of Hiroshima and Nagasaki? (See D&C 45:41; Joel 2:30-31; Matthew 24:24; Acts 2:19.) But, alas, even these may fall short of later fulfillments.

Yet the careful observer must also be aware of how many false readings there have been in bygone times as well as in contemporary days, even by some of the faithful.

Our challenge in the days ahead, therefore, is one of balance, to notice the early warnings without overreacting and to move forward without slipping into the dulled heedlessness of the days of Noah (see Matthew 24:38-39). In those far distant days some doubtless jeered, or at least were privately amused, by the sight of Noah building his ark. Presumably, local mockery continued even when it began to rain torrentially and kept raining. But soon Noah's ark was the only safe and sane thing in a bewildering and desperate situation.

Thus we are to ponder signs without becoming paranoid, and to be aware without frantically keeping score between current events and scriptural expectations. The wise chiliast will use his or her energy in serving God and man instead of fretting and will resist secularism's heavy sedation.

Whatever the imminence of that great event, however, no serious student of the scriptures and no careful observer of the contemporary world will question how rigorous and trying our days already are—to say nothing of those that lie ahead when even more "things shall be in commotion" (D&C 88:91; see also Luke 21:9; D&C 45:26). In contrast to our turbulent times, William Manchester observed of life's comparative unchangingness as perceived in the Middle Ages: "In [ten centuries] nothing of real consequence had either improved or declined. Except for the introduction of waterwheels in the 800s and windmills in the late 1100s, there had been no inventions of significance. No startling new ideas had appeared, no new territories outside Europe had been explored. Everything was as it had been for as long as the oldest European could remember." [^2]

As we look ahead, however, any toll that turbulence might take, amid the prophesied and dreaded events, might not bulk as large as the toll being steadily exacted on human hope by ongoing ethical relativism. Its effluence subtly saps much human hope and brings much subtle human misery. Ortega y Gasset said, regarding this spreading of relativism's fatal flaw: "If truth does not exist, relativism cannot take itself seriously. . . . Belief in truth is a deeply-rooted foundation of human life; if we remove it, life is converted into an illusion and an absurdity." [^3]

Unanchored, society drifts, hardly able to cope with the illusory, with the irony, and with the absurdity, all of which form part of what was foreseen in terms of human commotion and the "distress of nations, with perplexity."

In the days that lie ahead things will not always go smoothly while we are building the kingdom. Usually individually but sometimes collectively, because of unforeseen circumstances, we may at times be held up in our journey, as it were, at a Winter Quarters. We may expect to move on sooner and cover more territory. There will be the equivalents of long, hard, hot days in crossing the plains of the secular wilderness. The best of our intentions will sometimes be countered by severe circumstances that may correspond in their call for heroism to those at Martin's Cove when our pioneer ancestors pressed forward anyway.

But despite the hardships there is a valley that lies ahead toward which we must move. Even after sadness and grief, as President Boyd K. Packer urged, we are to "pick up our handcarts and head west." That is a fixed principle, and without fixed principles and a steady spiritual focus for life we will be diverted by the cares of the world and intimidated by boldly striding secularism. It is very easy to underestimate the pervasiveness and preoccupations of secularism. Merely surviving, then striving for advantage, getting and spending; then being anesthetized by relentless routine, and sensing, as the secularist does, the finality of death—all these combine to ensure the grim dominance of the cares of the world.

It is likewise a grave error to underestimate secularism's dulling, desensitizing influence on traditional values. Jesus Himself compared the "business as usual" days of Noah and Lot with our own last days:

And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the Son of man.

They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.

Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they;

But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all.

Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. (Luke 17:2630.)

Cataclysm came!

Two major symptoms of Noah's time were violence and corruption (see Genesis 6:11-12). Consider these depressing statistics regarding violence in today's United States:

Only 7 percent of U.S. burglaries result in an arrest according to the National Center for Policy Analysis (NCPA). Of those arrested, 87 percent are prosecuted. Of those prosecuted, 79 percent are convicted. Of those convicted, a mere 25 percent are sent to prison. (Most are paroled.) After multiplying these probabilities, we see that a potential burglar faces only a 1.2 percent chance of going to prison for each act of burglary committed. Once in prison, he will stay there for about 13 months. But since he will escape imprisonment more than 98 percent of the time, the expected "cost" of each burglary to the burglar is only 4.8 days. [^4]

How does one proceed with living and enduring well in such a world? How can we develop and maintain "a perfect brightness of hope" in a period of prophesied "gloominess"? (See Joel 2:2.) It helps to face squarely some of the underlying causes of the "gloominess" in which we live.

Solving society's problems is made much more difficult because of the failure to correctly diagnose their causes. Discerning between possible solutions and treating mere symptoms becomes much more difficult without gospel fulness. Without utilizing fixed principles, confused mortals will find things very hard to fix.

Without truth-trained perspective, some individuals will overreact to some supposed or short-term human successes, as did economist and free trader Richard Cobden, who in 1846 gushed that the repeal of Britain's Corn Laws was "the most important event in history since the coming of Christ." As important as that legislation may have been to some back then, clearly Cobden was carried away—and not by the Spirit!

If we do not acknowledge God and His ordering principles we will end up walking stubbornly in our own ways, thus producing the worst form of inflation and the hardest to cure: inflated egos.

On TV we see dramas that hype immorality and dishonor chastity and marital fidelity, along with occasional specials on the serious problem of children born out of wedlock and on the break-up of the family. Such inconsistency reflects a lack of fundamental integrity. Similarly, humanistic morality—"I hope I can forgive myself"—also abounds; its insularity contains no remedy and is completely unlike the meekly inquiring Apostles in their asking Jesus, "Lord, is it I?" (Matthew 26:22.) Ethical relativism eases the coasting down the adversary's carefully prepared slope (see 2 Nephi 28:21).

Superficially saying "I am sorry" is a popular mantra, but it guarantees no real change, either. There is so much shouted justification and so little quiet shame! Others may feel justified in saying "I have done nothing wrong," because with ethical relativism wrong is virtually defined "out of existence." Moreover, sorrowful sentimentality cannot cleanse us. Rather, it merely adds to mortal despair and distress.

If there is no acknowledgment of divine standards, justice and mercy become vague and fuzzy concepts instead of powerful principles. In that situation, even though some of them have caused gross suffering, sympathy is lavished on the guilty even before there is any consideration of justice and real repentance.

No wonder we also see a loss of righteous indignation. There is plenty of indignation all right, but most often it represents selfish egos, not righteous principles. Nowadays people are so much more easily offended, while being much less concerned about offending God.

No wonder too that we see so much "sorrowing of the damned"—this by those in a psychological no-man's-land (see Mormon 2:12-13). These individuals can no longer take pleasure in sin, but they do not fully repent, either. They hope somehow to be saved in their sins instead of being willing to "give away all [their] sins" in order to know God (Alma 22:18).

All about us we see hypocrisies as between public and private behavior, as if God had issued two sets of commandments—one for indoors and another for out-of-doors.

This means that humans desperately need correct views of our true identity and of God's purposes for us, His children. Likewise they desperately need to be reassured of the existence of an immortal but also kind God, as was Enoch: "yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30). Enoch went on to testify not only of the reality of the existence of our Father but, further, that He is "just, . . . merciful and kind forever" (Moses 7:30). It is not only an awareness of God that draws us to Him but also what He is like. Do we not sing: "We doubt not the Lord nor his goodness. We've proved Him in days that are past"?5

Going home to Him cannot happen except we are able to "see things as they really are" and "things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13), so that amid the challenges of life we can better endure it well by having gospel perspectives. Otherwise we can be so easily preoccupied with or diverted by lesser things.

The Lord told the Prophet in 1831, "Ye hear of wars in far countries, and you say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land" (D&C 38:29; see also D&C 87:1). In our time we don't understand fully the hearts of some of our countrymen, either. Nor do many see fully the implications of social fragmentation and the diminution of the family. It is all made even worse because of evils and designs in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days—and not just those pertaining to the tycoons of tobacco and alcohol (see D&C 89:4).

Evil, designing, and conspiring individuals understand very well how easy it is to titillate and ensnare the natural man. Why, therefore, do so many applaud, such as for their advertising cleverness, people who parade alcoholic temptations before an alcoholic? There is a significant difference between being genuinely "sorry" for an individual who shoots himself in the foot and applauding him for so doing. The sharp, fundamental differences between worldly sorrow and godly sorrow become apparent, again and again (see 2 Corinthians 7:10).

When society casts aside the traditional Judeo-Christian values, therefore, watch the tendency to give more attention to perpetrators than to their victims. The foregoing errancies are merely indicative of what is to be endured by the faithful.

God described to Enoch the essential causes of the vast and needless human suffering: "And unto thy brethren have I said, and also given commandment, that they should love one another, and that they should choose me, their Father; but behold, they are without affection, and they hate their own blood" (Moses 7:33, emphasis added).

The prophet Moroni recorded the clear consequences of what happened when his people became grossly desensitized: "They have lost their love, one towards another; and they thirst after blood and revenge continually . . . [they are] without civilization . . . delight . . . in so much abomination. . . . without order and without mercy. . . . strong in their perversion. . . . without principle, and past feeling." (See Moroni 9:5-20.)

Likewise, once we begin to walk in our own preoccupied ways, even if they are reasonably decent, we tend to "pass by" people who are in need and "notice them not" (Mormon 8:39).

Decrease the belief in God, therefore, and behold the large increase in the numbers of those who wish to play at being God. Such societal supervisors may deny the existence of divine ways but they are very serious about imposing their own ways.

Those who disavow the existence of absolute truths must forego the disapproving of anything on moral grounds. They may try to evoke a response by using all the old words, but these went out of fashion with the old values. Words minus their moral content cannot for long be meaningfully appropriated.

Once a society loses its capacity to declare that some things are wrong per se, it finds itself forever building temporary defenses, drawing new lines but forever falling back and losing its nerve. A society which permits simply anything will eventually lose everything!

The family of man is in deep trouble, in large measure because the institution of the family, at least in much of the western world, is in deep trouble. This situation and other indicators so tell us, if we have eyes to see.

As the Church spreads across the earth, so does Satan's dominion. Prophesied for our day are such things as wars, commotions, and distress of nations. These are not all geophysical. Perhaps even more destructive is the ethical relativism that denies any spiritual order and rejects divine and fixed principles of right and wrong. This we see reflected in a wholesale decline in moral standards and in the rapidly escalating incidence of cruelty, crime, and corruption.

Latter-day Saints, however, recognize the need for and adhere to fixed principles that have a clear and positive destination in view. This requires that we press forward consistently in righteous efforts that will bring us to that goal.

Notes

Chapter 2

1 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 13:280.

2 William Manchester, A World Lit Only by Fire (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992), pp. 26-27.

3 Jose Ortega y Gasset, The Modern Theme, James Cleugh, trans. (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1961), p. 29.

4 Ed. Rubenstein, "The Economics of Crime," Imprimis, August 1995, p. 3.

5 "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Hymns, 1985, no. 19.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
