Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

4

Pursuing Discipleship in a Living Church

You all know that it takes intelligence to enjoy. . . . I say, if you want to enjoy exquisitely, become a Latter-day Saint, and then live the doctrine of Jesus Christ. (Brigham Young.) [^1]

The restored Church of Jesus Christ is vital in assisting us to achieve exaltation and greatly aids us as we strive to grow and to endure and to enlarge our capacity for true joy.

President Brigham Young, while testifying of the restored and living Church, gave this practical caution: "This is the kingdom that was to be set up in the last days. It is like a stone taken from the mountain without hands, with all its roughness, with all its disfigured appearance—uncomely—even a stumbling-block and a stone of offence to the nations of the earth." [^2]

We are, in fact, a part of what at least in some respects is re-garded in the eyes of the world as a "strange work," "disfigured" and "uncomely" (see Isaiah 28:21). No wonder some are so dismissive of the Church, as they seek to explain it away or to push it away!

As we consider the context in which we live, including various and vexing trends, it is ever to be borne in mind that the Church is surely not trendy, though too many of its members, alas, follow the trends of the world.

The Lord, perceiving in advance these human prejudices, described His restored work as a "strange act" and "strange work" being brought to pass, so that some men might get over their stumbling blocks and ponder "that which they have never considered" (D&C 101:94, 95; 95:4; Isaiah 28:21).

A major stumbling block of the Jews in Jesus' day, for instance, was their expectation about what the Messiah would do when He came, such as emancipating them politically. But Jesus of Nazareth was not such an emancipator; thus to the Jews His death was a confirming stumbling block! This irony had been prophesied (see Psalm 118:22; Isaiah 8:14; John 1:5). The Greeks, on the other hand, regarded the whole idea of a crucified Messiah as foolishness (see 1 Corinthians 1:23). The day will come, however, when there will be a "taking away of their stumbling blocks" (1 Nephi 14:1).

A fresh view of things is thus not always welcomed. What can seem to be a strange perspective can actually be jarring to those intensely set in their ways (see Psalm 118:22). Even the remarkable Enoch was not welcomed by many of his contemporaries. Of him and his labors it was said, "There is a strange thing in the land" (Moses 6:38).

Nevertheless, in a time of prophesied perplexity, enhanced knowledge and perspective concerning the living God and Jesus are vital, and this richness came with the Restoration. Brigham Young observed perceptively: "The Lord is kind to this people, and if we could understand things as they really are and be as willing to help ourselves as the Lord is to help us, we should advance much more rapidly in the knowledge of God than we do" [^3] (see Jacob 4:13).

The living Church is the recipient and the repository of continuing and much-needed revelation, including additional scriptures. The Church is the preserver and sharer of divine doctrines, as it administers all the legal ordinances and covenants essential to salvation and exaltation, including those to be discussed in this chapter. Each of these provisions in man's behalf is also vital to helping us "endure it well."

The living Church, led by the living God through living prophets, counsels, directs, and at times even reproves its members, thus helping us to do and to be that which is needed for admission to the upper realms of God's celestial kingdom, the ultimate and complete homecoming.

Certain non-waiveable things are essential, however, in order for us to obtain eternal life. These things include what we are to do and what we are to be. Sometimes we give too little thought to what we are to be. Yet Jesus clearly asks us to become "even as I am," calling attention to "the weightier matters" such as judgment, mercy, and faith (see Matthew 5:48; 3 Nephi 12:48; 3 Nephi 27:27; Matthew 23:23).

In order to enter the kingdom of heaven we must be childlike. This term describes a particular manner of men and women (see Matthew 18:3; 2 Peter 1:4-7; 3:11). But what do those requirements mean? King Benjamin spells out the angel's message in his marvelous sermon, describing how, through Jesus' atonement, one can "[become] a saint . . . as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

Striving to incorporate these cardinal qualities makes us more saintly and helps us immeasurably to endure it well. Significantly, submissiveness, that reverent expression of enduring, is mentioned twice. Giving enduring extra emphasis is capped by directing that we "submit to" and endure "all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon [us], even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19). Much of enduring well requires this reverent submissiveness. The living Church greatly facilitates living discipleship in which opportunities and reminders of the needed virtues are all about us.

Developing these saintly qualities is every bit as essential as receiving the ordinances of the gospel. Even the gifts of God are not of full use if one has not, for instance, developed the quality of charity:

Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. (1 Corinthians 13:13.)

Thus developing charity is clearly just as essential for admission to the upper realms of the celestial kingdom as is baptism! We are to be more than merely nice; rather, we are to be "full of love" (Mosiah 3:19). Moroni could not have been more declarative on this point: "And now I know that this love which thou hast had for the children of men is charity; wherefore, except men shall have charity they cannot inherit that place which thou hast prepared in the mansions of thy Father." (Ether 12:34.)

It is significant that all the cardinal virtues flow from charity—patience, submissiveness, mercy, and so forth. "There is one virtue, attribute, or principle, which, if cherished and practiced by the Saints, would prove salvation to thousands upon thousands. I allude to charity, or love, from which proceed forgiveness, long-suffering, kindness, and patience." [^4]

Charity thus initiates and sustains all spiritual qualities. Sometimes the discussions in the Church regarding the nature and extent of God's love occur in reaction to the positions of others. Those, for instance, who feel God's love is unconditional—as if somehow his caring for us made Him uncaring about our sins—see themselves moving to the "starboard side" in order to balance those who feel God's love is severely conditional, and vice versa.

God loves all His spirit children. How could it be otherwise, since He is a perfect Father? In that sense His love is universal and everlasting for all of His children. But He does not and cannot love our wickedness: "For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (D&C 1:31). He does not and cannot approve of the things we do that are wrong, nor will He say on Judgment Day, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant" to those who have been wicked or who have been poor performers. His perfect integrity and His perfected attributes of truth and justice would not permit it. Nor can our Heavenly Father reward us evenly, because our deeds and our degrees of righteousness are so very uneven. Of necessity, therefore, we are told there are "many mansions" in His house, and only of the comparative few can it be said, "all that my Father hath shall be given" (John 14:2; D&C 84:38). It is especially of such faithful that Paul writes: "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? . . . Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." (Romans 8:35, 39.)

It is because God loves us, however, that He seeks with such vigor and long-suffering to separate us from our sins, which He hates. He continues to care for us even when He cannot approve of us. Yet ultimately we cannot go where He is unless He fully approves of us. This outcome, however, reflects the consequences of divine justice, not His love for us, which persists.

Likewise it is because He loves us that His redemptive arm "is lengthened out all the day long" (2 Nephi 28:32). Yet even after all of His outreaching and loving long-suffering, there will follow the judgment and justice of God. Thus His long-suffering is not indulgence masquerading as mercy.

God will never stop loving all of His spirit children, including those who go to the telestial kingdom, a kingdom of glory which, because of God's generosity, "surpasses all understanding" (D&C 76:89).

Thus the hard, cold fact is that how we use our moral agency does not result in a withdrawal of God's love but does determine the ways and the degrees to which a loving God can express His love of us. Only the most righteous will receive His praise, His approval, and enjoy His presence. These supernal blessings are conditionally bestowed. However, as a perfect Father He loves all of His spirit children! The more we understand His character and His love, the more poignant is any separation from Him.

It is our love of Him that needs to be proven. If we are unrighteous, "the Spirit of the Lord is grieved" (D&C 121:37). He is "grieved" precisely because He loves us so deeply. But do we love Him enough to set things right in our lives? This is the continuing test.

The large attributes, those that cover the most ground, are almost always developed incrementally—by small steps, small decisions, and small initiatives. The attributes and talents we bring with us from the premortal world were most likely developed there in the same way. Yet upon seeing someone with highly developed cardinal attributes we may respond that "he was born that way." Whatever the case, so far as the mortal life is concerned it is what we do with these qualities that matters.

Imagine, for instance, the differing outcomes if Abraham Lincoln had been less able to endure personal and political tragedy. Douglas Southall Freeman wrote eloquently of Lincoln:

Had Lincoln died in a cabin, men would not have thought it remarkable that he had been born in one. Had he not mauled Stephen A. Douglas, they would not have reminded the world that he had mauled rails. The manger grows in significance only as we approach the open tomb. . . .

When Lincoln came to Washington, the clouds had never been so dark and the danger so acute. And to the despairing, it seemed that during the whole history of the Union never had there come to the presidential chair a man less adequately equipped than was this stranger from Illinois. . . .

But Lincoln was ready. The stream of his strength was flowing full-banked. It had passed the meadows of doubt. It was flooded with high purpose, and soon it was to be joined with that other stream to make his self-mastery complete—the conquest of his own spirit. . . .

This full self-mastery of Lincoln you will find in that patient fixity of purpose that characterized every movement in the deep stream of his stalwart soul. . . . And well it was that he had learned not to weary of the battle! For when he came to Washington, he found himself opposed not merely by gallant armies, most brilliantly led, but badgered and opposed, misunderstood and maligned by men of his own nation and often of his own party. [^5]

Suppose similarly that George Washington had possessed less integrity and meekness. What then would have happened in the founding of the United States? Rich personal qualities have their consequences—public and private, personal and national. Deficiencies have their real consequences, too. Of course, our weaknesses are sometimes a spur. People strongly driven by ego may accomplish things that otherwise might have gone undone. Thus it is likewise marvelous to see how the Lord can use us even with our deficiencies.

The point, therefore, is not to be picky—picky or ungrateful concerning the contributions of outstanding men and women who have made special contributions in spite of some large, personal weaknesses, for we "all . . . come short of the glory of God" (Romans 3:23). Whatever the varied contributions of such individuals, however, these did not cancel their need to control their excesses.

God wishes to share His glory more fully with us but can only do so based on eternal, nonarbitrary rules. These terms include our striving to become more like Him (see Matthew 5:48; 3 Nephi 12:48; 27:27). Thus, even now, the better we are, the better it is for all whose lives we touch.

But let us note the things we are to do and to receive, for these greatly facilitate enduring. The things we are to do and to receive are likewise nonnegotiable, nonwaiveable requirements for entering into the presence of God. Alas, for many mortals these things seem to be antique and even quaint requirements. As we have come to know by means of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, however, these things are essential, just as the sample scriptures that follow illustrate and confirm.

Faith in the Lord is essential, as these scriptures clearly indicate, not only to qualify for the celestial kingdom but also to succeed in life itself.

The valiant in the celestial kingdom will be those "who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name" and "who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true" (D&C 76:51, 53). Thus, "without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" (Hebrews 11:6).

Faith is essential not only for salvation but also for successful daily life. "For we walk by faith, not by sight" (2 Corinthians 5:7).

Faith stirs us to repentance, which is an equally essential requirement: "all men, everywhere, must repent, or they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God, for no unclean thing can dwell there, or dwell in his presence" (Moses 6:57); "begin to exercise your faith unto repentance . . . that [God] would have mercy upon you" (Alma 34:17); "and the time is at hand that [the unrepentant] must repent or he cannot be saved" (Alma 5:31).

Baptism and receiving the Holy Ghost are nonnegotiable requirements, too:

Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God (John 3:5).

For the gate by which ye should enter is repentance and baptism by water; and then cometh a remission of your sins by fire and by the Holy Ghost (2 Nephi 31:17).

Ye must be born again into the kingdom of heaven, of water, and of the Spirit, and be cleansed by blood, even the blood of mine Only Begotten; that ye might be sanctified from all sin, and enjoy the words of eternal life in this world, and eternal life in the world to come, even immortal glory (Moses 6:59).

Note that baptism and the Holy Ghost permit us to "enjoy the words of eternal life in this world." In the absence of these two prerequisites, however, individuals will not really "enjoy" the holy scriptures or the words of the living prophets. This is no small clue as to why some are put off by, rather than become attached to, the Church and the gospel.

The Melchizedek Priesthood is essential for eternal life. Men hold that holy priesthood and women share fully in its blessings.

And this greater priesthood administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God. . . .

And without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of godliness is not manifest unto men in the flesh;

For without this no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live. (D&C 84:19, 2122.)

Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved (D&C 84:40).

All temple blessings, ordinances, and covenants are likewise essential:

Therefore, . . . your anointings, and your washings, and your baptisms for the dead, . . . are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name (D&C 124:39).

. . . in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high (D&C 95:8).

. . . it is expedient in me that the first elders of my church should receive their endowment from on high in my house (D&C 105:33).

Being sealed is, therefore, clearly essential to eternal life: "In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]" (D&C 131:12).

Many of our family duties flow from temple sealings and undeniably rest upon us, hence we are often "exhorted" to conscientiously "attend to all family duties" (D&C 20:47). How often we need to feel the whiplash wisdom in these words, "No other success can compensate for failure in the home"! [^6] How can we expect to enjoy eternally that which we neglect in mortality?

The culminating requirement repeatedly stated in the scriptures is that we must endure to the end: "And as many as . . . endure to the end, the same shall be saved" (D&C 18:22). "And . . . if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes" (D&C 121:8).

These ordinances and covenants (sincerely and worthily received and conscientiously revered and attended to) hasten the development of the essential qualities, already introduced, which are to be developed if we are to qualify for eternal life.

Among the perfect attributes of our living God, one that is and will be a great blessing to us, is His generosity. Important though it is, this quality is one that tends to be less noted.

God's generosity is associated with divine gladness, such as is evoked when His children keep His commandments. He is quick to bless and is delighted to honor the faithful (see D&C 76:5). God's generosity is expressed also in His long-suffering, His being always ready to respond when His children are inclined to "feel after Him" (see Acts 17:27; D&C 112:13).

The lesser but still impressive mortal examples of generosity remind and guide us as regards our need to show generosity. Consider, for instance, the exceptional generosity of the innocent Sir Thomas More, as shown in his last words to his enemies—those who had accused and convicted him—after they had unjustly sentenced him to be beheaded:

Like the Blessed Apostle St. Paul, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, was present, and consented to the death of St. Stephen, and kept their clothes that stoned him to death, and yet be they now both twain Holy Saints in heaven, and shall continue there friends for ever, so I verily trust and shall therefore right heartily pray, that though your lordships have now here in earth been judges to my condemnation, we may yet hereafter in heaven merrily all meet together, to our everlasting salvation. [^7]

President Brigham Young advised members of the Church who had been unjustly persecuted and driven to be generous in their perspectives of their particular afflictions. "If we did not exactly deserve it, there have been times when we did deserve it. If we did not deserve it at the time, it was good for [us] and gave us an experience." [^8]

Generosity is needed, therefore, in how each of us manages present feelings about any past wrongs done to us. In 1866, in the Bowery on Temple Square, Brigham Young reflected on the drivings and persecutions of the Church that he had just heard recited by a previous speaker. But in Brigham, any earlier resentment had been replaced by later generosity: "I am thankful that the rehearsal of those occurrences has ceased to irritate me as it did formerly." [^9] President Young had risen above the harsh memories of the history. He did not let yesterday hold tomorrow hostage. There was a willingness on his part to forget. Forgetting facilitates the generosity that springs from Christlike charity.

Brigham also wisely counseled regarding what should be our attitudes amid the adversities of life:

These are happy days to the Saints, and we should rejoice in them; they are the best days we ever saw; and in the midst of the sorrows and afflictions of this life, its trials and temptations, the buffetings of Satan, the weakness of the flesh, and the power of death which is sown in it, there is no necessity for any mortal man to live a single day without rejoicing, and being filled with gladness. . . . We rejoice because the Lord is ours, because we are sown in weakness for the express purpose of attaining to greater power and perfection. In every thing the Saints may rejoice—in persecution, because it is necessary to purge them, and prepare the wicked for their doom; in sickness and in pain, though they are hard to bear, because we are thereby made acquainted with pain, with sorrow, and with every affliction that mortals can endure, for by contrast all things are demonstrated to our senses. . . . I rejoice that I am poor, because I shall be made rich; that I am afflicted, because I shall be comforted, and prepared to enjoy the felicity of perfect happiness, for it is impossible to properly appreciate happiness, except by enduring the opposite. [^10]

Thus described and recommended is discipleship in which "afflictions . . . were swallowed up in the joy of Christ" (Alma 31:38). Part of enduring well is trusting in the Lord sufficiently that we avoid yielding to the temptation of "reviling . . . against revilers" (D&C 19:30). Not only are we to abstain from reviling, but further, as the Savior said, we are even to strive to love our enemies and to pray for them (see Matthew 5:44). Doing this is hard work, however. It requires considerable enduring to deal successfully with any insensitive or outrageous acting out by enemies! Yet the more we have "charity, the pure love of Christ," the less ego driven we will be. Likewise, the absence of excessive ego will enhance our empathy towards others, thereby facilitating our having generosity toward them.

We see loving generosity, too, in the way in which the Prophet Joseph Smith forgave the betrayer and defector William W. Phelps, when the latter desired to return. Wrote Joseph:

Come on, dear brother, since the war is past,

For friends at first, are friends again at last. [^11]

We should welcome the returnees in our time just as William W. Phelps was welcomed back, genuinely and optimistically.

We see generosity as well in the communicative ways of two leaders in the Book of Mormon, Pahoran and Moroni, who might easily have ended up bitterly misunderstanding each other. Instead, through extra efforts to communicate, they were reconciled. Consider the stout words of Moroni in his critical epistle to Pahoran: "Behold, I am Moroni, your chief captain. I seek not for power, but to pull it down. I seek not for honor of the world, but for the glory of my God, and the freedom and welfare of my country. And thus I close mine epistle." (Alma 60:36.)

Pahoran responded empathically and generously, detailing challenges he faced of which Moroni was not aware: "Behold, I say unto you Moroni, that I do not joy in your great afflictions, yea, it grieves my soul. . . . And now, in your epistle you have censured me, but it mattereth not; I am not angry, but do rejoice in the greatness of your heart. I, Pahoran, do not seek for power, save only to retain my judgment seat that I may preserve the rights and liberty of my people. My soul standeth fast in that liberty in the which God hath made us free." (Alma 61:2, 9.)

By way of applying generosity, can we too absorb unjust criticism and persecution and say with Pahoran, "it mattereth not"?

The Moffatt translation of Paul's great epistle on charity (see 1 Corinthians chapter 13) gives us useful and relevant renderings: "Love is never glad when others go wrong." "Love makes no parade." We too should learn how to give "a soft answer [that] turneth away wrath" (Proverbs 15:1). Such a response from us may make a vital difference in another person's capacity to endure his or her situation well. Since we are only in competition with our old selves, why should we be "glad when others go wrong"?

Another virtue required of us is to be meek: "and becometh a saint . . . meek, humble" (Mosiah 3:19). Meekness matters greatly, and its absence shapes many situations adversely.

Conversely, note the ego dripping from only four lines—two me's and four I's: "And I, the Lord God, spake unto Moses, saying: That Satan, whom thou hast commanded in the name of mine Only Begotten, is the same which was from the beginning, and he came before me, saying—Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor" (Moses 4:1).

Ego trips are almost always made on someone else's expense account. Noteworthy too is the fact that the proud, as in one of Jesus' parables, trust "in themselves that they [are] righteous, and [despise] others" (Luke 18:9).

The larger and the more untamed a person's ego, the greater the likelihood of that person's being offended, especially upon tasting his portion of vinegar and gall or upon encountering irony, the hard crust on the bread of adversity. Understandably, protesting words may issue: "Why me?" "Why this?" "Why now?" It is hoped, however, even if we utter such words momentarily, that we will not give way to inconsolability. From inconsolability it is a surprisingly short distance to bitterness.

Amid life's varied ironies we may begin to wonder: "Didn't God notice this torturous turn of events? And if He noticed, why did He permit it? Am I not valued? Didn't I deserve better?" Our planning usually does not allow for adverse and intruding events, which first elbow aside and then evict that which we had anticipated and perhaps even earned. Hence we can be offended by events as well as by people.

No wonder we are to be patient (see Mosiah 3:19). We are to be patiently submissive, even "willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

We are to be pure: "For they shall be purified, even as I am pure" (D&C 35:21). "And all the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God" (D&C 97:16). "For I will raise up unto myself a pure people, that will serve me in righteousness" (D&C 100:16). Chastening can result in purifying, including the purifying of our motives and intentions.

We are to be merciful: "Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful" (Luke 6:36). "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy" (Matthew 5:7).

We are to be forgiving: "But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses" (Matthew 6:15). "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men" (D&C 64:10).

Discipleship is thus a process of applying fundamental gospel principles while being "anxiously engaged" in knowing, doing, and becoming, including receiving, honoring, and renewing vital ordinances and covenants in a living Church through which the power of godliness is "manifest unto men in the flesh" (D&C 84:21).

"In process of time" wisely spent, we come to know God and Jesus Christ, and "this is life eternal" (John 17:3). Doing leads to knowing, and vice versa (see John 7:17; see also Alma 32:33-34). We also come to have sufficient "faith unto repentance," thereby becoming willing "to give away all [our] sins to know [God]" (Alma 34:15; 22:18). These may include activities and endeavors that distract and deflect us. Getting used to giving away such onerous things is a necessary first step to prepare us for the giving that constitutes eventual consecration.

Notes

Chapter 4

1 Brigham Young in Journal of Discourses 18:246-47.

2 Journal of Discourses 5:75.

3 Journal of Discourses 10:221, emphasis added.

4 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 7:133-34.

5 Stuart W. Smith, ed., Douglas Southall Freeman on Leadership (Newport, Rhode Island: Naval War College Press, 1990), pp. 35, 40, 42.

6 David O. McKay, in Conference Report, April 1964, p. 5.

7 Anthony Kenny, Thomas More (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983), p. 88.

8 Journal of Discourses 14:97.

9 Journal of Discourses 11:257.

10 Journal of Discourses 1:358-59. See also 2 Nephi 2:11.

11 History of the Church 4:164.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
[^11] 11 See Neil Postman, Technopoly (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), p. 75.
