Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

5

Pursuing Consecration

For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart? (Mosiah 5:13.)

If we were not serious about our submissiveness to God, could we endure his showing us our weaknesses? And if we did not really love Him, could we really trust Him enough to endure being tutored by Him; especially until our grinding and reminding weaknesses become emancipating strengths?

Through counsel, Church service, experience, and especially by means of the Holy Ghost, we become keenly conscious of all we yet lack (see Matthew 19:20; Mark 10:21; Ether 2:14; D&C 9:57).

The responsibility for pursuing discipleship, for enduring in this precious process, rests with each of us. Fortunately, this process of applying fundamental principles in our lives is self-reinforcing and self-verifying, for "every principle God has revealed carries its own convictions of its truth." [^1] But how can we reliably come to know how we are doing? "How shall we know that we obey Him? There is but one method by which we can know it, and that is by the inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord witnessing unto our spirit that we are His, that we love Him, and that He loves us. It is by the spirit of revelation we know this. We have no witness to ourselves internally, without the spirit of revelation. We have no witness outwardly only by obedience to the ordinances." [^2]

In the third lecture on faith we read that a person's faith will be "imperfect and unproductive" unless he believes God "actually exists," has a "correct idea" of God's character, and finally has "an actual knowledge that the course of life he is pursuing is according to [God's] will." [^3]

The "spirit of revelation" to which Brigham refers is another manifestation of God's generosity. It is a vital gift. As an illustration, as far as we now know there was only one sermon for which the Prophet Joseph Smith prepared a text beforehand. It contained a significantly different rendering of two words in Paul's epistle to the Hebrews (11:6). [^4] This rendering does not appear in the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, since the sermon was given several years after his translation of the Bible began.

In the King James Version of the Bible, Paul's words say that we cannot please God without faith and "that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him" (Hebrews 11:6). Surely God does reward the faithful, but Joseph Smith changed the rendering of the key word to read that the living God "is a revealer to them that diligently seek him." The use of the word revealer fits with the context, as illustrated by Paul's statement that Enoch, "before his translation . . . had this testimony, that he pleased God" (Hebrews 11:5). God revealed His mind to Enoch. How else could Enoch have known for certain that he pleased God?

The different rendering is of theological and salvational importance. It confirms the pattern of an omniscient and living God who is a revealer to the faithful (see Amos 3:7).

Some have sincere faith in the existence of a God but not necessarily in a revealing and omniscient God. Other sincere individuals question God's omniscience, wondering, even though respectfully, whether even God can know the future. But an omniscient and revealing God can at any present moment disclose things future. This is possible because "in the presence of God, . . . all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord" (D&C 130:7). Thus God "knoweth all things, for all things are present before [his] eyes" (D&C 38:2). He told Moses, "There is no God beside me, and all things are present with me, for I know them all" (Moses 1:6).

No qualifiers on the scope of God's knowledge appear in holy writ. Instead, we read: "O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it." (2 Nephi 9:20.)

King Benjamin, therefore, exhorts us to a humility that acknowledges not only God's existence but also His supernal capacity for comprehending: "Believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend" (Mosiah 4:9). Clearly, we mortals cannot fully comprehend His omniscience (see Alma 26:35).

In His mortal messiahship Jesus demonstrated this same revelatory process. He knew the thoughts of those He confronted: "But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stood forth." (Luke 6:8.)

Jesus revealed certain things to the believing woman of Samaria concerning her life: "And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did" (John 4:39). His discernment was remarkable: "But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man" (John 2:2425).

No wonder Jesus "needed not that any man should teach him" (JST, Matthew 3:25).

Our loving, living, and revealing Father God is thus very different from an unknown and unknowing deity who is substantially disconnected from and uncommunicative with His children on the earth (see Acts 17:21-30). A revealing, tutoring God, however, will reveal His secrets to His prophets, but likewise to all who please Him, according to their stations and individual needs (see Amos 3:7; D&C 1:20).

God rescues, and even intervenes at times, in order to aid the faithful, as set forth in Paul's litany of examples in chapter 11 of Hebrews. Indeed, God does reward the faithful, but sometimes that reward is expressed in what He chooses to reveal to them. Thus the closer we are to the living God and the more helpful in building the living Church, the more He will reveal to us, and the greater His help to us as we strive to endure it well. Of course, revelations for the entire Church come only through the prophets, ordained and sustained, who stand at the head of the Church.

Jesus' invitation to come to "know" Him by doing contains this promise: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls" (Matthew 11:29).

This process brings not only confirmation as a result of our faithfulness but also revelation to guide us in our personal lives and callings. God sees the end from the beginning and can communicate to us who are in the muddled, mortal middle. Hence we need faith in Him in order to learn from Him. As our faith pleases Him, He can reward us and reveal to us, for He delights to honor those who serve Him—especially those who are seriously pursuing consecration (see D&C 6:5).

Achieving greater consecration by receiving the necessary ordinances, making and keeping the necessary covenants, understanding the necessary doctrines, and ever becoming more and more the man or the woman of Christ is a tall order in any age, but particularly in today's secular world. Once again, therefore, it is imperative for us to know that we truly are the spirit sons and daughters of the living God, loved and overseen by Him in the midst of the vastness of His creations. Identity precedes felicity. He cares for each one of us and has assured us of this resplendent reality many times and in many ways.

If we understand the vibrant plan of salvation of the living God, we will understand too why it is that He loves us enough to remodel and to stretch us. C. S. Lewis's metaphor, paraphrasing George Macdonald's, remains one of the very best:

Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roof and so on: you knew that those jobs needed doing and so you are not surprised. But presently he starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts abominably and does not seem to make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of throwing out a new wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage: but He is building a palace. [^5]

Among some Church members there is, sad to say, a lack of real faith in the living God and in His plan of salvation. This includes the universal need for repentance and remodeling; failure to pay a full tithing; failure to wear the holy temple garments; refusal to work meekly at making a marriage more successful or helping a family to become happier; inordinate resentment of personal trials; trying to serve the Lord without offending the devil or the world; being willing to serve the Lord but only in an advisory capacity; failing to sustain the Brethren; neglecting prayer; neglecting holy scriptures; neglecting parents; neglecting neighbors; neglecting sacrament meetings; neglecting temple attendance; and so on. Of such happiness-draining failures the common cause, at the testing point, is the failure to endure it well. When we stop short, we interrupt the precious process of personal development.

If we endure it well, however, and do not "faint in our minds," our performance is finally sanctifying, being "consecrated for the welfare of [our] soul" (Hebrews 12:3; 2 Nephi 32:9).

Whenever Church members speak of consecration it should be done reverently, while acknowledging that each of us comes "short of the glory of God," some of us far short (Romans 3:23). Even the conscientious have not arrived, but they sense the shortfall and are genuinely striving. It is consoling that God's grace flows not only to those "who love [Him] and keep all [His] commandments," but likewise to those "that [seek] so to do" (D&C 46:9).

A second group of members are "honorable" but not "valiant" (see D&C 76:75, 79). They are not really aware of the gap or of the importance of closing it. These "honorable" individuals are certainly not miserable or wicked, nor are they unrighteous and unhappy. It is not what they have done but what they have left undone that is amiss. For example, if valiant, they could touch others deeply instead of merely being remembered pleasantly.

In a third group are those who are grossly entangled with the "ungodliness" of the world, reminding us all, as Peter wrote, that if "[we are] overcome" by something worldly, "[we are] brought in bondage" (2 Peter 2:19).

If one "mind[s] the things of the flesh" (Romans 8:5), he cannot "have the mind of Christ" (1 Corinthians 2:16), because his thought patterns are "far from" Jesus, as are the desires or the "intents of his heart" (Mosiah 5:13). It is ironic that, if the Master is a stranger to us, we will merely end up serving other masters. The sovereignty of these other masters is real even if it sometimes is subtle, for they do call their cadence. Actually, "we are all enlisted," [^6] if only in the ranks of the indifferent.

To the extent that we are not willing to be led by the Lord we will be driven by our appetites, or we will be greatly preoccupied with the lesser things of the day. The remedy is implicit in the marvelous lamentation of King Benjamin: "For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13.) For many moderns, sad to say, the query "What think ye of Christ?" (Matthew 22:42) would be answered, "I really don't think of Him at all"!

Consider three examples of how otherwise honorable people in the Church keep back a portion and thus prevent greater consecration (see Acts 5:1-4).

A sister gives commendable, visible civic service. Yet even with her good image in the community, she remains a comparative stranger to Jesus' holy temples and His holy scriptures, two vital dimensions of discipleship. But she could have Christ's image in her countenance (see Alma 5:14).

An honorable father, dutifully involved in the cares of his family, is less than kind and gentle with individual family members. He is a comparative stranger to Jesus' gentleness and kindness, which we are instructed to emulate, whereas a little more effort by this father would make a large difference.

Consider the returned missionary, skills polished while serving an honorable mission, striving earnestly for success in his career. Busy, he ends up in a posture of some accommodation with the world. Thus he forgoes building up the kingdom first and instead builds up himself. A small course correction now would make a large, even destinational, difference for him later on.

These deficiencies just illustrated are those of omission. Once the telestial sins are left behind and thenceforth avoided, the focus falls ever more upon the sins of omission. These omissions signify a lack of qualifying fully for the celestial kingdom (see Exodus 20:8, 12). Only greater consecration can correct these omissions, which have consequences just as real as do the sins of commission. Many of us thus have sufficient faith to avoid the major sins of commission but not enough faith to sacrifice our distracting obsessions or to focus on our omissions.

Most omissions occur because we fail to get outside ourselves. We are so busy checking on our own temperatures that we do not notice the burning fevers of others even when we could offer them some of the needed remedies, such as encouragement, kindness, and commendation. The hands that hang down and most need to be lifted up belong to those too discouraged even to reach out anymore.

Actually, everything depends—initially and finally—on our desires. These shape our thought patterns. Our desires thus precede our deeds and lie at the very cores of our souls, tilting us toward or away from God (see D&C 4:3). God can "educate our desires." [^7] Others seek to manipulate our desires. But it is we who form the desires, the "thoughts and intents of [our] hearts" (Mosiah 5:13).

The end rule is "according to [our] desires . . . shall it be done unto [us]" (D&C 11:17), "for I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desire of their hearts" (D&C 137:9; see also Alma 41:5; D&C 6:20, 27). A person's individual will thus remains uniquely his. God will not override it or overwhelm it. Hence we'd better want the consequences of what we want!

Another cosmic fact: only by aligning our wills with God's is full happiness to be found. Anything less results in a lesser portion (see Alma 12:10-11). The Lord will work with us even if, at first, we "can no more than desire" but are willing to "give place for a portion of [His] words" (Alma 32:27). A small foothold is all He needs. But we must desire and provide it.

Many of us are kept from eventual consecration because we mistakenly think that, somehow, by letting our will be swallowed up in the will of God we lose our individuality (see Mosiah 15:7). What we are really worried about, of course, is giving up not self but selfish things—like our roles, our time, our preeminence, and our possessions. No wonder we are instructed by the Savior to lose ourselves (see Luke 9:24). He is only asking us to lose the old self in order to find the new self. It is a question not of one's losing identity but of finding one's true identity. It is ironic that many people already lose themselves anyway in their consuming hobbies and preoccupations that are far, far lesser things.

Ever observant in both the first and second estates, consecrated Jesus always knew in which direction He faced: He consistently emulated His Father: "The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise" (John 5:19); for "I have suffered the will of the Father in all things from the beginning" (3 Nephi 11:11).

As one's will is increasingly submissive to the will of God, he can receive inspiration and revelation so much needed to help meet the trials of life. For Abraham, first came the "impossible" promise—though he was a hundred years old and Sarah ninety, well past the child-bearing age, a son would be born to them. Paul notes that at this, faithful Abraham "staggered not . . . through unbelief" (Romans 4:20). Years later God commanded Abraham to offer that son, Isaac, as a sacrifice. Of that trying and defining episode, John Taylor observed that "nothing but the spirit of revelation could have given him this confidence, and . . . sustained him under these peculiar circumstances." [^8]

Will we, too, trust the Lord amid a perplexing trial for which we have no easy explanation? Do we understand—really comprehend—that Jesus knows and understands when we are stressed and perplexed? The complete consecration which effected the Atonement ensured Jesus' perfect empathy; He felt our very pains and afflictions before we did and knows how to succor us (see Alma 7:11-12; 2 Nephi 9:21). Since the most innocent one suffered the most, our own cries of "Why?" cannot match His. But we can utter the same, submissive word: "Nevertheless . . ." (Matthew 26:39).

Progression toward submission confers another blessing: an enhanced capacity for joy. Counseled President Brigham Young, "If you want to enjoy exquisitely, become a Latter-day Saint, and then live the doctrine of Jesus Christ." [^9]

Thus consecration is not resignation or a mindless caving in. Rather, it is a deliberate expanding outward, making us more honest when we sing, "More used would I be." [^10] Consecration, likewise, is not shoulder-shrugging acceptance but, instead, shoulder-squaring to better bear the yoke.

Consecration involves pressing forward "with a steadfastness in Christ" with a "brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men . . . [while] feasting on the word of Christ" (2 Nephi 31:20). Jesus pressed forward sublimely. He did not shrink, such as by going only 60 percent of the distance toward the full atonement. Instead, He "finished [His] preparations" for all mankind, bringing a universal resurrection not one in which 40 percent of us would have been left out (see D&C 19:18-19).

Each of us might well ask, "In what ways am I shrinking or holding back?" Meek introspection may yield some bold insights. For example, we can tell much by what we have already willingly discarded along the pathway of discipleship. It is the only pathway where littering is permissible, even encouraged. In the early stages the debris left behind includes the grosser sins of commission. Later debris differs; the things being discarded are those that have caused the misuse or under use of our time and talent.

Along this pathway leading to consecration, stern and unsought challenges sometimes hasten us in a jettisoning that is needed if we are to achieve increased consecration (see Helaman 12:3). If we have grown soft, hard times may be necessary. If we are too contented, a dose of divine discontent may come. A relevant insight may be contained in reproof. A new calling beckons us away from comfortable routines wherein the needed competencies have already been developed. One may be stripped of accustomed luxury so that the malignant mole of materialism may be removed. One may be scorched by humiliation so that pride can be melted away. Whatever we lack will get attention, one way or another.

John Taylor indicated that the Lord may even choose to wrench our very heartstrings. [^11] If our hearts are set too much upon the things of this world, they may need to be wrenched, or broken, or undergo a mighty change (see Alma 5:12).

Consecration is thus both a principle and a process and is not tied to a single moment. Instead, it is freely given, drop by drop, until the cup of consecration brims and finally runs over.

Long before that, however, as Jesus declared, we must "settle this in [our] hearts" that we will do what He asks of us (JST, Luke 14:28). President Young further counseled us "to submit to the hand of the Lord, . . . and acknowledge his hand in all things, . . . then you will be exactly right; and until you come to that point, you cannot be entirely right. That is what we have to come to." [^12]

Thus acknowledging God's hand includes, in the words of the Prophet Joseph, trusting that God has made "ample provision" beforehand to achieve all His purposes, including His purposes in our lives. [^13] Sometimes He clearly directs; at other times it seems He merely permits some things to happen. Therefore we will not always understand the role of God's hand, but we know enough of His heart and mind to be submissive. Thus when we are perplexed and stressed, explanatory help is not always immediately forthcoming, but compensatory help will be. Our process of cognition gives way to our personal submission, as we experience those moments when we learn to internalize the words of the psalm, "Be still, and know that I am God" (Psalm 46:10).

Then, the more one's will is thus "swallowed up," the more one's afflictions, rather than necessarily being removed, will be "swallowed up in the joy of Christ" (Alma 31:38).

Seventy years ago, Lord Moulton coined a perceptive phrase, "obedience to the unenforceable," describing "the obedience of a man to that which he cannot be forced to obey." [^14] God's blessings, including those associated with consecration, come by unforced obedience to the laws upon which they are predicated (see D&C 130:20-21). Thus our deepest desires determine our degree of "obedience to the unenforceable." God seeks to have us become more consecrated, by giving everything. Then, when we come home to Him, He will generously give us "all that [He] hath" (see D&C 84:38).

The submission of one's will is placing on God's altar the only uniquely personal thing one has to place there. The many other things we "give" are actually the things He has already given or loaned to us. However, when we finally submit ourselves by letting our individual wills be swallowed up in God's will, we will really be giving something to Him! It is the only possession which is truly ours to give. Consecration thus constitutes the only unconditional surrender which is also a total victory.

We need all the help we can get along the road to ultimate consecration. It is a happy thought that the living God has provided us with a "great cloud of witnesses," some contemporary examples and many from the scriptures and history, to encourage and assist us.

Notes

Chapter 5

1 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 9:149. See also John 7:17.

2 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 12:99, emphasis added.

3 Lectures on Faith 3:2-5.

4 See Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., The Words of Joseph Smith (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1980), pp. 41, 50, 51.

5 C.S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1960), p. 160.

6 "We Are All Enlisted," Hymns, 1985, no. 250.

7 Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1939), p. 297.

8 In Journal of Discourses 14:361.

9 In Journal of Discourses 18:247.

10 "More Holiness Give Me," Hymns, 1985, no. 131.

11 See Journal of Discourses 14:360.

12 In Journal of Discourses 5:352.

13 See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 220.

14 "Law and Manners," Atlantic Monthly, July 1924, p. 1.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
[^11] 11 See Neil Postman, Technopoly (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), p. 75.
[^12] 12 "Choruses from 'the Rock,'" in T.S. Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays 1909-1950 (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1952), p. 96.
[^13] 13 Conference Report, April 1958, pp. 96-97.
[^14] 14 Cited in Richard Betts, "Analysis, War, and Decision: Why Intelligence Failures Are Inevitable," World Politics, October 1978, p. 62.
