Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

6

Living amid So Great a Cloud of Witnesses

Search the scriptures; for . . . they are they which testify of me (John 5:39).

And I did read many things unto them which were written in the books of Moses; . . . for I did liken all scriptures unto us, that it might be for our profit and learning (1 Nephi 19:23).

Jesus directs us to "search the scriptures" primarily because they testify of Him and of what He did, as our Savior, in the great atonement. They also testify of His matchless character [^1] (see John 5:39). Without Christ's character and His remarkable capacity to endure it well, His performance of the astonishing atonement with its resulting blessing of a universal resurrection would not have been possible. No wonder the Book of Mormon instructs us that we are to preach of Christ, talk of Christ, and rejoice in Christ, so that our children may know to whom they may look (2 Nephi 25:26).

It is important that the scriptures and likewise Church history also provide window-like verses and inspiring and instructive episodes that permit us to access and be affected by a "cloud of witnesses" (Hebrews 12:1). Thereby we can look into the souls of these great men and women who testified of Jesus and whom He tutored. These growth models testify to us, too, by the eloquence of their examples, which we can "liken" unto ourselves.

They endured their own difficult moments, as we are called on to do. They too experienced conceptual inadequacy and endured feelings of personal inadequacy. But they still trusted in the Lord. They too needed respite, renewals through time and space, in order to endure: "And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. And they departed into a desert place by ship privately." (Mark 6:3132.) Likening holy scriptures and historical episodes unto ourselves is, therefore, essential if they are to be fully for "our profit and learning."

Such glimpses into the souls of great men and women abundantly confirm how rigorous discipleship is, even for the advanced students. It becomes repeatedly apparent, too, how crucial it is for us to trust the Lord when we do not fully understand, when we feel inadequate, or when we are deprived in some particular respect and cannot help but notice and compare. The cloud of witnesses will keep present earthly things in perspective.

While being remodeled and stretched, will we, for example, learn from Enoch's excellent example how better to trust the Lord? Enoch was "but a lad," the "people hated" him, and he was "slow of speech." Someday we shall know and appreciate more what Enoch endured in those and in other respects (see Moses 6:31). Jesus tutored and trained submissive Enoch, who then established the matchless city of Enoch and led its people on to unique spiritual glory (see Moses 7:18, 21-23).

Enoch actually saw the "God of heaven . . . weep" over needless human misery (Moses 7:28-37). When Enoch was shown a portion of human wickedness, he reacted with anguish. This resulted in a major lesson in theodicy for all of us concerning the interplay of human agency and misery and why God permits it. (See Moses 7:32-37.)

Enoch at first "had bitterness of soul," refusing to be comforted. Then the Lord showed him Jesus' great rescuing and redeeming atonement, which was to be accomplished in the meridian of time. (See Moses 7:44, 46-47.)

We mortals should never think, even for a moment, that (despite all the cumulative pictures of human suffering around the globe we see on TV) we have glimpsed more than the smallest, surface part of human suffering that God sees in its entirety. Furthermore, God knows perfectly the depth as well as the massive quantity of that suffering. Our reactions to human suffering cannot even approach His. No wonder, given our lesser bearing capacities, that God in His wisdom and mercy will shorten the days before his rescuing Son comes again to put an end to human tragedies (see Matthew 24:22).

Yet even with our own lesser witnessing of human wickedness and suffering, faith in Christ's atonement and the Father's plan still provides the only final and full comfort. This will be especially the case amid the difficult events that will precede the Savior's second coming.

Part of the comfort of those days as of these is the reassurance that God's purposes will prevail. The Prophet Joseph assured us that God lives in an "eternal now," because "the past, the present, and the future" are before Him continually. [^2] Unlike us, He sees the end from the beginning. In His plan, God has anticipated human errors and wickedness and has made "adequate provision" for them. Thus all of God's purposes will finally be achieved. How vital, therefore, for us to have enduring faith in the Father's plan of salvation!

That kind of faith has to compensate for the incompleteness of our understanding. Because of that inadequacy we do not always know immediately and precisely what we should pray for. In his prayers, Paul experienced what some of us occasionally experience, as in this instructive disclosure: "For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered" (Romans 8:26).

On his arrival in Macedonia, Paul was physically weary and had to endure being "troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears"; understandably he felt "cast down." (2 Corinthians 7:5-6.) Nevertheless he described the divine consolation and comfort he received. From intensive and varied experiences, Paul knew what it was like to be troubled, distressed, and perplexed. Yet he wrote reassuringly that nothing can separate us from the love of Christ, not tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, perils, or the sword (see Romans 8:35). He knew to whom to look for consolation and perspective.

In his soliloquy, Nephi, though righteous and diligent, felt his inadequacies; his soul drooped in the valley of sorrow (see 2 Nephi 4:26, 28). He gratefully recited his many blessings, yet still felt that he fell short. We too, while feeling much blessed, nevertheless may feel very inadequate. Our solution is Nephi's solution; we should resolve to continue to rejoice, declaring: "I have trusted in thee, and I will trust in thee forever" (2 Nephi 4:34).

At times Nephi, like Paul, was perplexed. Nevertheless he modeled for us when he trustingly said, "I know that [God] loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things" (1 Nephi 11:17). For us in this time of "distress of nations, with perplexity," gospel perspective is vital if we are to endure it well.

We will not always know the full meaning of what is happening to us or around us, but like Nephi we can still know that God loves us personally and will see us through our difficult or down times (see 1 Nephi 11:23).

Mary, in the midst of her wonderment at the birth of Jesus, needed time to ponder all that the visiting shepherds and others had said. So she trusted; and "Mary kept all these things and pondered them in her heart" (Luke 2:19). Bright and perceptive, Mary still doubtless found, as did Alma, that she could not "speak the smallest part" of what she felt (Alma 26:16).

With the Restoration, more scriptural windows and clouds of witnesses are provided. In addition to the Holy Bible we have the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price, and the Joseph Smith Translation. Restoration scriptures provide hundreds of additional pages that testify of Christ. And there will be yet another volume: "And it shall come to pass that the Jews shall have the words of the Nephites, and the Nephites shall have the words of the Jews; and the Nephites and the Jews shall have the words of the lost tribes of Israel; and the lost tribes of Israel shall have the words of the Nephites and the Jews" (2 Nephi 29:13).

And even more is to come: "We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (Articles of Faith, 1:9).

Multiple scriptures speak of God's seeking to "convince" mortals that Jesus is the Christ: "And as I spake concerning the convincing of the Jews, that Jesus is the very Christ, it must needs be that the Gentiles be convinced also that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God" (2 Nephi 26:12; see also D&C 11:21; 90:10; 2 Nephi 25:18; Alma 12:7; 30:43; 3 Nephi 28:29; title page to the Book of Mormon).

The quantity of Restoration scriptures [^3] is matched by their quality, their relevancy, and their purity. Jesus declared that the scriptures testify of Him; hence the greater the quantity and quality of scriptures, the greater the testimony of Jesus and likewise of the resurrection (see John 5:39). All this combines significantly and expands our "hope and views of Christ and the resurrection" (Alma 27:28).

Not only are there many such scriptural windows, but likewise witnessing windows from history are helpful in seeing an enlarged "cloud of witnesses." For instance, Brigham Young—a true and exceptional disciple but still in process—had enough faith to continue to the end his struggle to improve, including his battle with one of life's sternest challenges: "One of the hardest lessons for me to learn on earth is to love a man who hates me. . . . I do not think I have got this lesson by heart, and I do not know how long I shall have to live to learn it. I am trying." [^4] We, too, must keep "trying."

Such examples can be a needed spiritual spur to us.

From time to time life will bring us difficulties, but even severe circumstances in the present need not rob us of our long-term hope and perspective. A young Eliza Snow, evicted from Nauvoo by events and now in a westbound ox wagon in the midst of cold and tribulation, still had perspective about "things as they really are" (Jacob 4:13). Eliza was "thankful that we are so well off." [^5]

In the early stages of his faith, King Lamoni's father did not understand all that Aaron taught him. But he surrendered anyway, saying trustingly, "And if now thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe" (Alma 22:7). In his first, tentative prayer, he was trusting, finally pledging to "give away all my sins to know [God]" (Alma 22:18).

Is our trust sufficient that we will surrender? Will we have faith enough to give away all our sins? There is only one to take them!

The Prophet Joseph was often concerned with loyal Brigham Young's poverty, which was intensified at times as a result of Brigham's devotion. Brigham once observed: "I took a mission to Canada at my own expense; and from the time that I was baptized until the day of our sorrow and affliction, at the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, no summer passed over my head but what I was traveling and preaching, and the only thing I ever received from the Church, during over twelve years, and the only means that were ever given me by the Prophet, that I now recollect, was in 1842, when brother Joseph sent me the half of a small pig that the brethren had brought to him, I did not ask him for it; it weighed 93 pounds." [^6] And again: "Joseph would often ask me how I lived. I told him I did not know—that I did my best, and the Lord did the rest." [^7] Such exemplification amid deprivation should strengthen us.

When, for the moment, we cannot see any rescuing remedies, either, will we too do our best and let the Lord do the rest?

Just after a special neighbor, Elder Marion G. Romney, was called to serve as a Counselor in the First Presidency, he spoke in our ward fast and testimony meeting. Meek President Romney said, in substance, "I have always sustained the President of the Church, and I can sustain this President now, even when he calls me as his Counselor." It was said with great tenderness.

Will each of us likewise trust each President of the Church not only in the callings he extends but also, which is just as important, in how he calls the cadence for the Church?

While Jesus is clearly the only perfect model, His best followers also give us needed and helpful glimpses of them during their journeys, including their recoveries from their falterings. Since faltering does occur, reaching out to those who have faltered is vital to them and renewing to ourselves. Oliver Cowdery provides an example of such a precious returnee. When Elder George Smith was in Council Bluffs, Iowa, in October of 1848, he visited with a then out-of-the-Church Oliver Cowdery. In spite of his past disaffections, Oliver testified "that Joseph Smith had fulfilled his mission faithfully before until death." [^8]

Oliver Cowdery was rebaptized in Kanesville, Iowa, at 2:00 p.m., on 5 November 1848. Understandably concerned with his reputation, he said: "I have sustained an honorable character before the world during my absence from you . . . a small matter with you [but] it is of vast importance. . . . I am out of the Church. I know the door into the Church, and I wish to become a member through the door. I wish to be a humble, private member. I did not come here to seek honor." [^9] Oliver thus demonstrated his humble character. He was baptized by Orson Hyde, upon whom he had first conferred the priesthood years before.

Later in a letter dated January 13, 1849, to Samuel W. Richards, Oliver Cowdery continued to testify. In this instance the testimony included the restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods, saying, "Blessed is the elder who has received the same, and thrice blessed and holy is he who shall continue to the end." In that same letter, Oliver refers to Joseph as a Seer.

In Richmond, Missouri, in 1887 David Whitmer affirmed Oliver's tenacity concerning the Book of Mormon, evidenced even on his deathbed:

I will say once more to all mankind, that I have never at any time denied that testimony or any part thereof. I also testify to the world, that neither Oliver Cowdery or Martin Harris ever at anytime denied their testimony. . . . I was present at the death bed of Oliver Cowdery, and his last words were, "Brother David, be true to your testimony to the Book of Mormon." [^10]

David Whitmer apparently was present with some of Oliver Cowdery's family members. A family member reports of Oliver that "just before he breathed his last, he asked to be raised up . . . so he could talk to the family and friends and he told them to live according to the teachings in the Book of Mormon and they would meet him in Heaven. Then he said lay me down and let me fall asleep in the arms of Jesus and he fell asleep without a struggle." [^11]

When Jacob Gates visited Oliver Cowdery in 1849 on his way to England, Oliver reaffirmed his testimony of the Book of Mormon by taking down a first edition copy of that book and turning to the testimony of the Three Witnesses, which he read in a solemn manner. Jacob Gates quotes him then as saying: "Jacob, I want you to remember what I say to you. I am a dying man, and what would it profit me to tell you a lie? I know," said he, "that this Book of Mormon was translated by the gift and power of God. My eyes saw, my hears heard, and my understanding was touched, and I know that whereof I testified is true. It was no dream, no vain imagination of the mind—it was real." [^12]

These and many other windows into Church history provide a way through which we can see and hear from a cloud of witnesses.

In this latter part of this last dispensation, Church leaders and missionaries travel about the globe, generally in comparative ease. Yet we would do well to remember the travails of our predecessors. Our season of service has its own stiff challenges, to be sure, but not all those faced by our predecessors.

Think, for instance, of the 1866 voyage of young B. H. Roberts across the Atlantic, when "violent storms . . . last[ed] as long as three days" compared to our brief minutes of turbulence in our otherwise comfortable jetliners.

As a boy, B.H. Roberts crossed much of the plains barefoot. "His feet became black, hard, and cracked from the journey; blood often oozed from the cracks. Sometimes at night [his sister] Mary cried in sympathy as she pulled spines of prickly pear cactus from his feet." By the time Brother Roberts arrived in Salt Lake City in September, "he was wearing a pair of boots, many sizes too large, that he had discovered in a burned out Pony Express station." [^13]

Today we have language training for missionaries, and able interpreters waiting to assist us at various locations. As a young missionary, George Q. Cannon—already very homesick in Hawaii amid strange food and temporarily separated from his missionary companions—endured feeling very unconnected. Even so, President Cannon with perspective humbly and generously acknowledged of exemplars in the Book of Mormon, "What were my petty difficulties compared with those afflictions which they had to endure?" [^14] We of today could well say the same of our predecessors in this dispensation.

Today's emissaries occasionally have problems with temporarily lost luggage, but on his mission to Hawaii young Elder Joseph F. Smith, because of a fire on Palawai, saw his trunk "reduced to ashes except his missionary certificate," including the "journals which he had faithfully kept." The loss to be endured included especially precious "copies of the first edition (European) of the Book of Mormon, [and] the Doctrine and Covenants, which had been given as a present to [his father] Hyrum Smith."

There was no Church travel office to pave the way for missionaries then. Instead, the missionaries often had to get employment to "earn their passage back to the United States," as did young Joseph F. Smith. He described how he travelled in lowly steerage and in the holds where "I never before smelt a smell like that smell smelt." [^15]

Alma taught his son that the scriptural record the Nephites kept had "enlarged the memory of this people" (Alma 37:8). For our part, we today can "enlarge" our memories by incorporating the lessons of scriptural and Church history as if they were our own. And the Holy Ghost can be a great and needed helper as to how we can best manage our personal memories, especially when we need to be brought in remembrance of them.

History and memory can converge to settle us spiritually and deepen our determination to keep the commandments. The instructions of Jesus to His disciples, therefore, are to "settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach, and command you" (JST, Luke 14:28). When we are so settled and established, we will endure whatever comes rather than be "tossed to and fro" either by false doctrines or by the fashions of the world (see Ephesians 4:14; 1 Corinthians 7:31). The cloud of witnesses can steady us and give us perspective amid today's pressing secular crowd.

Spiritual remembrance of our own relevant experiences is vital. Memory provides us with a precious capacity. It is not easy to describe what actually occurs as nostalgia stirs us productively. Abraham Lincoln spoke perceptively of "the mystic chords of memory." Thus we cannot fully account for what happens when our memories focus so intensely and positively on a particular time or event that had seemingly since slipped away from us. Suddenly we feel included again! Yet the moment is brief, for, alas, we are soon expelled—again; but only after such glimpses of the past have revived in us a fresh and vivid sense of what was, because the refreshing surf of recall rolled briefly over us. What often emerges is a growing and glowing gratitude to God.

Of human memory, scholars have written:

The function of memory in your life is not only quite remarkable, it is vitally necessary to your survival as a human being. It is your memory that stores up your past experiences enabling you to function swiftly and automatically without "taking thought" or starting from the beginning in everything you do . . . if it were not for memory, everything you take for granted—such as remembering your own name as well as the names of your friends and relatives, the street where you live, your telephone number, where you work, driving your car, what you had for dinner—all would require the necessity of being "re-learned" or keeping endless written and taped records for constant referral.

There are literally thousands of important "little" items of information and concepts in the daily routine of the average person which require remembering and automatic responses. Even the performance of the simplest activities you do—walking, talking, eating, reading, shopping, and so on and ad infinitum—are all part of your earlier conditioning and as part of your memory storehouse of "how to" information, permits you to perform countless tasks automatically and naturally without actual concentration or conscious thought. [^16]

Mark Van Doren has observed: "Memory performs the impossible for man; holds together past and present, gives continuity and dignity to human life. This is the companion, this is the tutor, the poet, the library, with which you travel." [^17]

We usually find it difficult, however, to share fully with others glimpses of our own past. Our enthusiasm exceeds their appreciation. Though they see how such useful nostalgia pleases us, and they are glad, it is only vicariously. Our memories are peculiarly our own. No wonder, therefore, that we sometimes resist any rejection of our particular remembrances because, in a way, rejection of our memories is a denial of our participation. We do not wish to be severed from our pasts.

Yet, as we have all experienced, an unchecked memory can unduly enhance what was reality, proceeding to "warehouse" a mere "whisper . . . as a shout." [^18] We need the help of the Holy Ghost to manage our memories, preserving the relevancy and integrity of the process. Even so, how grateful we ought to be for the measured ways in which reliable examples come alive for us not only in holy scriptures but also from our own pasts!

Meanwhile, though memories can bless us, we need to go on living and enduring in the "holy present"; for, as C. S. Lewis observed, "These things—the beauty, the memory of our own past—are good images of what we really desire; but if they are mistaken for the thing itself they turn into dumb idols, breaking the hearts of their worshippers. For they are not the thing itself; they are only the scent of a flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news from a country we have never yet visited." [^19]

A similar caution is called for as to what we choose each day to put in our storehouses of memory. It is a blessed condition if we can be nourished later therefrom rather than some day remember with regret. The words from President Joseph F. Smith are particularly relevant here: "In reality a man cannot forget anything. He may have a lapse of memory; he may not be able to recall at the moment a thing that he knows, or words that he has spoken; he may not have the power at his will to call up these events and words; but let God Almighty touch the mainspring of the memory, and awaken recollection, and you will find then that you have not even forgotten a single idle word that you have spoken." [^20]

These prophetic words from a prophet of our dispensation serve to remind us that living prophets who lead the living Church and who teach from living scriptures likewise are essential. This special combination is of great value as we strive to keep things in true remembrance and in inspired perspective.

Notes

Chapter 6

1 Brigham Young once defined faith as faith in Jesus' name, in His character, in His atonement, and in the Father's plan of salvation (see JD, 13:56). Thus we see how essential the holy scriptures are, for they teach us of these vital things that we may better develop our own character and faith.

2 See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 220.

3 In the Book of Mormon alone there are 3,471 references to the Savior (Susan Black's count)—see Robert J. Matthews, "What the Book of Mormon Tells Us About Jesus Christ," in The Book of Mormon: The Keystone Scripture, Paul R. Cheesman, ed. (Provo: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1988), p. 33. Robert J. Matthews has found in the Book of Mormon a total of 86 names or designations that are used to refer to the Savior (see his "An Appreciation for the Book of Mormon," Ninth Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium, 24 January 1981, pp. 26-27).

4 Journal of Discourses 14:97.

5 In Kenneth W. Godfrey, Audrey M. Godfrey, and Jill Mulvay Derr, Women's Voices (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1982), p. 147.

6 In Journal of Discourses 4:34.

7 In Journal of Discourses 7:230.

8 In George A. Smith letter of 20 October 1848 to Orson Pratt.

9 Recorded by E.M. Greene, clerk, at Kanesville, 5 November 1848.

10 An Address to All Believers in Christ (Richmond, Missouri, 1887), p. 8.

11 Lucy Cowdery Young letter of 7 March 1887 to Brigham Young (Church Archives).

12 Improvement Era, March 1912, pp. 418-19.

13 Leslie Crider Humphreys, "From Misery to Joy," The Friend, February 1995, pp. 45, 46.

14 My First Mission (Salt Lake City: Juvenile Instructor Office, 1882), pp. 67, 68.

15 Joseph Fielding Smith, Life of Joseph F. Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1938), pp. 184, 187.

16 Instant Memory: The Automatic Memory System (Pacific Palisades, California: The Institute of Advanced Thinking, 1964), p. 3.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
[^11] 11 See Neil Postman, Technopoly (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), p. 75.
[^12] 12 "Choruses from 'the Rock,'" in T.S. Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays 1909-1950 (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1952), p. 96.
[^13] 13 Conference Report, April 1958, pp. 96-97.
[^14] 14 Cited in Richard Betts, "Analysis, War, and Decision: Why Intelligence Failures Are Inevitable," World Politics, October 1978, p. 62.
[^15] 15 See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 220. See also D&C 130:7; 1 Nephi 9:6.
[^16] 16 In Journal of Discourses 12:256.
[^17] 17 Instant Memory, p. 3.
[^18] 18 Wayne Martindale and Jerry Root, eds., The Quotable Lewis (Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers, Inc., 1990), p. 424.
[^19] 19 C.S. Lewis, The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1965), p. 5.
[^20] 20 Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977), p. 311.
