Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

7

Following the Prophets

What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same (D&C 1:38).

An acquaintance said to me one day: "I admire your church very much. I think I could accept everything about it—except Joseph Smith." To which I responded: "That statement is a contradiction. If you accept the revelation, you must accept the revelator." (Gordon B. Hinckley.) [^1]

Accepting and following the counsel of the Lord's prophets helps us greatly to endure well. This includes following the wise and inspired prophets in this dispensation. These men also exemplify for us in various ways, including by their quality of endurance. Who can forget the many exemplary ways in which Presidents Spencer W. Kimball, Ezra Taft Benson, and Howard W. Hunter, each beset with physical afflictions and over extended periods of time, nevertheless managed to endure it well? How can we measure the contagiousness of such examples?

Among so many instructive utterances, here are but a few illustrations of prophetic teachings bearing on endurance. These are taken only from the second and fifteenth Presidents of the Church, President Brigham Young and President Gordon B. Hinckley, respectively.

President Hinckley, who has known personally eight—a majority—of the latter-day prophets thus far, testifies of how, among other things, each endured "a long period of experience and tempering, of training and discipline to stand as an instrument of the Almighty in speaking to the people for their blessing and direction."

Of the Prophet Joseph, President Hinckley has said: "I have not spoken face to face with all of the prophets of this dispensation. I was not acquainted with the Prophet Joseph Smith, nor did I ever hear him speak. My grandfather, who as a young man lived in Nauvoo, did hear him and testified of his divine calling as the great prophet of this dispensation. But I feel I have come to know the Prophet Joseph Smith." [^2]

Ira Nathaniel Hinckley, President Hinckley's valiant grandfather just referred to, became a relatively young pioneer and endured much, being no stranger to adversity. In the April 1995 general conference, President Hinckley, understandably moved while so doing, recited this account of ancestral endurance:

My grandfather as a boy was baptized in the summer of 1836 in Ontario, Canada. His widowed mother eventually brought her two boys to Springfield, Illinois. From there, my grandfather walked to Nauvoo, where he listened to the Prophet Joseph Smith. When the exodus of our people occurred in 1846, he was an eighteen-year-old youth of strength and capacity and faith. He was a skilled builder of wagons and a blacksmith. He was among those whom President Young requested to remain for a time in Iowa to assist those still on the westward trail. He married in 1848 and set out for this valley in the spring of 1850.

Somewhere along that wearisome trail, his young wife sickened and died. With his own hands he dug a grave, split logs to make a coffin, lovingly buried her, then tearfully took their eleven-month-old child in his arms and marched on to this valley. [^3]

A few years later Ira was back, posted on the pioneer trail, helping immigrants. Though sick in bed for several preceding days, Ira rose to help others. He wrote in his journal: "I had forgot that I was sick. For there was no time for being sick." [^4] A short while later, back in Salt Lake City, Ira heard Brigham Young speak "on the principle of resigning our will to the will of our Father in heaven [that we might] become one." Ira, meek and submissive, must have understood the sermon well!

Many people think primarily of Brigham Young as a great colonizer and a governor, and excellent he was in those roles. But Brigham, much more than a colonizer and a governor, was a seer and a profound teacher of gospel doctrines and principles. He had developed to a high degree his own capacity to endure it well, out of which experiences he could authentically encourage other Church members to do likewise.

Brigham noted, for instance, that he had to endure certain inconveniences in order to harvest from the Prophet Joseph much of what Brigham taught in the decades to follow: "In my experience I never did let an opportunity pass of getting with the Prophet Joseph and of hearing him speak in public or in private, so that I might draw understanding from the fountain from which he spoke, that I might have it and bring it forth when it was needed. . . . In the days of the Prophet Joseph, such moments were more precious to me than all the wealth of the world. No matter how great my poverty if I had to borrow meal to feed my wife and children, I never let an opportunity pass of learning what the Prophet had to impart." [^5]

Brigham Young also successfully endured a temptation to which others succumbed: to criticize the Prophet Joseph. He said: "I never called him in question, even in my feelings, for an act of his, except once. I did not like his policy in a matter, and a feeling came into my heart that would have led me to complain; but it was much shorter lived than Jonah's gourd, for it did not last half a minute. Much of Joseph's policy in temporal things was different from my ideas of the way to manage them. He did the best he could, and I do the best I can." [^6]

Only once, and then on a trivial and passing matter, President Young experienced a momentary "want of confidence in Brother Joseph Smith. . . . It was not concerning religious matters . . . it was in relation to his financiering—to his managing the temporal affairs which he undertook. . . . [I] understood, by the spirit of revelation manifested to me, that if I was to harbour a thought in my heart that Joseph could be wrong in anything, I would begin to lose confidence in him, and that feeling would grow from step to step, and from one degree to another." [^7]

Reflecting what must have been his deep and frequent pondering of large matters, Brigham Young had a special sense of how deep God's commitment is to our moral agency; hence what is to be endured includes all the anxieties that attend the exercise of our agency. "Yes; . . . it is [God's] earth, and he controlleth according to his pleasure, and it will yet be devoted to those who serve him. But, in consequence of the agency that is given to the intelligent children of our Father and God, it is contrary to his laws, government, and character for him to dictate us in our actions any further than we prefer." [^8]

This reality requires our making our way through and patiently enduring life's sometimes vexing choices, for in Father's plan not only is "there . . . an opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11), but facts, said Brigham, are demonstrated by "their opposites," for "we find ourselves surrounded . . . by an almost endless combination of opposites, through which we must pass to gain experience and information to fit us for an eternal progression." [^9]

Though the record in Brigham Young's Office Journal of 1857 is not complete, he apparently was asked a question which bears upon our need to endure it well: "Why are [we] left alone and often sad?" His response was that man has to learn to "act as an independent being . . . to see what he will do . . . to practice him . . . to be righteous in the dark—to be the friend of God." [^10]

Brigham Young often counseled as to how our enduring is part of experiencing affliction personally, as in these words:

It is like the words in the wind to talk about the sweetness of the honeycomb to those who have not tasted the opposite. You may talk about the glory and comfort of the light to those who never knew darkness, and what do they know about it? Nothing. You might as well preach to those lamps. If we can realize that everything in all the eternities that ever were and ever will be is ordained of God for the benefit and glory of intelligent beings, we can understand why he said to Joseph, "Against none is my anger kindled, only those who do not acknowledge my hand in all things." Do I acknowledge his hand? Yes. I told you in your afflictions, drivings, persecutions, and all that has been grievous to be borne, that the hand of God was in that as much as it was in bringing forth his revelations and the Priesthood through Joseph. . . . So with "Mormonism:" every time they give it a kick, it rises in the scale of power and influence in the world. [^11]

Similarly, of criticism and persecution, President Gordon B. Hinckley has counseled us: "I conclude with this question: Should we be surprised if we are called upon to endure a little criticism, to make some small sacrifice for our faith, when our forebears paid so great a price for theirs?" [^12]

Having personally observed much of the rising and falling of the tides of criticism, President Hinckley has reminded us of our present need to have the same wise perspective as that possessed by our predecessors:

Joseph F. Smith presided over the Church at a time of great bitterness toward our people. He was the target of vile accusations, of a veritable drumbeat of criticism by editorial writers even in this community. He was lampooned, cartooned, and ridiculed. Listen to his response to those who made sport of demeaning him: "Let them alone. Let them go. Give them the liberty of speech they want. Let them tell their own story and write their own doom." . . . And then with an outreaching spirit of forgiving and forgetting, he went ahead with the great and positive work of leading the Church forward to new growth and remarkable accomplishments. At the time of his death, many of those who had ridiculed him wrote tributes of praise concerning him. [^13]

Because living prophets are so precious a presence on the human scene, adversarial efforts to diminish and to mar them—past and present—should not be surprising. These men are thus called upon to endure efforts to "mar" them. The word mar, as used in certain scriptures, suggests to "spoil to a certain extent or to render less attractive," as if one were to mar furniture by scratching its surface but not harming its substance.

Isaiah speaks of the Lord's servant whose "visage" (or appearance) is marred (Isaiah 52:14). The resurrected Jesus speaks of a "great and marvelous work" which will not be believed by many, "although a man shall declare it unto them." This latter-day servant who was to bring Christ's word forth "shall be marred. . . . Yet . . . I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil." (3 Nephi 21:9-10.) The Doctrine and Covenants (10:43) uses those same last words (about the wisdom of the Lord proving greater than the cunning of the devil) in reference to Joseph Smith and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon.

Joseph Smith, Sr., gave a father's blessing to the Prophet Joseph on 9 December 1834. In part of that blessing Father Smith quoted from ancient Joseph, who wondered how his latter-day posterity would receive the word of God. Then ancient Joseph's eyes beheld Joseph Smith, Jr., to be raised up in the last days. Ancient Joseph's soul was satisfied and he wept. Ancient Joseph was quoted by Father Smith as saying that the choice seer to arise "shall meditate great wisdom, [and his] intelligence shall circumscribe and comprehend the deep things of God, . . . though the wicked mar him for a little season." [^14]

Church members should not be surprised, therefore, if enemies seek to "mar" prophets and the Presidents of the Church, or the Church itself, by seeming to render it, or us as members, less attractive and influential, thus causing some to turn away from or to discount the Lord's work and His servants. One of the early Twelve, Elder Orson Hyde, observed that the "shafts" intended for the Church "are always aimed at the head first." [^15]

Being marred can be part of the experience of discipleship: "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake" (Matthew 5:11).

If we as members are likewise "marred" while doing the Lord's work, it will prove to be yet another dimension of sharing the fellowship of Christ's sufferings (see Philippians 3:10).

Prophets teach but also exemplify the way. Jacob, the poet-prophet, as have other prophets, also endured the challenge of not being heeded though having often testified and pleaded for repentance. Jesus' relevant lament surpassed all: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" (Matthew 23:37.)

Almost as if with a similar, resigned sigh, Jacob counseled, "O be wise: What can I say more? Finally, I bid you farewell, until I shall meet you before the pleasing bar of God." (Jacob 6:12-13.)

Prophets have a special appreciation, too, for Jacob's allegory of the olive trees. They can identify with the feelings of the Lord of the vineyard who, after all His labors, saw much evil fruit come forth. The twice-given lamentation of the Lord of the vineyard was: "What could I have done more for my vineyard?" (Jacob 5:41, 47.)

Paul told Timothy, his young brother in the gospel, "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, . . . for instruction in righteousness" (2 Timothy 3:16). Obviously, all our canonized scriptures today, the Church's standard works, have come to us through men who at the time were living prophets to their people. These writings plus the inspired words of prophets of this dispensation, including those now living, constitute God's word to us.

In his day Alma found that the word of God in the scriptures and from living prophets had a "more powerful effect upon the minds of [his] people than "anything else" (Alma 31:5). In our day, "What can [they] say more?" (Jacob 6:12.) Our challenge is to be quick to draw upon the real power of special, prophetic words to help us, including those which can help us to endure well.

Notes

Chapter 7

1 Gordon B. Hinckley, "Joseph the Seer," Ensign, May 1977, p. 64.

2 "Believe His Prophets," Ensign, May 1992, pp. 50, 51.

3 In "This Is the Work of the Master," Ensign, May 1995, pp. 69-70. At Ira's funeral President Seymour B. Young said of him that he was "a man who had never betrayed a trust, never betrayed his brethren and never betrayed his God; a man who had scattered blessings along his pathway through life, not only to his loved ones, but to all with whom he came in contact."

4 Journal entry of 23 October 1857.

5 In Journal of Discourses 12:269-70.

6 In Journal of Discourses 8:16.

7 In Journal of Discourses 4:297.

8 In Journal of Discourses 8:292.

9 In Journal of Discourses 11:42. See also D&C 122:7.

10 Brigham Young's Office Journal, 28 January 1857.

11 In Journal of Discourses 6:148.

12 "Contend Not with Others, but Pursue a Steady Course," Improvement Era, June 1970, p. 41.

13 "Of You It Is Required to Forgive," Ensign, November 1980, p. 62.

14 Mark L. McConkie, The Father of the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993), p. 77.

15 Times and Seasons, 5:649-50.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
[^11] 11 See Neil Postman, Technopoly (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), p. 75.
[^12] 12 "Choruses from 'the Rock,'" in T.S. Eliot, The Complete Poems and Plays 1909-1950 (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1952), p. 96.
[^13] 13 Conference Report, April 1958, pp. 96-97.
[^14] 14 Cited in Richard Betts, "Analysis, War, and Decision: Why Intelligence Failures Are Inevitable," World Politics, October 1978, p. 62.
[^15] 15 See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 220. See also D&C 130:7; 1 Nephi 9:6.
