Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

9

Living in a Community of Saints

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind (Matthew 13:47).

The Lord had a perfect Church, then He let all of us come inside. (The late Dr. Henry Eyring, faithful disciple and eminent scientist.)

And it came to pass that I, Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory (1 Nephi 14:14).

In the last days, even with significant Church growth, human wickedness will set limits on the growth of the kingdom (see 1 Nephi 14:12). At the same time, God's disciples will achieve unity amid diversity and will be "armed with righteousness" (v. 14). The glory of God will eventually rest in great power upon His sanctified people, even given the side-by-side, "wheat and tares" circumstances (see D&C 105:32; Matthew 13:24-30).

Being in communities of Saints is made even more essential by the sharp decline of traditional communities, at least in much of the world. The current trends, including those noted in chapters 2 and 3, reflect more and more functional as well as affectional separations of citizens, including depersonalized urban living. Alas, it is regrettable that those who live in neighborhoods are not necessarily neighbors.

Today's separation results not only from a loss of community but also from the increasingly profound segmentation and specialization of modern life: we care less, know less of each other, and have less in common as neighbors.

Americans need to be wary of the nation's declining social capital, the bank of trust formed from engagements in the shared service of its citizens in various associations. Of all these associations, wrote Robert Putnam, the family and religious affiliations are the most common and contributive. But there are other contributors like PTAs, women's clubs, the Red Cross, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, fraternal organizations, and so forth. [^1]

Participation in many of these organizations, however, has been eroding and shrinking in America. Furthermore, instead of these interactive and overlapping networks, we now see more and more single-interest and single-issue pressure groups.

Meanwhile technology, a blessing in a great many respects, nevertheless can divide us and make us even more solitary souls. Television, for instance, observed Robert D. Putnam, "has made our communities . . . wider and shallower." [^2] The recurring irony of some talk shows is illustrative. These often feature those who bare their inmost souls to strangers but cannot converse effectively with spouse or children!

Long ago, de Tocqueville anticipated what American individualism, unenriched by family and community, could produce: "Thus, not only does democracy make every man forget his ancestors, but it hides his descendants and separates his contemporaries from him; it throws him back forever upon himself alone, and threatens in the end to confine him entirely within the solitude of his own heart." [^3] One outcome has been called "the lonely crowd."

Errant individualism further adds to the slackness regarding community, with every man "walking in his own way, and after the image of his own god . . . in the likeness of the world," resembling circumstances anciently when "there was no king in Israel [and] every man did that which was right in his own eyes." (D&C 1:16; Judges 21:25.)

Information highways can bring many blessings, but insofar as their promised capacity to connect us is concerned, they may end up cutting an even wider swath through more traditional families and communities. Individuals may be drenched with information while being isolated even more from association with real people right around them and from real conversations with those living next door. Traveling the information highway is no substitute for walking the straight and narrow path. Being saturated with data even brings to mind a prophecy about those who are "ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth" (2 Timothy 3:7). Megabytes, however large and helpful, are no substitute for partaking of the bread of life.

Thus living in an age which celebrates errant individualism at the expense of community, we can better endure it well if we are not only members of the living Church but also, within that larger fold, we belong to a community of Saints. In a community of Saints—clusters of faithful families, neighborhoods, branches, and wards who are "alive in Christ"—we are greatly supported as we strive to live "in" but to not be "of" the world.

The best single description of such a community of Saints is captured in this account:

And it came to pass that he said unto them: Behold, here are the waters of Mormon (for thus were they called) and now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light;

Yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even until death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life. . . .

In fact, being assimilated into such a community or fold should precede, as well as follow, joining the Church formally, for,

. . . if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?

And now when the people had heard these words, they clapped their hands for joy, and exclaimed: This is the desire of our hearts. (Mosiah 18:8-11.)

Preparation for Church membership is to be anything but casual, and enduring therein is not to be accomplished in isolation: "And again, by way of commandment to the church concerning the manner of baptism. All those who humble themselves before God, and desire to be baptized, and come forth with broken hearts and contrite spirits, and witness before the church that they have truly repented of all their sins, and are willing to take upon them the name of Jesus Christ, having a determination to serve him to the end, and truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins, shall be received by baptism into his church (D&C 20:37).

It is abundantly clear, therefore, that we have a duty to comfort others, to mourn with them, to serve them, and to help them. When there is so much to do to help others, there is little time for self-pity. We do not know all the details of the crosses others bear, but we know enough to understand that crosses are being borne valiantly. Moreover, the courage of others can be contagious.

During our mortal schooling in submissiveness we will see the visible crosses that some carry, but other crosses will go unseen and unappreciated. A few individuals may appear to have no trials at all—which, if it were so, would be a trial in itself. If, as do trees, our souls had rings to measure the years of greatest personal growth, the wide rings would likely reflect the years of greatest moisture—but from tears, not rainfall.

Ordinances and associations converge in communities of Saints: "It is expedient that the church meet together often to partake of bread and wine in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus" (D&C 20:75), "Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious resurrection" (D&C 42:45).

Even while giving much to others in need in such communities, we must also be meek enough to learn how blessed it is to receive from the ministrations of others.

The disciples' inquiry about the blind man (whether it was he or his parents that had sinned) called forth Jesus' stunning response (see John 9:2-3). Jesus indicated that neither the blind man nor his parents had sinned; rather, the man was in that condition "that the works of God should be made manifest in him." These "works of God" are seen not only in healings but in the enduring shown in the lives of people who become walking witnesses to the mercy and power of God. These individuals in one way or another become portable and observable sermons, as "the works of God" are "manifest in [them]."

Exemplifying neighbors are a great blessing in many ways. So are congregations where, when an especially spiritual sacrament meeting is over, one sees a lingering of caring members that is not unlike the lingering of those who were overcome after Jesus had taught and blessed people (see 3 Nephi 17:18).

The rest of us thus are blessed to associate with remarkable individuals who are in the process of enduring trials. The Lord has told us He has "designs" which are related to our enduring certain tribulations (see D&C 58:3). "For the present time," however, faith is needed, since we are not always able to see all "the design" of our God nor "the glory which shall follow." The latter is a hard but very reassuring doctrine; and it is measurably softened when we are among practicing and exemplifying believers.

We are sometimes called upon especially to serve as "secondary sufferers." In some respects, secondary sufferers often have a tougher time than the primary sufferers. Many secondary sufferers also endure it well in meeting the particular challenges they face. They honor the endurance of the primary sufferer by displaying grace and courage in the midst of "all these things." More than a few husbands and wives almost seem to take turns, rotating roles as primary and secondary sufferers as a spouse just emerging from a medical crisis is now called upon to nurse the other, again.

In communities of Saints we actually witness more lessons than we can absorb, including how varied trials can be. A friend of mine who had known a special trial meekly said, "If it's fair, it's not a trial." If something were "fair," there would be one less grievance to endure. Likewise, if something were "fair" in terms of its timing, at least there could be no complaint over the Lord's calendaring. Fair or unfair, however, it helps to be comforted by fellow disciples when we stand in need of comfort in trying times (see Mosiah 18:9).

Empathy and exemplification are all about us—to instruct us, to inspire us, and to reassure us.

Maintaining individual equipoise is likewise less difficult when we are part of such balanced communities of Saints. Otherwise we are much more alone, being unrelievedly "encompassed . . . round about" by the "natural man" en masse (see D&C 76:29). Without the gospel, mortals are viewed very pessimistically by some: "In human nature, generous impulses are occasional or reversible. They are spent in childhood, in dreams, in extremities, and they are often weak or soured in old age. They form amiable interludes like tearful sentiments in a ruffian, or they are pleasant self-deceptive hypocrisies acted out, like civility to strangers, because such is in society the path of least resistance. Strain the situation, however, dig a little beneath the surface, and you will find a ferocious, persistent, profoundly selfish man." [^4]

If we are not careful and correctly informed about the true identity of others, it is easy to despair and to stereotype. Stereotyping reflects both intellectual laziness and lovelessness. The straight and narrow path leads us to a wide horizon of discovering and knowing people, but stereotyping confines us in the solitude of a conceptual cul-de-sac.

It is not surprising that other observers find exemplars with characteristics resembling those in communities of Saints.

Many of our exemplars found in their faiths a seemingly boundless capacity for forgiveness and charity—a capacity that lay at the heart of their moral activities. In fact, it is hard to imagine how the exemplars could have overcome the dispiriting frustrations of their work, such as betrayal and ingratitude from those whom they served, without such a capacity. Exemplars who exhibited the capacity of forgiveness and charity avoided the bitterness and negativity of the few who did not. Most often, this capacity was firmly rooted in a spiritual faith, a belief in God, a transcendent force for the good. [^5]

What, however, of our responsibilities to those beyond our communities of Saints? Church members should be good neighbors to all, cooperating with others regarding shared concerns in larger communities. This can be done, if we are thoughtful, without subordinating gospel principles or our spiritual integrity. As members do things for the best of reasons, we will build up a supply of good will that will stand us in good stead should we later differ with others on matters of doctrine.

It is significant that the Church itself is instructed to stand "independent above all [that is] beneath the celestial world" (D&C 78:14). This does not mean aloofness, however. Rather, this permits cooperation in a "good cause" with appropriate sensitivity to diversity. Clearly the Church must neither allow its doctrines to be diluted nor its people to be diminished by compromising with the ways of the world. Yet the second great commandment is not to be applied solely to one's immediate in-group.

There is also a related risk: bending too much to accommodate local cultures or to do what is, for the moment, politically and culturally correct. "Nevertheless among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God" (John 12:42-43). But where is that particular synagogue now? Where, too, are those Pharisees—of whom some near converts were so afraid in the midst of a sharp "division among the people"? (See John 7:43-48.) The Pharisees, as a movement, actually lasted only a relatively short span of time and then faded into history.

Though required to be good citizens, we must not become inordinately attached to nations, either. Not only are we to be headed for a celestial culture, but the millennial time will come when the Lord will "[make] a full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6).

Meanwhile, local and national cultures can have a profound influence upon us. But we are headed for a celestial culture. This everlasting culture was previewed for us in connection with the unique city of Enoch and also among the Church members in the Americas after the resurrected Jesus departed (see Moses 7:18; 4 Nephi 1:17). The characteristics noted included being "in one, the children of Christ," but with no social and economic subdivisions, no "ites" and no "isms." The outcomes are joyous to contemplate:

And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God.

There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God. (4 Nephi 1:1517.)

Later, however, there began to be subdivisions once again among the Nephites, hence multiple troubles also began to arise again in the land. Many resumed the follies that previously had brought so much misery.

Thus the relevancy of "love thy neighbor," if practiced successfully "here and now," one day will demonstrate how it will be applied in the coming "there and then"—in a neighborhood as wide as the universe!

Given their importance, how can we better facilitate in the here and now the building of these communities of Saints, those human-sized clusters of families, neighborhoods, branches, and wards?

First, shepherds of the flock and members of a community of Saints should know the doctrines of and how to administer the kingdom: "And now, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that when ye are assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know how to act and direct my church, how to act upon the points of my law and commandments, which I have given" (D&C 43:8).

Shepherds are thus to teach the doctrines and the correct principles of the kingdom to members, thus fixing accountability on the individual members of the community, lest they depart therefrom unadmonished and uninstructed.

A true community of Saints will also have a high ratio of those who are meek, being low demanders and high performers. However, efforts to build such communities will not succeed in a day, but, rather, "in process of time" (see Moses 7:21).

By associating together and sharing the needed experiences, we will get much practice, for instance, in meeting one of life's vexing challenges: to enlarge our compassion for those who are swollen with self-pity. This will include learning how difficult it is to pat a porcupine. We will also learn to weep together. In the grammar of the gospel, tears are like a quiet exclamation point punctuating poignancy.

Some in the Church have hands that hang down, no longer even expecting to be reached for. The imagery suggests those who have given up (see D&C 81:5). Learning to reach out and to "lift up" those particular hands is a vital part of life in the kingdom.

Other afflictions and unredeeming human tendencies are amply represented, for the gospel "net [gathereth] of every kind" (Matthew 13:47). In such communities we even come to love those we don't even like initially.

We can learn something else together too, something having to do with duties and commitments. Brigham Young said of our sometimes inordinate attachment to material things and the comforts of life: "Some do not understand duties which do not coincide with their natural feelings and affections. Do you comprehend that statement? . . . There are duties which are above affection." [^6] The various calls to duty give us chances to rise above mere pleasantry to contemplate the things of eternity.

There is thus ample clinical material within the communities of Saints to train us. There are, for instance, a few men in the Church who boast about how they hold the priesthood, while they are actually in the grip of their own egos.

We soon learn, too, while experiencing the rotations of leadership roles that are inevitable in the kingdom, that to be uncalled does not mean one is unworthy, unable, or unserviceable. Life in the Church means experiencing a variety of leaders not all of whom are always wise, mature, and deft. In fact, some of us are as bumpy and uneven as a sackful of old doorknobs. Some of the polishing we experience is actually a result of grinding against each other. How vital patience and lubricating love are in such circumstances!

Enduring likewise utilizes our patience and meekness when, for the moment, we have more to offer to the kingdom than there seem to be chances to give and to contribute. The gears as between what is offered, on the one hand, and the gears of opportunity to utilize these talents and gifts, on the other hand, are not perfectly matched. These frustrations can be real, especially for those who may for the moment feel underwhelmed.

While though those particular gears may not always match, there is certainly no such problem of being underwhelmed in daily life as regards opportunities to honor our covenants and keep the commandments. There is never anything underwhelming about those challenges! It is important, therefore, to differentiate between the occasional frustrations resulting from unmatched gears and the pervasive reality that none of us can complain that we are being underused or under-tested when it comes to keeping our covenants or the commandments.

Paul's teachings on the interdependency of Church members are particularly relevant to the building of these special communities. Amid our diverse talents, backgrounds, and personalities, the eye cannot say to the hand, "I have no need of thee" (1 Corinthians 12:21). The concert pianist cannot say to the lowly piano tuner, "I have no need of thee." The pianist's great music would not be possible on an untuned piano. Correspondingly, the tuner is unlikely to be able to play the piano superbly. Both use their hands, however, to the edification of all. So it is in a true community of Saints, where there "are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit" (1 Corinthians 12:4).

Often missing in human relationships in the world but present in these special communities is corrective but loving commentary. Members are to edify and serve one another, and the Church is to admonish individual members as needed. This is part of the perfecting process. (See Mosiah 26:6.)

Admonition is not always well received, of course. In reproving members at Galatia, Paul wrote, rhetorically, "Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?" (Galatians 4:16.) Not even those the Church reproved were to be counted as enemies (see 2 Thessalonians 3:15).

Can we endure well corrective counsel even in such communities? The Prophet Joseph taught, "When a corrupt man is chastised he gets angry and will not endure it." [^7] Joseph and other valiants endured well having their occasional chastisements from the Lord, including having these set forth publicly for all to see. The world is often either too cruel in correction or abstains altogether therefrom. For us, "speaking the truth in love" (Ephesians 4:15) and showing forth "an increase of love" (D&C 121:43) make all the difference.

Enduring involves coping successfully with customized chastening. "If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? . . . Now no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby." (Hebrews 12:7, 11.)

Members who speak the truth in love help each other in many ways. One way is helping each other to endure it well. Giving neighborly admonitions is better than creating self-serving media events, anyway, for the latter only serve to create or to perpetuate adversarial relationships. Therefore, Jesus' prescription should be lovingly and generously applied: "Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother" (Matthew 18:15).

We have many opportunities to balance giving needed admonition with the needed sensitivity urged by Paul—that we be especially forgiving of the admonished, lest he be "swallowed up with overmuch sorrow" (1 Corinthians 2:7). Once again, the Lord's further direction is to show "forth afterwards an increase of love" (D&C 121:43).

There are, however, those among us who would rather try to change the Church than to change themselves. Such individuals either are ignorant of or choose to ignore a fundamental fact concerning the kingdom of God: that it is not a democracy, it is a kingdom. The law of common consent is a significant check and balance, but the Church is still a kingdom. Those who would want to liken the Church to their own image do not realize how ludicrous, even if it were possible, doing this would be. Walking our own way creates its own ironies and "should warm every atheist's heart. For if God is a socially conscious political being whose views invariably correspond to our own prejudices on every essential point of doctrine, he demands of us no more than our politics require. . . . [H]ow would our worship of [this kind of being] constitute more than self-congratulation for our own moral standards? As an atheist, I like this God. It is good to see him every morning while I am shaving." [^8]

Besides, why would any one want to belong to a Church which could be readily changed to resemble him? As members, we are to strive to resemble Jesus, after whom the Church is named, and to seek to have His image in our countenances (3 Nephi 27:27; Alma 5:14). Those whose primary purpose is to be a self-centered and recruiting change agent should recall Groucho Marx's relevant line about his not wanting to belong to any club that would have him as a member!

The doctrines are God's, not ours. His power is His to delegate, not ours to manipulate. Those who want to shape and remake things to their own liking have ample opportunities to do so by establishing their own secular organizations. For us, the goal is clearly to make God's work our own—not the other way around. Those in communities of Saints understand this reality.

Even so, communities of Saints are also quick to reach out to their members, including those who, consciously or otherwise, try running away from God. But God, who has created worlds without number, still notices the fall of every sparrow. He even advises us that the hairs of our heads are numbered (see Matthew 10:29, 30). Actually, runaways cannot even make it off the porch unnoticed, let alone down the road, before God's arm reaches out to them, often through utilizing visiting teachers or home teachers or leaders. God's reassurance is that "mine arm is lengthened out all the day long" (2 Nephi 28:32). Such should likewise be the redeeming posture of those in communities of saints toward all members. Of none should it ever be said "I have no need of thee" (1 Corinthians 12:21).

Besides, the returning prodigals report poignantly and constantly that it is impossible to run away from God's love or beyond His reach. He stands "with open arms to receive" the repentant (Mormon 6:17). The repentant will, one day, know the superlative moment of what it is like to have been "clasped in the arms of Jesus" (Mormon 5:11).

Thomas B. Marsh, once president of the Twelve, was excommunicated, yet he returned. In 1857, he made his way to Salt Lake City, where he spoke in the Bowery and humbly asked for forgiveness. To the congregation he said: "I became jealous of the Prophet, and then I saw double, and overlooked everything that was right, and spent all my time in looking for the evil; . . . I thought I saw a beam in brother Joseph's eye, but it was nothing but a mote, and my own eye was filled with the beam." [^9] Those in communities of Saints will love but not follow the disappointed dissenter. Instead, they will help each other to sustain and support the Brethren.

In a community of Saints we not only count our blessings but also weigh them. The special need for a sense of proportion emerges again. Little blessings are still blessings, and they come from the same God as do big blessings. But the big blessings are cause for special rejoicing. It is ironic that often a lack of especially desired little blessings irritates us, even when we are recipients of the supernal blessings given to us by the great atonement, which include the impending glorious resurrection and temple sealings.

Though life in the Church greatly aids our learning, our most vital experiences usually occur in families. There is much to edify in neighborhoods, and in communities, but it is usually in families and small communities where we learn to live right and "to wait." This education of our desires is a vital part of patient enduring. President Joseph F. Smith taught:

God's ways of educating our desires are, of course, always the most perfect, . . . And what is God's way? Everywhere in nature we are taught the lessons of patience and waiting. We want things a long time before we get them, and the fact that we wanted them a long time makes them all the more precious when they come. In nature we have our seedtime and harvest; and if children were taught that the desires that they sow may be reaped by and by through patience and labor, they will learn to appreciate whenever a long-looked-for goal has been reached. Nature resists us and keeps admonishing us to wait; indeed, we are compelled to wait. [^10]

Nevertheless the requirement of enduring causes otherwise good persons to stumble. The Lord still describes as "honorable" those who consistently fall short of being "valiant" in their testimony of Jesus. Truly the gospel net gathers of "every kind" and of every level of commitment (see Matthew 13:47). We can strive for spiritual unity amid such diversity, blending our talents, while moving from honorable to excellent, especially if we help each other.

Yes, the local conditions in which Heavenly Father's children live in their communities of Saints vary widely. But these are all taken into account in His plan of salvation, in which ultimate justice and mercy are assured. When a priesthood leader in India was asked how he handled the pervasive suffering seen in the nation of India, his response was humble and brief: "All people experience some suffering. As for India, we are poor economically, but we are rich in family life. America is rich economically, but increasingly poor in family life!"

Most of all, these communities help us to become and remain "alive in Christ," "one [with] the children of Christ" (2 Nephi 25:25; 4 Nephi 1:17). And being thus enlivened and united, His children will be witnessing children—both to fellow members and to those of the world.

Notes

Chapter 9

1 See Robert D. Putnam, "Bowling Alone: America's Declining Social Capital," Journal of Democracy, January 1995, pp. 69, 70, 73.

2 Putnam, "Bowling Alone," p. 75.

3 Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Richard D. Heffner, ed. (New York: New American Library, 1956), p. 194.

4 George Santayana, as quoted in Anne Colby and William Damon, Some Do Care (New York: The Free Press, 1992), p. 1.

5 Some Do Care, pp. 296-97.

6 In Journal of Discourses 7:65.

7 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 195.

8 Eugene D. Genovese, "Pilgrim's Progress," The New Republic, 11 May 1992, p. 38.

9 In Journal of Discourses 5:207.

10 Gospel Doctrine, pp. 297-98.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
