Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

10

Witnessing for the Name of the Lord Jesus

Willing . . . to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places . . . even until death (Mosiah 18:9).

One of the most vital things we can do in order to "endure it well" is to believe sufficiently "on the name of the Lord Jesus" that we will "stand as witnesses" for Him in and out of communities of Saints—"at all times and in all things, and in all places" (see D&C 49:12; Mosiah 18:9).

In the biblical sense, a name is intended to convey the essence of the individual. "A name is not a mere label of identification; it is an expression of the essential nature of its bearer. A man's name reveals his character." [^1]

Consider, therefore, how Jesus Christ always lived up to His names fully. He always carried out the essence of those special names and the roles implicit in those special designations.

In Greek, the name Jesus means "God is help" or "Savior." [^2] The name Jesus was not uncommon. Hence Paul's careful delineation, "Christ Jesus," meaning the Messiah, Jesus (2 Timothy 1:13; 2:1).

The name Christ means the "Anointed One," or the "Messiah." [^3] Messiah denotes "king" or "deliverer." In His mercy the Great Deliverer delivered all mankind from death by His great atonement! Yes, the Jews of that time yearned keenly for deliverance from their political and military bondage, but Jesus, the Messiah, proved to be a far, far greater deliverer.

As to His earlier name, Jehovah, He was and is "the great I Am," and "the Eternal One." Ponder the use of Jehovah and I Am as testified of in these revelations by the Lord Jehovah:

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father (D&C 110:34).

Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled, for I have come to fulfil the law; therefore it hath an end (3 Nephi 15:5).

Thus the essence of Jesus Christ's names tells us much about who He is, what He has done, and what He will yet do. Imbedded in that essence are the implications of His names, too. Therefore, to witness for the name of Jesus Christ is to witness of the reality of His having been anointed as Lord and Savior; to witness of His deeds, especially His atonement; to witness of His attributes; and to witness of the Father's plan of salvation—in which Jesus is the redeeming centerpiece. Jesus' works also witness abundantly for His name. "Have I not delivered you from your enemies, only in that I have left a witness of my name?" (D&C 136:40.) "Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me" (John 10:25). "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up that which ye have seen me do. Behold ye see that I have prayed unto the Father, and ye all have witnessed." (3 Nephi 18:24.)

If the patience or mercy of Jesus were merely like ours, would His arm be "lengthened out all the day long" (2 Nephi 28:32)? And what if His submissiveness were like that of ordinary mortals? In that case, after a few skirmishes with Jewish authorities that demonstrated His obedience to the Father and after having done much good, He could have sought a reasonable settlement instead of marching courageously on to grim Gethsemane and Golgotha.

Apostles are "special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world" (D&C 107:23). They are to "testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words" (D&C 18:36). However, communities of righteous individuals can witness for Jesus, too. Clearly Church members especially are to be witnesses of Jesus, as is specifically intended in the covenants of the sacramental prayers (see Moroni 4:3; 5:2).

What kind of voice is Jesus'? Most often it is "the voice of the Spirit," which is likened to "the still small voice" (D&C 84:46; 104:36; 85:6). Furthermore, "My voice is Spirit" (D&C 88:66). While literacy in the things of the Spirit is vital, audibility may be no help to the undiscerning—as when "a voice from heaven" was heard, yet some merely "said that it thundered" (John 12:28, 29).

Thus communication from the Lord is most often a voice in which "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost" (D&C 8:2). Such is "the spirit of revelation" (D&C 8:3). This particular process is the more secure and sure way of revelation.

A comparative few, of course, have had additional and even supernal experiences. President Brigham Young cautioned regarding the durability of flashy and attention-getting forms of witnessing when compared to the witnessing of steady and faithful members who know but do not boast. "Men who have professedly seen the most, known and understood the most, in this Church, and who have testified in the presence of large congregations, in the name of Israel's God, that they have seen Jesus, &c., have been the very men who have left this kingdom, before others who had to live by faith."

And now Alma began to expound these things unto him, saying: It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him (Alma 12:9).

Continuing his counsel, Brigham Young asked: "What made the Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ witnesses? What constituted them Apostles—special witnesses to the world? Was it seeing miracles? No. What was it? The visions of their minds were opened, and it was necessary that a few should receive light, knowledge, and intelligence, that all the powers of earth and hell could not gainsay or compete with." [^4] Minds were opened, since the Lord "will tell you in your mind and in your heart" (D&C 8:2).

Confirming words appear in the Book of Mormon concerning this precious process of coming to know for ourselves: "Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me." (Alma 5:46.)

President Marion G. Romney cautioned about the inappropriate sharing of certain spiritual experiences, suggesting that we might have more of them if we would not talk so much about them! [^5] We must be careful not to "trifle" with sacred things (D&C 6:12).

It was the resurrected Jesus who told the assembled Nephites that they would be "blessed" if they believed in Him after they had seen Him. Significantly Jesus then added, "More blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me." (3 Nephi 12:1-2, emphasis added.)

Orson Pratt said: "If I had seen angels, I might doubt, without having the Holy Ghost. I might doubt if I had seen great miracles, without the Holy Ghost accompanying them; and I might doubt if I saw the heavens opened, if I heard the thunders roll; and I might go and build a golden calf and worship it: but when the Holy Ghost speaks to me and gives me a knowledge that this is the kingdom of God, so that I know it just as well as I know anything else, then that knowledge is past controversy." [^6]

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "Christ is the second person in the Godhead. But Christ has himself declared that the manifestations we might have of the Spirit of Christ, or from a visitation of an angel, a tangible resurrected being, would not leave the impression and would not convince us and place within us that something which we cannot get away from which we receive through a manifestation of the Holy Ghost. Personal visitations might become dim as time goes on, but this guidance of the Holy ghost is renewed and continued, day after day, year after year, if we live to be worthy of it." [^7]

Apostles are also to witness—but so should all true disciples—that salvation and exaltation come only through acceptance of the name of the Savior and His ordinances and covenants (see D&C 18:21-28; 107:23, 35). Likewise, only through Christ's atonement are immortality and eternal life made possible through repentance (see D&C 18:11-14). His is the only name under heaven whereby salvation can come (2 Nephi 25:20). Thus we may be "persecuted" and "hated" and slandered for Jesus' name and sake (see Matthew 5:10, 11; 10:22).

Another special way in which we can witness for Jesus is to live as He did. "Now, if ye believe all these things see that ye do them," exhorted King Benjamin (Mosiah 4:10). By the very quality of our lives and by our service to others we are truly witnessing that we do worship Him, that we do remember our covenants with Him, that we do love His gospel, that we do honor the name of Jesus in our daily lives, and that, indeed, we are sufficiently worshipful of Him that we are ever striving to become like Him.

In fact, Christ has directed and invited: "Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Nephi 27:27.) Amid the challenges and vicissitudes of life, to be steadily becoming more like Jesus is an especially impressive way to witness for Him.

Having faith on the name of Jesus Christ thus means not only having faith that Jesus is who He declares Himself to be but also knowing and testifying day after day "that he, through his infinite goodness and grace, will keep you through the endurance of faith on his name to the end" (Moroni 8:3).

Ours, therefore, is a continuing task that requires enduring faith in Him and in what His name signifies: "And may the Lord Jesus Christ grant that their prayers may be answered according to their faith; and may God the Father remember the covenant which he hath made with the house of Israel; and may he bless them forever, through faith on the name of Jesus Christ" (Mormon 9:37).

Thus, having real faith in the name of Jesus Christ will ensure that we have "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:16, 17). Only then will we be fully willing to change and to improve in the very directions prescribed by Jesus, including greater consecration.

No wonder the multiple reinforcing that occurs in the Church is vital! In families, congregations, and Church communities we witness to each other, in word and deed, concerning the name of Jesus. After all, Jesus' atonement with its resultant blessings of a universal resurrection (and eternal life for the most worthy) is the most fundamental act in all human history. What other fact is so deserving of repeated attention in word and deed? Testifying and witnessing for His name, while serving in His name, will help us to qualify for eternal life with Him and with the Father in the ultimate community.

No wonder doing all this is such a fundamental objective. But it also is draining—unless we are renewed! We very much need God's and each other's help in this process. Otherwise we will grow weary and faint in our minds.

Notes

Chapter 10

1 The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible (New York: Abingdon Press, 1962), p. 500.

2 See LDS Bible Dictionary, p. 713.

3 See LDS Bible Dictionary, p. 633.

4 In Journal of Discourses 3:205-6.

5 See Boyd K. Packer, That All May Be Edified (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), p. 337.

6 In Journal of Discourses 8:313.

7 Doctrines of Salvation, comp. Bruce R. McConkie, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56), 1:44.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
