Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

11

Not Wearying by the Way

Do not weary by the way, whatever be thy lot(W. H. Flaville). [^1]

If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew To serve your turn long after they are gone And still hold on when there is nothing in you Except the Will that says to them: Hold on!(Rudyard Kipling.) [^2]

It is essential to avoid that immobilizing weariness, which can be a prelude to giving up. Professional athletes say that the legs are the first thing to go. In discipleship, the first thing to go is meekness. If a person is not humble, he may, for instance, feel he already knows enough to be bored by any more of the gospel. Hence he need not study. Likewise, if not humble one soon slackens in giving service, ending up merely going through the motions of worship and membership. In such circumstances, lost is the sense of intellectual excitement over the gospel, and also the needed satisfactions and reinforcement that come from serving in the Church.

This boredom and weariness, of course, are self-inflicted. Then, once we are no longer "anxiously engaged," we make ourselves vulnerable to sin (D&C 58:27). Whether through boredom or sin, we slow down or depart from the path. We "faint in [our] minds" and grow stale (Hebrews 12:3). Such intellectual fainting brings a loss of spiritual consciousness, and our strength quickly ebbs.

Physical fatigue, of course, is to be expected. From it we can recover by rest and wise renewal. The form of fatigue noted above, however, can be difficult to recover from unless we can reignite and become, once again, anxiously engaged. So "let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not" (Galatians 6:9).

In the particularized renewal of our covenants, in our prayerful pleadings, in and through Church service, and in the renewal of our minds through the study of the "word" and the holy scriptures—in these activities is to be found the fundamental renewal that is vital to the continuing journey of the man and the woman of Christ. For instance, in the renewal of our temple covenants we can be nurtured and encouraged by connecting the present with the past and the future. If we are deprived of these renewing opportunities over a sustained period of time, however, present cares can blur the past and cloud the future.

Special tribute is due, then, to those righteous Church members who do not weary despite sustained adversity, who regularly and quietly endure their special trials in faith day by day. These individuals—and they are all around us—cope with the "short and sharp" trials as well as the "long and tough" ones. The latter involve severe and recurring demands that at times seem even beyond the capacity of these exemplars to meet, yet even in their fatigue and amid the sheer repetitiveness of it all they do not cry out incessantly, "How long, oh Lord, how long!" These who thus inspire the rest of us deserve assurance, and this they should allow to seep into the marrow of their souls. Though still imperfect, they are doing not only the right thing but also the thing that matters most. Moreover, they are doing it far better than they think!

The very nature of the enduring, which is asked of all of us, includes the expenditure of considerable emotional and physical energy, and this over a period of time. Thereby, in this micro-dot called mortality, the faithful experience at least some local taste, as it were, of what lies behind the words concerning God's course being "one eternal round" (D&C 3:2; 35:1).

The very nature of this mortal experience is, as has been said: "The only way to go is through, there isn't any around."

Since discipleship need not be hectic and frantic, we are wise to allow for the periodic compression of experiences and events in our lives. Given the short span of mortality and all that God desires us to do and learn, this should not surprise us. Unless we grasp them firmly and quickly, many of the proffered opportunities to serve have a short shelf life and are perishable. Golden moments come and go. Even full repentance cannot fully recover lost time, though compensatory opportunities will be numerous. President Brigham Young thus urged us to do good whenever we have a chance. [^3]

Nevertheless, given the disciple's busy "schedule," helpful counseling and teaching is much needed for the avoidance of weariness: "Teach them to never be weary of good works, but to be meek and lowly in heart; for such shall find rest to their souls" (Alma 37:34). Paradoxical as it sounds, more diligence actually brings more relief. Any selfishness, on the other hand, magnifies our weariness. Selfishness not only shrinks the quantity of service we render but also provides none of the needed renewal, no "rest to [our] souls."

Paul worried, therefore, lest we become impatient and cease "looking unto Jesus" and thereby become "wearied and faint in [our] minds" (Hebrews 12:2-3). If we are not wise, however, both physical and mental fatigue can combine to our great disadvantage, jeopardizing our endurance and limiting our service to others. Jesus saw to this need for His disciples: "And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. And they departed into a desert place by ship privately." (Mark 6:31-32.)

Thus physical fatigue is surely not all of it. Consider the case of Sidney Rigdon's fainting in his mind. The failure of faith can be a private thing or, as with Sidney Rigdon, a public thing. Of Brother Rigdon's giving up, John Taylor said: "I remember a remark made by Sidney Rigdon—I suppose he did not live his religion—I do not think he did—his knees began to shake in Missouri, and on one occasion he said, 'Brethren, every one of you take your own way, for the work seems as though it [has] come to an end.' Brigham Young encouraged the people, and Joseph Smith told them to be firm and maintain their integrity, for God would be with his people and deliver them." [^4]

In the process of enduring, will our knees bend to receive strength or will they shake?

If living our religion can at times make us physically tired, not living it brings a worse weariness, a weariness more pervasive, dark, and constant. The foreseeing Lord in 1831 said of Sidney Rigdon that he had "exalted himself in his heart, and received not counsel, but grieved the Spirit" (D&C 63:55). Sidney Rigdon's ego apparently was not fully tamed. The Lord counseled him, "remain with my people," but he did not (D&C 124:104).

Looking unto Jesus involves not only taking His yoke upon us but also keeping it there: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls" (Matthew 11:29). Enduring is easier when accompanied by our meekness and lowliness. One of the most relieving experiences, which is designed to keep us from fainting, occurs when the Lord speaks "peace to [our minds]" (D&C 6:23).

The Lord warned, "All those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified" (D&C 101:5). This linking of failure to endure with denying the Lord suggests a failure of trust in the purposes and designs of Heavenly Father's plan. Laman and Lemuel grew weary, murmured, and even rebelled, because they "knew not the dealings" of God (1 Nephi 2:12). Others of us may likewise crack under the refining heat of a particular trial because we doubt or deny "the design . . . and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation" (D&C 58:3).

It is not real faith, therefore, to say, in effect, "Yes, there is a God, but He is not to be trusted when it comes to our personal trials." On the other hand, trusting in the Refiner's love, purposes, and timing reflects a multi-faceted faith.

Willing engagement hastens consecration and carries with it promises both crucial and specific: "And any man that shall go and preach this gospel of the kingdom, and fail not to continue faithful in all things, shall not be weary in mind, neither darkened, neither in body, limb, nor joint; and a hair of his head shall not fall to the ground unnoticed. And they shall not go hungry, neither athirst." (D&C 84:80; emphasis added.)

If faithful, we will thereby experience this "renewing of [our] bodies" (D&C 84:33). If we are not specifically focused, however, we will tire in both body and mind—a dual drain. As the Brethren of today gladly attest, amid aging and jet lagging, the Lord keeps His promise of renewal.

One major cause of real fatigue, little appreciated by those so afflicted, is trying to serve two masters. This is devastating double duty. If so divided, one inevitably ends up being ineffective, even disloyal, in respect to one master or another—a most fatiguing circumstance. (Matthew 6:24.)

Insincerity is fatiguing, too. Anne Morrow Lindbergh wrote of the need "to shed my Martha-like anxiety about many things. . . . shedding pride. . . . shedding hypocrisy in human relationships. What a rest that will be! The most exhausting thing in life, I have discovered, is being insincere. That is why so much of social life is exhausting." [^5]

Brigham Young counseled us to control our tempers, even when we are provoked, because this helps us to avoid another form of exhaustion: the auger that anger can become. "Never suffer anger to find a seat in your breast, never get angry. Treat all mildly, govern yourselves, control your passions, and it will give you power." [^6] In the same way that aggressive, evil thoughts should not be offered a chair and invited to sit down, so anger should never be an overnight guest!

If we will school ourselves and bring our own tempers and dispositions into subjection we shall then have influence to do good, over the minds of our acquaintances; but if we do not control ourselves how can we have influence over others? [^7]

If you give way to your angry feelings, it sets on fire the whole course of nature, and is set on fire of hell; and you are then apt to set those on fire who are contending with you. When you feel as though you would burst, tell the old boiler to burst, and just laugh at the temptation to speak evil. If you will continue to do that, you will soon be so masters of yourselves as to be able, if not to tame, to control your tongues, able to speak when you ought, and to be silent when you ought. [^8]

Hence, self-control avoids many otherwise wearying conflagrations.

This self-control can spare us another portion of weariness, one that results from the management of conflict in our human relationships—few things than which are more draining and worrying. Thus we need not experience all of the grinding weariness that comes of conflict. Calmness conserves energy as well as relationships.

We will not, of course, be able to manage all the outcomes of all the conflicts and certainly not the behavior of others involved. But we can manage ourselves in the midst of those conflicts and better influence others. When, through meekness and lowliness, we control our egos, we will not experience the extra weariness that is demanded by the exercise of unrighteous dominion. That dominion involves its own form of added calisthenics, not the least of which is resisting one's conscience. By contrast, enduring well brings a joy that displaces despair.

Yet without the tension of decision-making amid opposites and among shades of gray that is more easily managed by righteous reflexes, life really would be an undifferentiated "compound in one" (2 Nephi 2:11). Without moral agency the taste buds of the soul could not function fully. Without an "opposition in all things" there could not be the isometrics required for individual development as the old self is pitted against the new. Hence, neither happiness nor misery (see v. 23). God has yet to tell us all the implications of having things in a "compound of one," but we can be certain they have to do with what is needed in order that we "might have joy" (2 Nephi 2:25).

If we are focused on Jesus and His work, both our joys and our staying capacity are increased: "Blessed art thou, Nephi, for those things which thou hast done; for I have beheld how thou hast with unwearyingness declared the word, which I have given unto thee, unto this people. And thou hast not feared them, and hast not sought thine own life, but hast sought my will, and to keep my commandments." (Helaman 10:4.) Nephi had not selfishly sought his "own life," but rather had sought to do God's will. This gave him the extra and undivided energy which made his striving with unwearied diligence possible. Nephi knew in which direction he faced: toward God.

In contrast, and to be pitied, are the ambivalent, forever pivoting as between looking toward God or man. With all the incessant pivoting, no wonder some grow so weary! Instead, if we let our own wills be swallowed up in the will of the Lord, there is a more holistic deployment of our talents (see Mosiah 15:7). Like Nephi, we are not to pursue our own wills.

Another vital source of renewal is expending some of our energy by striving with the less active. Serving in this way keeps the giver from becoming weary or from fainting in his mind, making possible "striving with unwearied diligence that they may bring the remainder of their brethren to the knowledge of the truth; therefore there are many who do add to their numbers daily" (Helaman 15:6). Assisting in such reclamation actually gives us added energy. We are energized and empowered, like the father of the prodigal, who ran to greet him "when he was yet a great way off" (Luke 15:20). Such real love keeps us from becoming too tired to reach out.

We can, in fact, become "alive in Christ because of our faith" (2 Nephi 25:25). No wonder those who respond to the invitation to "come unto Christ" (D&C 20:59) "talk of Christ . . . rejoice in Christ . . . [and] preach of Christ . . . that [their] children may know to what source they may look" (2 Nephi 25:28). They know the Lord will "comfort [their] soul in Christ" and help them to "endure it well" (Alma 31:31-32). It is fitting that when those who were once lost manage to come home they are rightfully and enthusiastically described as being "alive again" (Luke 15:32).

When so engaged in these various forms of service, will we still have cares? Oh, yes! However, we have the invitation "cast all your care upon Him" (1 Peter 5:7). Only He can carry all our cares, anyway. No wonder we are to talk, preach, and rejoice in Christ, ever knowing to whom to look (2 Nephi 25:26).

Weariness also arises out of struggling to perform in a lackluster way because of a lack of commitment. Trying to do the Lord's work with a slothful heart brings its own special buildup of blockage in arteries and valves. There are no aerobics in apathy. Merely going through the motions of Church membership without the renewing emotions of discipleship can be very fatiguing.

Where there is any such slackness, the divine word about avoiding fainting in our minds and promising the renewing of our bodies cannot be fully obtained. Nor can we receive the special peace and rest that Jesus promises. "Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." (John 14:27; see also Matthew 11:28.)

If, along with other things, we will be meek, search the scriptures, proclaim the gospel, and seek to reclaim our less-active brothers and sisters, we will avoid the needless weariness of mind and body that would otherwise beset us. After all, it was in the midst of his heavy work of reactivation, bringing souls again unto Christ, that Nephi received this counsel: "Yea, I say unto you, that the more part of [the Lamanites] are doing this, and they are striving with unwearied diligence that they may bring the remainder of their brethren to the knowledge of the truth; therefore there are many who do add to their numbers daily" (Helaman 15:6).

Jesus, who bore the greatest and heaviest burdens, knows how to help His followers absorb afflictions in a unique way: "And the Lord provided for them that they should hunger not, neither should they thirst; yea, and he also gave them strength, that they should suffer no manner of afflictions, save it were swallowed up in the joy of Christ. Now this was according to the prayer of Alma; and this because he prayed in faith." (Alma 31:38.)

Even so, we will not be free of affliction. But we will be given help in bearing affliction, especially if our wills are swallowed up in the will of the Father and Christ. Being swallowed up in the will of God can help us cope not only with afflictions but even with death (see Mosiah 16:8; Alma 22:14).

It is noteworthy that this particular prophet, Alma, while trying to reactivate people, was efficient, because he was determined to "try the virtue of the word of God," the very approach which has "a great tendency to lead the people to do that which [is] just" (Alma 31:5).

Having faith in Jesus includes having faith in the assurance that our trials and difficulties "are but for a small moment," even when at the moment they seem to us to be extended and unremitting (D&C 122:4). Faith includes having faith in God's timing.

As we see the valiant reach breaking points without breaking, it inspires the rest of us to trust in the divine design in our own circumstances, which may not be immediately apparent to us during our trials: "Ye cannot behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your God . . . and the glory which shall follow after much tribulation" (D&C 58:3). Furthermore, the empathy earned by our patiently enduring will be eternal and will bless others in the world to come, just as it blesses some in special ways now. A special and helpful form of multilinguality emerges too. Annie Sophie Swetchine said: "Those who have suffered much are like those who know many languages: they have learned to understand and be understood by all." [^9] By His unique obedience and suffering Jesus was made unique and perfect in His understanding.

Everlastingly relevant is submissiveness to God, the admission ticket to blessings of unspeakable proportions that await and that are part of the promised divine and everlasting rest. It was not only the Prophet Joseph Smith but also all the faithful who were told, "if thou endure it well" (D&C 121:8), "all these things shall give thee experience and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7).

We may murmur a little now over the calisthenics of being stretched, and we may complain over enduring the exhausting isometrics of individual development in the mortal gymnasium. But if we were deprived of all these experiences in mortality, how would we feel later, as immortals, upon discovering that our smallness of stature was due to that earlier deprivation?

Of course there are strains and stresses. We have even been assured that some of the needed purifications and siftings are accomplished by such trials (see D&C 100:16; 136:31). Indeed, the increasing polarities in the world between righteousness and wickedness will hasten such siftings. If we wish to help those weak in the faith who may falter, we will strengthen our own faith and then endure for their sakes as well. It is difficult, as Jesus implied to Peter, to strengthen our brethren unless we ourselves are converted (see Luke 22:32). And the more "settled" we are in our minds and hearts, the more we can help others.

We can "bear one another's burdens, that they may be light" not only by rendering whatever practical assistance is needed, along with the empathy and the sympathy, but also by bearing up under our own burdens. Courage can be contagious. It is similar with comforting "those that stand in need of comfort," by means of which we stand "as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places" (Mosiah 18:8-9).

Finally, it is worth remembering that there is often a resistant residue of feeling, concerning which President Ezra Taft Benson counseled: "There are times when you simply have to righteously hang on and outlast the devil until his depressive spirit leaves you." [^10]

While carrying our individual crosses, we can greatly help each other if we "hold fast" to the doctrines as well as to each other.

Notes

Chapter 11

1 "If the Way Be Full of Trial, Weary Not," Deseret Sunday School Songs (Salt Lake City: Deseret Sunday School Union, 1909), no. 158.

2 Rudyard Kipling, in Charles Carrington, ed., Rudyard Kipling: His Life and Work (London: Macmillan, 1955), p. 575.

3 See Journal of Discourses 2:267.

4 In Journal of Discourses 11:25.

5 Ann Morrow Lindbergh, Gift from the Sea (New York: Vintage Books, 1975), p. 32.

6 Brigham Young, Nauvoo, 28 December 1843, from Wilford Woodruff journal.

7 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 14:277.

8 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 6:75.

9 Count de Falloux, ed., The Writings of Madame Swetchine, trans. H. W. Preston (Boston: Roberts Brothers, 1869), p. 7.

10 The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), p. 396.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
