Neal A. Maxwell, If Thou Endure It Well ( 1996)

12

Enduring It Well

No matter how serious the trial, how deep the distress, how great the affliction, [God] will never desert us. He never has, and He never will. He cannot do it. It is not His character. He is an unchangeable being; the same yesterday, the same today, and He will be the same throughout the eternal ages to come. We have found that God. We have made Him our friend, by obeying His Gospel; and He will stand by us. We may pass through the fiery furnace; we may pass through deep waters; but we shall not be consumed nor overwhelmed. We shall emerge from all these trials and difficulties the better and purer for them, if we only trust in our God and keep His commandments. (George Q. Cannon.) [^1]

I will not, I cannot, desert to his foes ("How Firm a Foundation"). [^2]

To think of enduring to the end as "hanging in there" and "holding fast" is certainly not inaccurate. But even swaying seaweed knows how to "hold fast." Enduring to the end, then, is more than weaving and surviving. Instead, we are called upon to "endure in faith" and "endure it well" and endure "valiantly" (see D&C 101:35; D&C 121:8, 29). Nephi's imagery conveys a special zestfulness: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life." (2 Nephi 31:20.)

Here Nephi portrays an earnest enthusiasm, but without illusions. Hence dullness is not descriptive of such disciples. Bored is the wrong word to describe such believers. Casual is not the correct connotation for such committed climbers on the straight and narrow path. This journey will finally require all we have, yet at the end of the journey, after we "endure it well," we will receive "all" that God has (D&C 84:38). There isn't any more than that!

Enduring, then, is much more than making a passive passage. Rather it is an activism that not only affirms one's faith but also confirms the basic joys of life. Until the end, enduring is not over. In fact it may be more of a challenge as life goes on. For some, life's final exams may turn out to be more difficult than the mid-terms, and certainly than the early quizzes. Hence the high relevance of the prepositional phrase "to the end."

Given the uneven seasons of life, the Lord desires balance in His disciples as well as in the Church collectively. We cannot be all sail and no anchor. Moreover, as we grow, "the root and the top" should be "equal in strength," providing a capacity to endure both heat and storm (Jacob 5:66).

Hence we are not merely to exist to the end but are to persist in coping with what is occurring in the holy present. If we will follow the example of "the Son of the living God," great things await us (see 2 Nephi 31:16). "Nevertheless, he that endureth in faith and doeth my will, the same shall overcome, and shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the day of transfiguration shall come" (D&C 63:20). "And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory" (D&C 101:35).

Even yesterday's spiritual experience, however, does not guarantee us against tomorrow's relapse. Persistence thus matters greatly. More than a few, for instance, have had supernal, spiritual experiences only to fall away later; or, more often, merely to pull off to the side of the road, though intending only a brief rest stop.

Hence the emphasis on enduring well to the end is wise, simply because we are at risk till the end! By enduring well all along the way we can, for example, have felicity amid poverty and gratitude without plentitude. We can even have meekness amid injustice. One never sees the "root of bitterness springing up" in enduring disciples (Hebrews 12:15). If we are wise like Job, while in the midst of "all these things," including the customized chastening, we too will avoid charging God foolishly (see Job 1:22).

Included in the enduring process is meeting the test of being constantly improved. Remodeling is costly and painful. But how can we realistically expect the arduous process of putting off the old man and putting on the new man to be otherwise?

God has repeatedly said He would structure mortality to be a proving and testing experience (see Abraham 3:25; Mosiah 23:21). Hence our fiery trials, said Peter, should not be thought of as "some strange thing" (1 Peter 4:12). Still some of us approach our experience in this mortal school as if it were to be mostly relaxing recesses with only the occasional irritant of summoning bells. In fact, any recesses are merely for renewal and for catching one's breath; and these are not to become a prolonged sigh of relief that introduces protracted leisure or languor.

By taking Jesus' yoke upon us we learn most deeply of Him, and especially how to be like Him. This includes emulating His power to endure (see Matthew 11:29). Even though our experiences are micro compared to His, the process is the same. True enduring, therefore, represents not merely the passage of time but also the passage of the soul—not merely going from A to B, but the "mighty change"—all the way from A to Z.

Rather than resigned shoulder-shrugging, enduring involves soul trembling. After all, Jesus bled not at a few pores but "at every pore" (D&C 19:18). He, the Lord of the universe, actually trembled because of pain!

The enveloping dissonance that sometimes accompanies our enduring can bring discovery—new ways of knowing about ourselves and about our larger-than-imagined reserves. These discoveries might not occur without shaking up the status quo. But we do not like it—"no chastening for the present seemeth to be joyous" (Hebrews 12:11). As to testing faith, C.S. Lewis said: "You never know how much you really believe anything until its truth or falsehood becomes a matter of life and death to you. It is easy to say you believe a rope to be strong and sound as long as you are merely using it to cord a box. But suppose you had to hang by that rope over a precipice. Wouldn't you then first discover how much you really trusted it?"

Speaking of the pain that accompanies suffering, Lewis also perceptively observed: "It doesn't really matter whether you grip the arms of the dentist's chair or let your hands lie in your lap. The drill drills on." [^3]

This dual need for testing and discovering is the reason why some of our trials and experiences in life cannot be cut short. Therefore, more than curtain parting is needed. We must enter into what is discovered. One does not graduate in mid-academic year, anyway. So the risks for us are real, and they persist to the end. This is one reason why the unconverted and unrooted are usually the first to let go, enduring "but for a time" (Mark 4:17). "The seed that falls by the way side, for want of root cannot endure the scorching sun of persecution. Those who are represented by the seed among thorns cannot endure because of the cares of the world and the pride of life. The influence and power of the world, and of the adversary, surrounding such individuals, they are by and by turned away, and cease to be Saints, cease to serve the Lord, and turn every one to his own way." [^4]

The assurance that the Lord's grace is sufficient for the meek does not mean an absence of adversity or a promise of repose and ease. His grace, instead, does bring the needed inner strength and peace that are vital in the process of enduring all things (see Ether 12:26).

Brigham wisely counseled, "We must endure all things that we cannot help." [^5] How many times we fret and stew over what we cannot change! This is understandable but regrettable. "The Almighty has his objects and plans all laid, and we are to pass through all these afflictions and to endure all that he calls us to endure, to give us knowledge, wisdom, and experience; for we cannot receive them upon any other principle." [^6]

Even when we may be enduring reasonably well in other respects, we are not enduring well if we murmur. Murmuring is defined as a half-suppressed resentment or muttered complaint. Just as "a yawn [can be] a silent shout," so murmuring can be much more than muted muttering. Realized or not, the real "addressee" of some of our murmuring is clearly the Lord, as when the people complained against Moses (see Exodus 16:8; 1 Nephi 16:20).

Murmuring, however, comes naturally to the natural man. It crosses the scriptural spectrum of recorded complaints. Grecian widows were felt to be neglected in favor of the Hebrews (Acts 6:1). We need bread. We need water (see Numbers 21:5). "Why did we ever leave Egypt?" (See Numbers 11:20.) "Why did we ever leave Jerusalem?" (See 1 Nephi 2:11.) Some murmured over persecution by unbelievers, while others even murmured over what the name of Christ's Church should be (see Mosiah 27:1; 3 Nephi 27:3-4).

The real danger, of course, is that we will finally start believing in our own murmuring! Too much such catharsis, and we really think we are experiencing too many "raw deals." Good-bye then to operative faith in Heavenly Father's plan of salvation. How can the whole plan be "OK" if our portion of it seems so awry?

A basic cause of murmuring is that too many of us seem to expect that life will flow ever smoothly, featuring, as it were, an unbroken chain of green lights with empty parking places just in front of our destinations. It is often the little things that get to us. Benjamin Disraeli, who had many large pressures as prime minister, confessed, "I can bear a great reverse, but these petty personal vexations throw one off one's balance." [^7]

There was murmuring, too, because Nephi broke his steel bow and also because he couldn't possibly build a ship (see 1 Nephi 16:18-20; 17:17). Those same murmurers, insensitive to their inconsistency, quickly surfeited themselves on the meat brought back by Nephi's new bow. They also sailed successfully over vast oceans to a new hemisphere in the ship that Nephi couldn't build. Strange, isn't it, how those with the longest lists of new demands also have the shortest memories of past blessings?

How handy, too, imperfect leaders always are as focal points for the frustrations of some, especially if particular circumstances require the leaders for good reason to suffer in silence! But having confidence in leaders who keep confidences is part of sustaining them.

In the late 1820s Brigham Young, as yet untouched by the restored gospel, was a somewhat discouraged young man. Apparently he found himself disapproving of much of what he saw in the world, while wondering if he had a work yet to do. His loving brother Phineas gave Brigham prescient counsel: "Hang on, for I know the Lord is agoing to do some thing for us." [^8] What soon happened to Brigham and because of him is Moses-like history!

We must never underestimate the difficulty of the last days, however. Joel and Zephaniah both speak of the last times as being "a day of gloominess" (Joel 2:2; Zephaniah 1:15). The coming decades will be decades of despair. Why? Especially because, as Moroni said, despair comes of iniquity (see Moroni 10:22). The more iniquity, the more despair. Therefore, unless there is widespread repentance, despair will both deepen and spread—except among those who have gospel gladness.

As with Paul, however, though we may be momentarily perplexed, we need not despair: "We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair" (2 Corinthians 4:8). Likewise, if we are prepared spiritually, we need not fear (see D&C 38:30). Puzzlement, for instance, is often the knob on the door of insight. The knob must be grasped with firm faith and deliberately turned in order for one to see and to experience what lies beyond.

Upon arriving at the foreseen geographical destination, President Brigham Young confirmed, "This is the place!" Of God's plan of salvation with its developmental destination, it can be confirmed, "This is the process!"

In the midst of our afflictions, reassurances will come to us from the Lord and from His prophets. The Lord's people in another age feared an approaching army, and their prophet reassured them; and "therefore they hushed their fears" (Mosiah 23:28). Prophets in our time will occasionally need to hush our fears, too.

The Lord has clearly indicated that His purifying and sifting judgment will begin "at the house of God" (see 1 Peter 4:17; D&C 112:25). Just what this sifting will consist of is not now clear. In a worsening world, special pressures will combine with the ongoing and demanding daily rigors of "taking up the cross daily" (see Luke 9:23). The tempter's triad of tools are temptation, persecution, and tribulation (see Matthew 13:18-22). These tools will be relentlessly used upon God's flock (see Matthew 13:21; Luke 8:13). And if the heat from the summer sun of such circumstances will scorch even a green tree, that heat upon the whole world will be intense (see Luke 23:31; D&C 135:6; Alma 32:38).

The cares and anxieties of the world are pervasive and persistent. They also vary widely from person to person. But it is usually the case (whatever the objective load of these cares is and even if it is actually small) that these worries will expand so as to fill whatever worry space is available in that individual. Thus what may be an easily manageable load for one person may seem overwhelming to another. Hence the need for us to put in perspective the cares and anxieties of the world. Otherwise the cares and anxieties will spread, crowding out space needed for spiritual things.

Though we may still let things "get to us" at times, there is no need for us to be threatened in any fundamental ways. There is no need for trembling, for instance, over the prospects of the annihilation of our species. Similarly we have no need to fret over the lack of meaning in life, or of identity, or of the existence of a loving God.

It is well, then, to put the cares of the day and the anxieties of the moment in the context of the things of eternity. After all, the little things are little.

Peter and Paul urged us to become "grounded," "rooted," "established," and "settled" (Colossians 1:23; 2:7; Ephesians 3:17). Being thus settled does not immunize us against trials, but it does against concerns over the basic realities about God, life, meaning, and the universe. We can and will be tried tactically, but this can occur without our calling into question the whole strategy of God's plan of salvation. Enduring involves coping with those moments when we cannot give an easy explanation for what is happening to us or around us, but we can still know that God loves us (see 1 Nephi 11:17).

Once again, let us not forget the simple little modifying phrase, "to the end." Once again, too, going 60 percent of the way will not do.

Some reasons why it is so hard to endure have been explored in previous pages. Sometimes we just plain feel put upon. We are doing the large things pretty well, so why must we put up with the "petty vexations" and frustrations? A reasonable answer is that our personal development requires us to pass through the little things too in order to give us full perspective and broad patience. If we enjoyed immunity from all the little things, would we later belong in the same company with those who endured both the little and the large challenges and who overcame them?

After the Atonement and its related agonies, Jesus does not mention such matters as how keenly He thirsted, or the sting of the scourging. But these and other comparatively "little" things He experienced were certainly trying and real, and He endured them even as He simultaneously worked out the large and great deliverance for all mankind that would bless billions and billions.

Nephi's broken bow doubtless brought to him some irritation, but not immobilizing bitterness. After all, he was just trying to feed the extended family, so why should he have to contend as well with a broken bow? Yet out of that episode came a great teaching moment. Irritation often precedes instruction. If we are not careful, small things can become the small sifting holes through which our resolve trickles away.

The thought evokes a further question: In the process of developing the precious quality of empathy, would we trade for some earlier relief today the enlarged empathy to be used in so many endless tomorrows? Would we trade keener perceptivity, likewise to be used throughout time and eternity, for an abrupt, premature closing up of today's upsetting scene? Without eternal perspectives, we might.

God our Eternal Father is very serious about developing in us the eternal attributes. It is well that we focus more on our eternal possibilities, because, as Brigham Young put it, "man possesses the germ of all the attributes and power that are possessed by God . . . that God possesses in perfection." Moreover, with almost stunning insight he counseled, "sin is . . . an inversion of the attributes God has placed in [man]." [^9] These words suggest, for example, that the innate and needed desire we have to succeed, when gone awry, leads to putting others down. Furthermore, the quality of patience, if skewed, could lead to a squandering indulgence, and the virtue of meekness could be distorted to mean sublimation to various peer groups or Caesars, or a refusal to choose independently for ourselves. The quality of submissiveness could be distorted into a feeling of diffused accountability and responsibility for ourselves. The innate sense of identity can quickly sour into pride. Likewise, love can be twisted into lust and perversion. Thus, as immortal genes are mixed in with the natural man's challenges of the flesh, "inversion" can occur—unless there is a conversion to the ways of the Lord.

No wonder, therefore, in our development that some events almost seem to wait upon the successful completion of an eternal spiritual transaction. Then the things of the day become almost inconsequential.

Sometimes our pleadings are for relief, but not for ourselves; rather, for a loved one. These can be noble requests. But if these importunings go unanswered, can we endure well? This denial may be for the same, sober reasons why our importunings for ourselves cannot always be granted to us. Therefore, will we also have faith in Heavenly Father's "designs" for our loved ones? (See D&C 58:3, 4.)

Even when special nobility underlies one's petition to God, then, this cannot always be the controlling factor. Nor can one's personal deservingness. Consider Jesus in Gethsemane!

Small wonder, given such tutorial purposes, that both President John Taylor and President Brigham Young later testified that they were glad their earlier views about the need for relieving certain human suffering had not prevailed. [^10]

We may wonder how our joy can be full in eternity if anyone we love is excluded from a fulness of joy? Can Adam and Eve have complete joy without having their unrighteous posterity with them, including Cain, in the eternal world to come (see D&C 107:53-56)?

On a much more vast scale, can Heavenly Father and Mother have a fullness of joy when a third of their children rebelled early on—along with many more later who will never come finally and fully home?

Mitigating factors to be considered include these: (1) In the justice and mercy of God, everyone will—at one point or another—have had an adequate opportunity to choose their futures according to the acted out "desires of their hearts." (2) Having chosen for ourselves that which we will be allotted in eternity, we will not later complain about God's mercy or justice (see Mosiah 27:31; Alma 12:15; Mosiah 6:1). Brigham affirms: "If we fail to obtain the salvation we are seeking for, we shall acknowledge that we have secured to ourselves every reward that is due to us by our acts, and that we have acted in accordance with the independent agency given us, and we shall be judged out of our own mouths whether we are justified or condemned." [^11] (3) Each post-resurrection kingdom is a kingdom of glory that is far better than this world we now know. Even "the glory of the telestial" will surpass "all understanding" (D&C 76:89). (4) The family circle, when finally completed in time for the world to come, may yet be larger than we may now imagine; late arrivals, after having paid a severe price and thus being finally qualified, may be more than a few.

We must not, therefore, underestimate the redemptive and reaching effectiveness of our Father's ongoing work in the spirit world. Even so, being a "trembling parent" here should cause us to be more conscientious now while there is yet time to affect eternity (see 2 Nephi 1:14).

After all, the resurrected Jesus, while visiting the Nephites and after blessing the children, said, "Now behold, my joy is full!" (3 Nephi 17:20.) Yet He clearly knew that many elsewhere on the planet were lost and beyond conversion. Earlier, and a continent away, He had rejoiced in prayer over the original Twelve, noting, however, that He had lost one, Judas (John 17:12). Therefore, it is apparently possible to have a fullness of joy even when some have been lost.

In any case we will not be frozen forever in grief over what might have been. This will be especially so when we "see things as they really are" and "things as they really will be"—for all of these will demonstrate God's surpassing mercy and astounding generosity (Jacob 4:13). Those who receive lesser kingdoms, but still kingdoms of glory, will not question; nor, therefore, should we question in anticipatory ways. The justice and mercy of God, who is perfect in His love, will prevail. He who is perfect in determining individual accountability is likewise perfect in His generosity and mercy in His bestowals upon His children.

Nevertheless, ever to be borne in mind is a preexisting, flinty fact: God, Himself, either cannot change or, in His infinite love and wisdom, will not change the reality that the moral agency of every individual cannot be violated!

Yes, having to choose is an onerous burden at times, but the prophetic and strategic words are: "Therefore, cheer up your hearts, and remember that ye are free to act for yourselves to choose the way of everlasting death or the way of eternal life" (2 Nephi 10:23). This cosmic fact becomes the great hinge upon which swing all the different outcomes in terms of salvation and exaltation.

Meanwhile, God "allotteth unto men" certain things, and with these we are to be content (see Alma 29:4; Philippians 4:11; 1 Timothy 6:8). A missing parent or limb is to be lived without. Other things are to be endured and "lived with."

Temper and lust are to be tamed and expunged (see 3 Nephi 12:22, 28). One's race is fixed, yet he or she may be among those granted by the Lord in that "nation and tongue, to teach his word" (Alma 29:8). One's genetic endowment is fixed but carries with it a duty to be a careful steward thereof.

The submissive soul will thus be led aright. Though living within certain limitations—enduring some things well, and being "anxiously engaged" in setting other things right—the disciple all the while discerns the difference between what is allotted and what is required (see Alma 29:3, 6, 7).

Within what is allotted to us, we can "endure it well," such as taking one more step when we think we cannot, making it to the next ridge when we are sure it is too far. Likewise, enduring injustice, misrepresentation, irony, and abuse, because we are the servants of Him upon whom wicked men spat.

Yes, at times during the journey of discipleship we will be frustrated by lesser things. The irritations and diversions do seem to "get in the way." We would do well, however, to contemplate some details along Jesus' road through Gethsemane and on to Calvary and all He encountered amid His accomplishment of the astonishing atonement. Did there need to be the added frustration of having to attend to Peter's impulsive severing of an assailant's ear? Was it really necessary to have a thief on an adjoining cross, pleading his personal case just when Jesus was saving all mankind? Was it really necessary, too, for Jesus to endure thirst while hanging on the cross? Many little things were part of that big moment!

Yet without all those little things, could it later have been correctly declared, "He that ascended up on high . . . also . . . descended below all things, in that he comprehend all things"? (D&C 88:6.)

Ever ringing in our ears, therefore, whenever we are asked to "endure it well," should be the Savior's searching question in Doctrine and Covenants 122:8: "The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?"

Notes

Chapter 12

1 George Q. Cannon, Collected Discourses, comp. Brian H. Stuy (Burbank, B.H.S. Publishing, 1988), 2:185.

2 "How Firm a Foundation," Hymns, 1985, no. 85.

3 A Grief Observed (New York: Bantam Books, 1978), pp. 25, 38.

4 Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses 2:250-51.

5 In Journal of Discourses 19:97.

6 In Journal of Discourses 8:31.

7 Sarah Bradford, Disraeli (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1982), p. 209.

8 Heber C. Kimball sermon 8 January 1845, in minutes, Brigham Young Papers (Church Archives).

9 In Journal of Discourses 10:251.

10 See Journal of Discourses 5:115; 11:275.

11 In Journal of Discourses 7:204.

---
Notas:
[^1] Divorce. If current divorce levels persist, about 50 percent of all marriages contracted in the past fifteen to twenty years will end in divorce. Of all marriages contracted in 1995, it is expected that 60 percent will end in divorce. Half of the children whose parents divorce and remarry will also experience a second such family disruption before they reach age sixteen.
[^2] Single-parent families. In 1960, 73 percent of the nation's children lived with two natural parents who were married only once. Of the children born in 1986, however, 60 percent will spend a portion of their childhood in a one-parent situation.
[^3] Employed mothers of preschoolers. Today, many single mothers work out of sheer necessity; some valiantly try to keep their families intact. Yet we are compelled to consider that back in 1950 only 12 percent of the mothers with preschool children were in the labor force. By 1993, it was 60 percent!
[^4] Illegitimate births. In 1950, 13 percent of the births to fifteen-to nineteen-year-olds were to unmarried women. By 1990, it was 67 percent! Looking ahead from 1995, the overall national illegitimacy rate "is predicted to reach 50 percent within the next twelve to twenty years." [^4]
[^5] Children not living with their biological fathers. About 40 percent of U.S. children now sleep in homes without a resident father. Presently, more than half of the American children will spend a portion of their childhood living apart from their fathers. It may soon rise to 60 percent.
[^6] 6 Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Garden City Publishing Company, 1927), p. 1.
[^7] 7 In Thomas F. Hornbein, Everest—The West Ridge, ed. David Brower (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1965), p. 100.
[^8] 8 G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (Garden City, New York: Image Books, 1955), p. 148.
[^9] 9 David Popenoe, "American Family Decline, 1960-1990: A Review and Appraisal," Journal of Marriage and the Family, August 1993, p. 540.
[^10] 10 In Generation at the Crossroads (New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1994), p. 126.
[^11] 11 See Neil Postman, Technopoly (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), p. 75.
