SHEEP OF ANOTHER FOLD

Shepherds and Sheep-Herders

OUR Lord's likening Himself to a shepherd and His followers to sheep has been an inspiration to poets, preachers, artists, and devout souls generally throughout the centuries of our era. While all His discourses are fraught with a significance that increases with repeated readings, some of His utterances are of outstanding interest because of their universal application and personal appeal. The sermon of the Good Shepherd is prominent in this class. Read John 10.

None other than the Lord Himself has depicted so forcefully and yet simply the contrast between shepherd and sheep-herder, between owner and hireling, between him who is ready to defend the sheep because he loves them, and the other who sees in the flock only so much wool, hide, and mutton.

Our literature contains no more striking differentiation of devoted service from money-loving effort than that presented in this brief, terse, yet comprehensive discourse. Every efficient laborer is worthy of his hire, or ought to be, be he plowman, artizan or professional, artist, teacher or preacher. Far from there being discredit in receiving wage for work, this reciprocal relationship is a fundamental necessity of community existence. But he whose sole purpose and interest is the wage, without devotion to the service for its intrinsic good, is but a hired servant and likely so to remain.

Never has been spoken a stronger arraignment of insincere teachers, false pastors, self-seeking hirelings--those who teach for pelf and divine for dollars, robbers who pose as shepherds yet avoid the door to the fold and climb up "some other way," prophets in the devil's employ who, to achieve their master's purpose, hesitate not to robe themselves in assumed sanctity, and appear in sheep's clothing while inwardly they are ravening wolves. (Matt. 7:15).

In the record of this profound discourse, one verse appears as an abrupt interpolation, bearing little relation aside from imagery with preceding or following verses. This reads: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." (John 10:16).

The Bible contains no related passage affording explanation. Commentators treat this verse as an isolated and unconnected utterance, and content themselves with the suggestion that the "other sheep" may be the Gentile nations who are to be brought into the Jewish fold under the one Shepherd. The Jews who heard the Lord speak so understood Him. The Book of Mormon, however, illumines our understanding of the quoted Scripture, and explains the Lord's purpose in speaking as He did and in leaving the subject without further exposition.

Shortly after His ascension, Christ visited a detached body of Israelites then existing as a great nation on the Western Continent. To them He declared Himself to be the slain and resurrected Son of God, through whom alone salvation was made possible to man. He gave them precepts and commandments, and chose twelve disciples whom He ordained to teach the Gospel and to administer in His name the ordinances thereof. To them He said, referring to the Jews amongst whom He had lived and died:

"This much did the Father command me, that I should tell unto them: That other sheep I have, which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. And now because of stiffneckedness and unbelief, they understood not my word; therefore I was commanded to say no more of the Father concerning this thing unto them. . . . And verily, I say unto you, that ye are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd. And they understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching. And they understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice; that I should not manifest myself unto them, save it were by the Holy Ghost. But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me." (Book of Mormon, 3 Nephi 15:16-24).

It is evident that even the Jewish Apostles had failed to apprehend the real significance of the Master's words; for they had vaguely surmised that He would manifest Himself in personal ministry among the Gentiles, oblivious to the fact that He had been sent to the lost sheep of the House of Israel; and that only through the ministrations of His ordained representatives would the Gospel be declared to the Gentile world.

But, as other parts of the sacred record make plain, the Gospel is offered freely to the Gentiles of the earth, and they through acceptance and obedience shall be numbered with Israel and be made partakers of the blessings assured by covenant to the righteous. See Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 30:2; 3 Nephi 16:13.
