AMERICA THE LAND OF ZION

The Place of the New Jerusalem

WE believe in the literal gathering of Israel, and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes; that Zion will be built upon this [the American] continent; etc. (Articles of Faith, No. 10).

The Holy Bible makes frequent mention of Zion and Jerusalem with the context showing that the terms are used interchangeably if not as precise synonyms. This application of different names to the same place is justified by the fact that within the walls of the Jerusalem of old was a hill specifically called Mount Zion, and by contraction, Zion.

But the two names appear in other Biblical passages with distinctive meaning, indicating different places, and expressive of contrast instead of identity. For example, consider the prophecy voiced by Isaiah relating to a time yet future: "Oh Zion that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength: lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God." (Isa. 40:9).

The same prophet refers to a Zion of the last days in which the righteous shall be safeguarded, this to be in a mountainous land, with the "munitions of rocks" as a defense; and he particularly states that the land is very far off. (See Isa. 33: 14-17).

More definite than Bible prophecies, however, are the predictions relating to the latter-day Zion made by prophets who ministered on the American continent many centuries prior to the rediscovery of the New World by Columbus. In the Book of Mormon the names Zion and New Jerusalem are used with allied meaning and sometimes synonymously.

Near the beginning of the sixth century before Christ's birth, Ether, a Jaredite prophet, compiled the history of his people from the time of their coming to America soon after the dispersion from Babel. Even before they had crossed the ocean, the sanctity of the Western Continent as a foreappointed land for people who would observe the laws of righteousness was made known to the Jaredites. In a summary of Ether's record, Moroni the Nephite who lived a thousand years after the extinction of the Jaredites, says of the latter:

"And the Lord would not suffer that they should stop beyond the sea in the wilderness, but he would that they should come forth even unto the land of promise, which was choice above all other lands, which the Lord God had preserved for a righteous people. And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise from that time henceforth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath should come upon them. . . . For behold this is a land which is choice above all other lands; wherefore he that doth possess it shall serve God, or shall be swept off; for it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off." (Book of Mormon, Ether 2:7-10).

The inspired admonition of these ancient prophets to the inhabitants of America today, that they observe and uphold the principles of righteousness, which embody just government and true liberty under equitable laws, may profitably be taken to heart by people of all conditions and degrees.

America is the Land of Zion, and as the people of this continent render allegiance to the God of Israel who is verily the God of all mankind, the land shall be sacred to liberty as the inheritance of the house of Israel. In it the Gentiles shall be potent, and shall be numbered with Israel according to their deserts. To the Nephites the Lord gave this far-reaching and blessed promise.

"But behold, this land, saith God, shall be a land of thine inheritance, and the Gentiles shall be blessed upon the land. And this land shall be a land of liberty unto the Gentiles, and there shall be no kings upon the land, who shall raise up unto the Gentiles. And I will fortify this land against all other nations. And he that fighteth against Zion shall perish, saith God; for he that raiseth up a king against me shall perish, for I, the Lord, the king of heaven, will be their king, and I will be a light unto them for ever, that hear my words." (Book of Mormon, 2 Nephi 10:10-14).

Zion is to be established on this continent, and as the word of modern revelation avers, in the western part of the United States (See D&C 45:64-71; 57:1-5). The time of the blessed consummation is conditioned by the fitness of the people. Hither shall come the hosts of scattered Israel, and the Lost Tribes from their long obscurity. Here shall yet be built the City of the Lord, Zion, the New Jerusalem, which in time shall be made one with the "Holy City," which the Revelator saw "coming down from God, out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband." (Rev. 21:2).

Holy Scriptures, of both ancient and latter days, aver that the Lost Tribes of Israel shall be brought forth from the place whereunto the Lord has led them, and shall figure in the general gathering incident to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Touching this feature of the Divine purpose in the time of restoration, we are told:

"And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord, and their prophets shall hear his voice and shall no longer stay themselves, and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their presence. And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep. Their enemies shall become a prey unto them, And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land. And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim my servants. And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence. And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim; and they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy. Behold, this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows." (D&C 133:26-34).
