Before we came to earth, Heavenly Father taught us the great plan of happiness. The family is central to His plan. Because He loves us, He has given us families so that we can love and learn from one another. By following Heavenly Father’s plan, families can return to Him and live with Him forever.

Prayerfully read the scriptures and quotations referred to on this year’s poster, and present them in family home evening. As you do, you will remember the blessings of being a member of a family. And you will learn ways to make your family stronger.

1.  Open the staples, remove the poster from the magazine, and reclose the staples.

2.  Cut out the foundation stones, and put them in an envelope. Cut out the pieces of the house, and put them in a different envelope.

3.  At the beginning of each month, find the right foundation stone and house piece for that month in the envelopes (all pieces are labeled by month on the back). Read and memorize the scripture or quotation. Then glue the pieces in place. When you attach the October piece, make sure there is no glue on the back of the door. In November, cut the door on the dotted lines and fold it open. In December, draw or glue a picture of your own family on the doorway piece.

Additional copies of the poster (item no. 24958) are available from Church distribution centers.

© 2004 by Intellectual Reserve, Inc.

September
June
July
March
January
February
November
October
December
August
April
May

I am a child of God.
The family is central to Heavenly Father’s plan.
Families can be happy when they follow Jesus Christ.
Family members have important responsibilities.
Heavenly Father teaches me how to strengthen my family.
Temples unite families.
Prophets teach me how to strengthen my family.
My family is blessed when we remember Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ makes it possible for me to live with Heavenly Father again.
Faith, prayer, repentance, and forgiveness can strengthen my family.
Respect, love, work, and wholesome recreation can strengthen my family.
Keeping the Sabbath day holy can strengthen my family.

January: “I am a child of God. I know Heavenly Father loves me, and I love Him. I can pray to Heavenly Father anytime, anywhere. I am trying to remember and follow Jesus Christ” (Faith in God guidebook, inside front cover).
February: “The family is ordained of God” (Liahona, Oct. 1998, 24).
March: “Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me” (John 14:6).
April: “Happiness in family life is most likely to be achieved when founded upon the teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ” (Liahona, Oct. 1998, 24).
May: “Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right” (Eph. 6:1).
June: “And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably” (Mosiah 4:13).
July: “Let this house be built unto my name, that I may reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people” (D&C 124:40).
August: “Successful … families are established and maintained on principles of faith, prayer, repentance, [and] forgiveness” (Liahona, Oct. 1998, 24).
September: “Successful … families are established and maintained on principles of … respect, love, compassion, work, and wholesome recreational activities” (Liahona, Oct. 1998, 24).
October: “What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, … whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same” (D&C 1:38).
November: “Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy” (Ex. 20:8).
December: “And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me. … I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world” (Ether 4:12).
