Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am ( 1982)

Preface

Appreciation is gladly given for Elder James E. Talmage's work Jesus the Christ, from which I first benefited as a young missionary, but also ever since. Gratitude is also due to President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., for the painstaking way in which he converged the chronology and concepts of Jesus' ministry and teachings in his publication Our Lord of the Gospels. More recently, I have been blessed, as have many others, by the multiple and scripture-enriched volumes of my colleague, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, about the Messiah. Each of these works stands on its merits, reflecting the message, talents, and emphasis of the authors.

This volume seeks to bear my own witness and to give my own emphasis and testimony of Jesus Christ. (Rev. 1:2; D&C 76:82.) If there are any incorrect thoughts or words in this volume, that detract from His words, may these be allowed to "fall to the ground" unheeded. (See 1 Sam. 3:19; 2 Kgs. 10:10; Alma 37:17; D&C 1:38.) Use will be made of selected events and incidents for the purpose of discussing not only Jesus' actuality, but also His remarkable personality and His unparalleled development of the eternal attributes of the Father. These episodes will, of course, underscore His divinity, but they will also tell us much that we need to know about the personality of Jesus, since we have been told clearly that we are to strive to become as He is. We will examine Jesus' tutoring relationship with His followers in the traditional framework, such as those involving Moses, Peter, and Paul, but also with other prophets, such as Enoch, Moroni, and Joseph Smith. We obviously learn more of Him by studying the fullness of His ministry. Studying the Savior's life at any one point provides single episodes that stir us and deservedly claim our attention. But it is the accumulation of episodes that produces awe and adoration of Him—all the more reason to ponder the fullness of His ministry.

As we examine "this Jesus Christ" (3 Ne. 11:2), most of our information about His life comes through the four Gospels of the New Testament. These priceless texts chronicle that portion of His existence wherein the Savior of all mankind was, so to speak, "in residence." Prior and later, He made important visitations elsewhere, giving corroborating testimony and making additional declarations, such as to His "other sheep," as in the Americas, and, subsequently, to the so-called lost tribes. (See 3 Ne. 15:17, 21.) In these and other visits, He repeated many of His basic teachings and sermons; He also provided additional vital instructions and certain amplifications.

However, there was only one birth at Bethlehem, one period when He was a carpenter's son, one Gethsemane, one Judas Iscariot, and one Calvary. Praise be to those who preserved those precious and singular episodes in our Holy Bible!

We do not, by any means, have all that Jesus said. Some of His teachings to His closest disciples have not been shared with others, and for very appropriate reasons. (John 21:25; 3 Ne. 26:6.)

Furthermore, even where we do have His words, we learn of His facial expressions and accompanying gestures only rarely. For example, we do read about Him when He was angry (Matt. 21:12; Mark 3:5), and when He wept (John 11:35; 3 Ne. 17:21-22). We learn of the look He gave to Peter (Luke 22:61), and how He smiled upon His praying apostles and disciples (3 Ne. 19:25, 30).

Jesus clearly had the unique capacity of being able to respond truthfully to inquiries and circumstances in a manner that addressed the immediate audience as well as the needs of eventual audiences. On occasion, He said things that might have seemed stern, even harsh, at the moment in order to teach an eternal truth.

How His glorious words have held up under the scrutiny of the centuries! Though His teachings are deep in the demands made upon us, He has taught us also by explanation and example how to "be of good cheer" as we pass through the proving and tutoring process of mortality.

Acknowledgment is gladly given, therefore, to all who over the centuries have written and preserved the precious and illuminating words about our "precious Savior, dear Redeemer."
