Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am ( 1982)

1

Eternal Purpose in Christ Jesus

In a setting of irreligion or vague religion, both of which abound in our contemporary culture, not only to certify Jesus' actuality but also to write of His personality constitutes marked counterpoint.

In a permissive society that is increasingly unconcerned with virtue, it is even more unusual to testify in apostolic affirmation of the clear requirement that the Father and Jesus have undeniably laid upon us mortals: to strive, individually, to become like them.

In the scriptures, however, we encounter truths and requirements that are at the center of personal, global, and "eternal purpose . . . in Christ Jesus." [^1] Therefore, this deliberate, divine seriousness underlies not only our need to worship God, but also to know what we worship. Jesus declared this in a telling conversation with a woman of Samaria: "Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship." [^2]

Much of the message of the holy scriptures concerns the nature, character, and attributes of God and His Son, Jesus Christ: "I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness." [^3]

Therefore, it becomes clear both logically and scripturally that the only real veneration of Jesus is emulation of Him. Indeed, striving to become like Him is a special way of bearing and sharing our testimony of Him.

Jesus has told us that if we truly love Him, we will keep His commandments; and keeping and doing His commandments surely puts and keeps us on the lengthy pathway to perfection.

None of the divine data given to us about the Father and the Son are provided merely to give us an interesting theological backdrop for our mortal musings. The revelation of Jesus Christ is so much more relevant and demanding of us than that, as these next interactive verses make soberingly and abundantly clear:

"Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect."

"Ye are therefore commanded to be perfect, even as your Father who is in heaven is perfect."

"Therefore I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect."

"Therefore, what manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." [^4]

The Greek rendering of the word perfect is finished, complete, fully developed—but whichever the synonym, it is an awesome requirement. Yet it is a requirement. Striving for this excellence is not an elective. No wonder Paul wrote of the "eternal purpose" that the Father "purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord." [^5] And no wonder that the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "a correct idea of [God's] character, perfections, and attributes" is necessary to the development and exercise of true faith in God. [^6]

Vagueness about the true nature of God—"what" we worship—has taken a terrible toll in the world. Such vagueness subtly feeds faithlessness and adds to the sense of purposelessness that needlessly permeates so many lives. Someday we shall see how much boredom and drift (as well as both dread and disdain of death) are rooted in the incorrect and inadequate perceptions of God. Those in ancient Israel were not alone in following false gods "to [their] hurt." [^7]

Besides, the teachings of Jesus Christ have never been rejected because His standards are imprecise or insufficiently high. His teachings have, in fact, been disregarded by some because they are viewed as being too precise and impractically high! Yet such lofty standards, when followed, produce the truest and highest happiness. There is no other individual to compare with Jesus Christ, nor any other message to rival that of Jesus—a message that is so holistic, so consistent, and so explanatory of what we earthlings are experiencing in mortality. [^8]

Passive acknowledgment of an aimless and diluted deity does little to improve the human condition. And militant followership of tribal deity who issues no equivalent of the second commandment is dangerous. But sincere followership of the living God—who urges us to be like Him in love, justice, kindness, mercy, and purity—can redeem both the individual and mankind. Understanding what we worship is, thus, no trivial theological point—it is purpose itself!

Discovering and pursuing such eternal purpose is made no easier as the second coming of our Lord draws ever nearer and the prophesied conditions appear, such as the foreseen perplexity among nations and uncertainty of our war-filled times. Appearing, too, is the foreseen ambivalence toward the divinity of the Savior—even by many so-called Christians and, ironically, some clerics. An earlier apostle, Peter, foretold how, in the last days, some would even deny the divinity of Jesus, who purchased humanity—and at such a price. [^9] When else in human history have the ransomed complained about the ransomer or ignored their benefactor?

Yet while we live in an age in which many hold religion in disdain, so many other people openly hunger, soulfully and deeply, for an understanding of how things really are and really will be, for purposes that outlast the moment. They are kept from the truth only because they "know not where to find it." [^10] This search for meaning is the search for an explanation of self and of life, and for the underlying purposes of the universe. This deep craving for truth is expressed in many ways by many mortals, often directly, other times indirectly; sometimes foolishly, other times wisely. Blessed are those who have found the truth and have, thereby, been made free, and who have learned that there is both eternal and personal purpose! It is the beginning of wisdom for us mortals to accept the simple but verifiable truths about eternal purpose as found in Jesus Christ. He has summed it all up, commencing with the words "This is my gospel." [^11] The straightforward explanation that follows each of these declarations gives to mankind the "good news"—the glorious news—concerning Jesus' coming as our Rescuer and our Savior and our Atoner. His gospel gives to humankind the answers to the search for meaning and eternal purpose.

Regarding eternal purpose, the words in this book are designed to help us to "be of good cheer," lest we be numbered among those whose hearts fail them in the last days. [^12] Some of the current causes for despair and discouragement should be no mystery: skepticism about the historicity of Jesus; the mistaken view that a value-free society is free; schools that lack moral content; family Bibles that go unread; and fewer and fewer families that are intact and nourishing, and so forth. Alas, when the hopes of humans are riddled and blasted, it is usually when mortals assume that familiar formation: the circular firing squad.

Unsurprisingly, this decline in true religion has occurred at the same time as the rise in behavioral permissiveness. Such permissiveness has not been generated solely by the people; often it has been promoted by those who pretend to be religious leaders but who are consumed with other causes. To them, our crucial task of developing the divine attributes is regarded as out of reach or as a diversion. [^13] Why be concerned with developing one's mercy when there is a corrupt government to be toppled? Why worry over containing sexual hunger within the bounds of chastity and fidelity when there is so much other hunger in the world?

The consequences of such attitudes and conditions are felt—inevitably, diversely, but irrevocably. Yet the plans of God are not set aside merely because some humans have tried to set Him aside or because some deny the divinity of His Son, Jesus Christ.

Happily, modern revelation not only affirms the reality of the existence and lordship of Jesus Christ, of whom the prophets have spoken, but it also provides us with this needed affirmation in a time of increasing despair and increasing doubt. In ways yet unclear, we shall even see how the Book of Mormon, "these last records," "shall establish the truth of the first" records, the Holy Bible. [^14] And the central truth to be established by both interactive books of scripture is the glorious fact that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world whose pattern provides for us purpose for mortality and whose atonement gives us the inestimable blessings of immortality.

The various appearances of the resurrected Christ to over three thousand souls make it clear who He was and is. Additional scriptures attest to the reality of the resurrected Christ. Added to the traditional list of those who saw Him, such as Saul and Stephen, are names like Jacob, Nephi, Lamoni, Emer, Mormon, and Moroni. How fortunate that we are not left alone with the antiquity of previous testimonies and revelations, marvelous and needed as those are!

There is no need for doubt merely because of the passage of time. Growing historical distance from certain events need not pose a special problem for those in our day who desire to believe in and to behave in accordance with God's eternal purpose in Jesus Christ.

In the precious Acts of the Apostles, we read the declaration of how Jesus "shewed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God." [^15] These "infallible proofs" included, said Paul, the multiple appearances of Jesus that affirmed His resurrected status.

Infallible proofs of the same type and description have been amply provided in this dispensation, too. [^16]

It is very important to understand how the events of the restoration reinforce these last-recited and fundamental realities about Jesus. Modern revelation dissolves the doubts and distortions about His divinity. The restoration, therefore, not only constitutes a glorious restitution, but also a stern, head-on refutation!

So many implications, for instance, flow from the illuminating and confirming first vision granted to Joseph Smith as well as from subsequent appearances in our day of the Savior and His ancient prophets. For instance, since Jesus came to restore his Church, then it is clear that He established an authorized church while He was on earth before—contrary to what some maintain who believe that He gave some helpful ethical pronouncements in the meridian of time and merely let it go at that. Remember, had Jesus been of the world, the world would have loved Him! [^17]

Since Jesus came in the early part of the nineteenth century to select and call a new, youthful prophet, He continues to work through prophets, just as He did in the past. Moreover, He dispatched other great leaders, such as Moses, Elijah, Elias, John the Baptist, Peter, James, and John, to assist the new prophet in launching the last dispensation. Christ operates not only through an organized church, but also through priesthood keys of authority, circumspectly honoring those who held certain keys in previous dispensations.

Jesus' use of ancient American records in undergirding the restoration also signifies how important it is to have a second scriptural witness for Christ in the form of the Book of Mormon, to join the marvelous Holy Bible. Should it surprise us? Jesus, as Jehovah, in His justice, insisted on establishing facts in the mouths of two or three witnesses, and He would have it so in order to confirm His resurrection, the most important fact of all. [^18]

Our faith can be freshened in yet other ways. Those fed at the miracle of the loaves and fishes have long since gone to their reward, as have also the ten lepers. However, the same Lord who fed and healed loves us no less, nor is He less powerful than He was two thousand years ago. How blessed we are to have "proofs" of the longevity of His Lordship! Moreover, His working out of the miracle of the Atonement gives us each everlasting blessings, while the wine produced in the miracle at Cana is long gone. Jesus' blessings, both personal and universal, continue with us to this very day. Little wonder, then, that the adversary sought to extinguish the tiny light of the Restoration before it could fully flame and reilluminate these great realities! It is not difficult either to see both why and how the adversary has feverishly worked to deflect people from carefully considering Jesus in His true role in carrying out the Father's eternal purposes.

Alas, however, some still settle for regarding Jesus as a mere figure in folklore. Others see Him as a significant moral, but nevertheless mortal, teacher—a Socrates of Samaria, a Plato of Palestine. Still others regard Him as the respected founder of a sect that became yet another widespread religious movement to take its place alongside several other large, worldwide religious movements. Many do accord Him a vague form of Lordship, mistakenly assuming, however, that though He lived and is risen, He has receded somewhere into distant space. [^19]

But men are not mere ciphers in a vast but dumb space; they are everlasting and accountable individuals. Modern witnesses affirm the meaningfulness of life, human identity, human belonging. The vastness of God's creations are the verification of meaning, not its annihilation. There is eternal purpose, and it is to be found in the Father's Only Begotten, Christ Jesus.

Therefore, when we say "He lives," we mean all that that glorious truth implies. The theophany at Palmyra, for instance, was a deeply profound statement, not solely an affirmation to that youthful audience of one, but to all mankind. The chorus of resurrected notables who, representing ages past, later appeared to Joseph Smith, such as at the Kirtland Temple, gave to us an anthem of assurance. [^20] And what is more, these great, ordering, and reassuring realities will not go away just because some reject them. After all, the Lord's plan of salvation is not a set of floor plans for a new house that we as clients can modify or reject. The Architect is not our employee, but our Host, even the Lord of Hosts; He is not only our Landlord, He is also our Lord!

Strangely, it is not only the fullness of the gospel that is rejected by some, but the fullness of its attending implications. Questions and reservations about Jesus' historicity may, for some, merely be a cover for a refusal to face not only His reality but also the realities and implications of His gospel truths. Some lives, alas, are far too entangled in the webbing of the world to make it easy to entertain the implications that radiate from the reality of the resurrected Jesus.

We are, nevertheless, at the center of God's eternal purposes, for He has told us what His work and His glory consist of. [^21] There can be no sense of purpose—no lasting purpose—for us that exists apart from His purposes. And Christ Jesus is our Atoner and Advocate—our Rescuer and Exemplar. His gospel is the "good news." Yet it is the oldest news ever!

It is in this setting that a long-held desire to write a book about Jesus Christ in tribute to and testimony of Him comes to fruition. With the author's calling to the holy apostleship in the summer of 1981, the subsequent ordination thereto, and the conferring of the solemn duties that go with being a special witness of Jesus Christ and His name in all the world, this most demanding but most deserving task has been undertaken.

While the fundamental and summational content of the testimony of all the special witnesses in behalf of the Savior will be the same, the manner in which the witness is given and the emphasis within that witness will, of necessity, differ with the personalities of these men. Likewise, such witnessing seeks to respond to the existing circumstances of those to whom their witness is addressed.

Having gladly forgone what could have been a career in government and politics (the former constitute "the road not taken" for which there is no regret at all, since those chores are being better done by others anyway), I gladly give full attention to the task of being a special witness.

Once another and better church leader, Alma, determined to forgo his governmental chores in order to give full attention to his spiritual ministry. He chose to bear down in pure testimony and to stir his people up "in remembrance of their duty." [^22] These pages seek to stir us in our duty to become like the Savior. The words to follow, however, represent not even "the smallest part which I feel" [^23] by way of God's "eternal purpose . . . in Christ Jesus" and by way of sharing my testimony about the reality that Jesus lives—with all that that glorious fact implies.

More and more, whatever my tasks and activities of the moment, or my thought patterns, there stands the Savior—whether in needed remonstration or in needed inspiration. What He is presses in upon me in relentless reminder of what I should be. What He has generously given me elicits deep gratitude and deepens my trust. His impending blessings are a spur to me to intensify my discipleship.

I find I can do nothing without Him. Yet, alas, how often He can do so little with me. It is increasingly difficult for me to sing those hymns that pay special tribute to Him without becoming misty-eyed. Whether in the temple, on a highway, or in a jet airplane, the reflections and reminders about Him come in waves, like refreshing yet subduing surf. And, on occasion, of a night, "I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day." [^24]

So it is that the time to try has come—the time to testify not only of Jesus' transcendent actuality, but also to His resplendent personality. Through examining and describing His matchless attributes in action, I find the conclusion is inescapable: how earnestly we are to strive to accept His generous but genuine invitation and direction to become, as He has said, "Even as I am." [^25]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Lectures on Faith 3 and 4. See also Moses 6:6; 1 Nephi 19:9; 2 Nephi 11:5; Alma 42:15.
[^2] Matthew 22:37-40.
[^3] See the Topical Guide in the LDS edition of the King James Version of the Bible (1979) under such headings as "Gentleness," "Graciousness," "Humility," "Intreated," "Judgment," "Justice," "Kindness," "Love," "Meek, Meekness," "Mercy, Merciful," "Patience," "Submissiveness," and "Wisdom."
[^4] Luke 6:40.
[^5] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Deseret Book, 1977), p. 348.
[^6] See, for example, Genesis 6:9; 17:1; Matthew 19:21; Ephesians 4:13; Hebrews 12:23.
[^7] James E. Talmage, Jesus the Christ (Deseret Book, 1977), p. 248, note 5.
[^8] Alma 32:34; Genesis 6:9; 17:1; Alma 27:27; 50:37.
[^9] Alma 32:34; Genesis 6:9; 17:1; Alma 27:27; 50:37.
[^10] Micah 6:8.
[^11] Ecclesiastes 7:20. See also Romans 3:23.
[^12] D&C 93:13.
[^13] 2 Nephi 28:30.
[^14] 3 Nephi 27:27. See also Matthew 5:48; 3 Nephi 12:48.
[^15] Hebrews 9:9.
[^16] Luke 13:32.
[^17] Luke 12:15, 21.
[^18] See Matthew 19:21.
[^19] Abraham 2:27.
[^20] John 19:30; JST Matthew 27:54.
[^21] 3 Nephi 17:20.
[^22] D&C 88:106.
[^23] D&C 39:18; Alma 7:11-12; Hebrews 2:8; D&C 62:2.
[^24] John 5:36; D&C 88:42, 47.
[^25] Philippians 3:10; D&C 45:32.
