Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am ( 1982)

3

Ye Are My Friends

Filled with mercy, Jesus generously described His true followers as His friends. Both endearing and lifting, this designation describes how in His perfect love He regards us. He has surely proven His unconditional and unending friendship for us, but we have not yet proven our friendship for Him. He said to His disciples in the meridian of time that they were no longer servants, but friends: "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." [^1]

Attaching this condition does not indicate conditional love for us, since we are loved perfectly by Him. Rather, it describes the condition necessary for us to achieve in order to prove our friendship for Him: we must keep His commandments and strive to become like Him. His truest friends are those who give such evidence of being "valiant in the testimony of Jesus" and who thereby overcome themselves and the world. [^2]

The Lord's communications with His prophets reflect a King who would have His subjects also be His friends. Moreover, His friendship for us is reflected in the style as well as the substance of His leadership. Centuries ago, "the Lord spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." Centuries later, as the Lord described His creations in presenting an overwhelming vista, He touchingly said, "And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, I leave these sayings with you to ponder in your hearts." [^3]

His is a beckoning friendship, a designation that is actually an invitation, for He declared: "I will call you friends, for ye are my friends, and ye shall have an inheritance with me." [^4]

We can better understand the remarkable nature of the Lord's friendship for us if we examine His relationship with His prophet-friends in times past.

In no dimension of the divine personality of Jesus Christ do we see His love any more fully expressed than in the divine tutorials given especially to His friends—those who believe in and who strive to follow Him, leaders and followers alike, rich and poor alike, men and women alike, for He is "no respecter of persons." He would not deny these enriching but stretching divine tutorials to any who follow Him, especially those who have already done much to prove their friendship for Him and are thus ready for further lessons.

The manner in which Jesus gives us our individual training indicates He does this work in many ways in order to save and to improve people. Yet His Spirit will not and cannot dwell in unholy temples. And He cannot be deceived; He will have none of the games people play. Hence the individualized tutoring and cleansings, but according to His rules and according to our readiness.

If we ponder the Lord's relationship with Abraham, we see a young man who desired a more righteous and happy life, but who had a lapsing father. Yet this young man genuinely craved the holy priesthood and desired a better way of life. Early in life, well before he was asked to offer Isaac as a sacrifice, Abraham personally experienced a little appreciated lesson: what it was like to contemplate being sacrificed, for the pagan priests actually sought to sacrifice him. [^5]

Later, when the time came for offering his own son Isaac in similitude of the Father's offering of Jesus as the supreme sacrifice, Abraham doubtless had unusual empathy for Isaac. But he also had unusual empathy for our Father in heaven—such as could very few, if any, others. Surely Abraham marveled at the submissiveness of his son Isaac, foreshadowing the later and more marvelous submissiveness of Jesus—for whom, however, there was no ram in the thicket!

Abraham and Isaac had undeniable cause for subdued rejoicing in the walk down Mount Moriah, when the latter's sacrifice proved unnecessary. Both had been obedient and submissive, in similitude of that which was to come in the meridian of time. Perhaps there even occurred a special father-and-son conversation, perhaps only rich and instructive silence. But the lesson given to Abraham was not being given to a novice or to an apprentice. The most advanced disciples—far from being immune from further instruction—experience even deeper and more constant tutorials.

When we reflect upon our need for such submissiveness, it is not solely a matter of subordination. Submissiveness involves an invitation to come to grips with reality—to come into harmony with "things as they really are." Only then, proceeding from where one now is, can genuine spiritual progress be made. This is not mysticism, but realism; the acceptance of the truth of things as they were, as they are, and as they will become, as God's purposes for individuals and mankind unfold in the universe. [^6] Refusing to look at these realities or shielding our eyes from them—these are signs of immaturity, whereas looking with wide-eyed wonder but with eyes of faith is an act of high intelligence.

Let us consider another whom the Savior loved dearly—Moses, who served the Savior so well in the Sinai and so bravely earlier in the Pharaoh's court. Paul's praise of Moses was not amiss: "By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt." [^7]

What is the meaning for us of God's stern response to the momentary relapse of noble Moses that prevented his going over Jordan into the long-awaited Promised Land?

Moses, wearied by much murmuring, was nevertheless called upon to importune for yet one more miracle in behalf of his thirsty, badgering people. He cried, "Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?" Moses "smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and the beasts also." God honored Moses' authority, even though Moses had momentarily not fully honored God. Apparently Moses, in a brief lapse, arrogated some authority unto himself, indicated by the use of the word we, rather than giving full credit and honor to the Lord. There followed a tutorial that was given because Jesus loved Moses. Moses was permitted to view the Promised Land only from atop Mount Pisgah. [^8]

Moses, the most meek man upon the face of the earth, [^9] still stood approved of the Lord, but even star pupils need lessons. Indeed, he was sufficiently approved of the Lord that he was later translated. [^10] Even so, Moses' tutorials were not finished until they were finished! Such an episode teaches much (perhaps, in a way, more than we now wish we knew) about the tutoring personality of our Savior.

Is this episode not also a lesson for us all about acknowledging, as did Jesus, our continuing dependency upon the Lord lest we too, in fatigue and frustration, arrogate authority to ourselves? And is it not also a lesson for us about how even a virtue already highly developed in us can still require additional attention? Self-sufficiency and selfishness ever require the pruning presence of meekness and humility.

Furthermore, Moses, in that moment on Mount Pisgah overlooking the Holy Land, must have been sobered by the realization that even sterling past performance, when tarnish is present, cannot rob justice of its polishing part.

Three hundred warriors of Gideon could also tell us about the importance of our acknowledging—gladly not grumpily—the hand of the Lord. Before the battle, a swollen army was deliberately reduced by the Lord to only three hundred, "lest Israel vaunt itself," thinking their own hand had saved them. [^11] Such episodes cause the soul to shiver as we think of the implications for us in acknowledging the Lord's hand even as we are surrounded by seemingly overwhelming circumstances. Apparently it is necessary for us on occasion to be brought to a white-knuckles point of anxiety so as to be reminded, when rescued, of who our Rescuer is!

Yet mercy is not idle. David, the prophet of such promise, fell, and his portion has been given to another. [^12] Even so, we are told that after justice has been satisfied, at some point David will yet be redeemed by God's mercy. God's love balances justice and mercy in divine due process—beside which our mortal due process is, comparatively, either a kangaroo court or an orgy of unredeeming indulgence.

Perhaps these divine tutorials carry such a high priority because the more we are fully developed here, the more chores and opportunities we can be given in the world to come—chores and opportunities that, without growth through tutoring, simply could not be entrusted to us. Perhaps, too, what seems stern, even harsh, as a required experience is merely the necessary crust around the sweet bread of spiritual progress. Little wonder that some such warnings must sometimes come in the form of a shout if they are to save us. A mere frown may not be enough to move us away from a particular precipice.

Imbedded deeply in all of this is an immense and sobering truth about the aloneness that often goes with such soul-stretching experiences. President Brigham Young, who knew by experience the part to be played by tutoring trials, observed with insight that God deliberately does not do everything for man in order that man can learn to act as an independent being "to practice . . . [using] his own resources . . . to be righteous in the dark . . . to be a friend of God." [^13] President Young's is an illuminating insight. Indeed, we could scarcely face the stern requirements of submissiveness were it not for our knowledge of God's foreknowledge of our capacity to succeed. Was not the Father's "immediate presence" withdrawn in order that Jesus' triumph on the cross could be complete? [^14]

When we think of the Savior's mercy, we should remember how often mercy requires patience. And what is patience without time for people to change? Esau's heart was not softened toward Jacob (nor Jacob's toward Esau) the next weekend after their disputed transaction, but only years later when their caravans rendezvoused in the desert and when there was brotherly tenderness and mutual generosity. [^15]

While the Savior's tutorials may on occasion be abrupt, these usually occur "in process of time." It is our stubborn use of our agency that slows us, not God's desire for delay. The eternal attributes require time for their development and expression. Instant forgiveness is not always given, though it is desperately wished for. Instant compassion is not always generated, though it is so needed. Alas, empathy for others sometimes waits for its fuller development upon one's passing through the same experience. And, of course, instant patience is a contradiction in terms.

Progress requires time, but time by itself is no guarantor. The scriptures indicate that Methuselah "took glory unto himself," though the infractions are unspecified. [^16] Longevity does not automatically produce humility. The mere passage of time does not mean the automatic passing of milestones in personal development.

As for submissiveness, it is both proper and important for us in our afflictions and trials to ask for relief through fasting, prayer, and priesthood blessings. But after all we can do, we then submit to God's will as did Jesus in Gethsemane and on the cross, when, in anguish, He posed aloud the possibility that the cup might pass from Him. On that occasion, the key word that expressed Jesus' attribute of submissiveness was "nevertheless."

Paul thrice petitioned God that the unidentified thorn of affliction might be taken from Him. The answer was "no." In place of full relief came God's grace. [^17] We express our desires out of an imperfect perception, and upon learning the Father's desires, we yield to His eternal perspective and purposes. It is the only surrender that is also a victory!

Examining yet another tutoring friendship, we see a prolonged pattern of instruction in the relationship of Jesus with Enoch. [^18] In the beginning, Enoch felt inadequate. But, happily, he was meek and teachable. We see a highly empathic Enoch when his bowels were filled with mercy for all humankind. He saw the impact of sin and wickedness upon his people and wondered aloud just how long-suffering a merciful God could be. An Enoch disconsolate over the destructiveness of sin encountered the rich redemptiveness of God.

Enoch surely had received special lessons in patience in the development of his special city "in process of time." Though his enemies hated and feared the city of Enoch, they nevertheless stood "afar off" out of respect for Enoch's access to divine power, which access depended upon Enoch's personal righteousness.

As a result of his tutorials, the Enoch who had earlier felt inadequate later actually moved mountains. A matured Enoch, once slow of speech, became so powerful the people trembled when he spoke, "so great was the power of the language which God had given him." But Enoch never forgot the Source of his eloquence.

In the city of Enoch, we also observe the Lord producing a particular kind of people—a righteous people "of one heart and one mind" who had no poor among them. It was the outcome that the Lord has always desired and that has been achieved (and sustained) only this once in human history.

Yet it all began with a meek lad who was slow of speech and who was disliked by the people.

Centuries later, President Brigham Young, who was no stranger either to the tutorials the Lord gives to his friends, spoke of a particular time, after the original latter-day Twelve were named and called, when these "friends" of Jesus in this dispensation went through a seeming period of humiliation wherein the Twelve felt left out, or at least not fully used, by Joseph Smith. To what extent this reflected divine deliberation we do not know. We do know, however, that later on, the nine most-tutored members of the Twelve were those valiants who participated in the mission to the British Isles and other soul-stretching tests, and who later carried off the Kingdom to the valleys in the tops of the mountains. They were the Lord's proven leaders, having "in process of time" gained confidence in their capacity to do whatever the Lord asked them to do. They had learned with Nephi that special trusting submissiveness: "I will go and do the things which the Lord hath commanded, for I know that the Lord giveth no commandments unto the children of men, save he shall prepare a way for them that they may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them." [^19]

Trusting in the Lord is so vital! Yet it is seldom a quality that is fully in place in Jesus' "friends" at the very beginning.

Do we not, where record was made, likewise learn of Jesus' working with certain of the original Twelve in His day in a manner that developed them individualistically by taking into account their particularized needs? Presently, however, we know precious little concerning the other members of the original Twelve. What do we now know, for instance, about the personality or apostolic service of Thaddeus or of Simon the Canaanite? Nor is the record complete concerning Barsabas, surnamed Justus, who, along with Matthias, was honored by being nominated for membership in the Council of the Twelve to fill the vacancy that existed after the betrayal and death of Judas. [^20] Though Matthias was chosen, presumably Barsabas continued faithful and effective in the work, for the Lord loved him as much as He loved Matthias. Likewise, we may wonder about later developments in the life of Nicodemus, or about the Nephite apostles who are named but about whom we are told virtually nothing individually.

This observation is made not by way of complaint but by way of quiet anticipation. We should assume that these remarkable men were "no less serviceable"—and also no less tutored—than their prophetic brethren about whom we know somewhat more. For example, of Moroni we are told: "Behold, he was a man like unto Ammon, the son of Mosiah, yea, and even the other sons of Mosiah, yea, and also Alma and his sons, for they were all men of God. Now behold, Helaman and his brethren were no less serviceable unto the people than was Moroni; for they did preach the word of God, and they did baptize unto repentance all men whosoever would hearken unto their words." [^21]

And do we not see different gifts manifested by those whom Jesus calls His friends? Did not John the Baptist receive high commendation from Jesus, even though John performed "no miracle"? [^22]

Just as Jesus, in a customized manner, tutored such ancients as Enoch, Moses, Peter, and Paul, surely He has done likewise in this dispensation with those whom He has called to lead in His Kingdom. And what He does for one, He does for all of His children who are willing followers. Discerning enough to know all our individual needs, strengths, and weaknesses, He is willing to train us in such a way that those weaknesses can be overcome or can even be made into strengths.

An incident, seemingly small, gives yet another large indication of Jesus' kindness and encouraging ways as our Teacher. Luke reported the episode more briefly, but Matthew, one of the Twelve, included Jesus' full reply in which the Master reassuringly told the original Twelve they would one day judge the twelve tribes of Israel. This generous and encouraging indicator is all the more significant because it was given just after Peter's human and candid observation to Jesus about how much the Twelve had sacrificed and had given up to follow Him. [^23]

There were apparently conversational asides in which Jesus taught His closest disciples. Privately, He observed on one occasion how blessed they were to hear and see the things they were hearing and seeing. [^24] For those of us living in these days of prophecy fulfilled, can we not muster more gratitude than we now do for what we are privileged to see?

Furthermore, just as we see Jesus as the perfect example, we also see how some are used as less than perfect examples—as people, like us, in process of becoming better. One day, for instance, we shall know more about Jonah and his eagerness for vindication. A repentant Nineveh was mercifully not destroyed, which provided a great lesson not only in the tutoring of one prophet, but for us all, concerning the principle of mercy. [^25] Mercy rejoices in every step toward righteousness and is not offended by being pleasantly surprised. Though he acknowledged God's graciousness, mercy, and kindness, Jonah had not fully understood the application of these attributes. Has not God even referred to His Plan of Salvation as the plan of mercy? [^26]

The marvelous capacity Christ has to blend reproof and reassurance is yet another reflection of His perfect love. Instead of scolding and repudiating Thomas, who said he would not believe in Jesus' resurrection except he could see and feel the wounds in Jesus' body, Jesus gave him his desires. But, at the same time, He reminded us that true faith does not require such absolute proof. [^27] Unlike Thomas, some of us ask not only for absolute proof, but also for its perpetual renewal, contradicting the Father's plan by which, essentially, we are to walk by faith and triumph by faith.

Jesus' patience is clearly evident as He prepared the Twelve for His crucifixion and resurrection and for their own temporary scattering. The Twelve kept assuring Jesus they believed. Once He asked searchingly, "Do ye now believe?," and went on to observe how they would be scattered. He even foretold where they would meet Him again, saying that after His resurrection He would go before them into Galilee. He told them that their overwhelming grief would, nevertheless, be followed by much joy. Though carefully instructed, Peter and John, after seeing the empty tomb, went away wondering. [^28]

We can expect to do some wondering too. We will not understand everything at once, nor all the truths we are taught. Our righteousness and our readiness are determining factors more often than we know as to what we understand.

Though Jesus spoke to the Twelve of the crucifixion and resurrection several times, the Twelve still did not fully understand:

"Then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on: And they shall scourge him, and put him to death: and the third day he shall rise again. And they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken." [^29]

The deep love and respect they felt for Jesus may have made the Twelve reluctant to ask Him about that which He had said—especially about the death and resurrection. Since never before had there been a resurrection, the conceptual inadequacy of the Twelve was understandable.

How patient Jesus was as the Master Teacher—with how very good but far less than perfect students. Is this example of patient persistence not one that we, whether as pupil or teacher, are to contemplate and to implement, time and again, in our lives? Will we be sufficiently trusting and patient as we teach others, or as we must wait upon the Lord for fullness of understanding concerning that which we too have been taught but do not yet comprehend? If we can trust the answers God has already given, why not the answers yet to be given, including patiently awaiting the data from our first estate that will illuminate the imponderables of our second estate?

Impatience is not only abrupt but destructive, leaving its own human debris, as in the case of the children of Israel who, while Moses was on Mount Sinai, relapsed by making a golden calf to worship. It seemed they could not wait even a few more days when Moses "delayed to come down." This episode underscores the need not only for general patience, but also for patient trust in the Savior and in His prophets, even in those circumstances when we feel neglected or miffed—when, for instance, the Brethren seem inexplicably to delay. Keeping ourselves spiritually intact is our responsibility lest we too be "turned aside quickly out of the way." [^30] But when we stay in the way, Christ gives us rich and reassuring experiences.

Though elsewhere we read of Jesus giving a reminding look to one disciple, [^31] we also see His gladness and graciousness as His countenance smiled upon others of His disciples:

"And it came to pass that Jesus blessed them as they did pray unto him; and his countenance did smile upon them, and the light of his countenance did shine upon them, and behold they were as white as the countenance and also the garments of Jesus; and behold the whiteness thereof did exceed all the whiteness, yea, even there could be nothing upon earth so white as the whiteness thereof."

It occurred a second time: "And when Jesus had spoken these words he came again unto his disciples; and behold they did pray steadfastly, without ceasing, unto him; and he did smile upon them again; and behold they were white, even as Jesus." [^32]

Though He tutors them, Jesus loves and, therefore, consistently honors and sustains His prophets: "Behold, I do not destroy the prophets, for as many as have not been fulfilled in me, verily I say unto you, shall be fulfilled. And because I said unto you that old things have passed away, I do not destroy that which hath been spoken concerning things which are to come." [^33]

Jesus' mortal ministry was elaboration, not rejection; fulfillment rather than annulment; a building up, not a tearing down of that which His own prophets had so painstakingly written and declared.

Along with occasional needed reproof, Jesus praised His prophets; how marvelous for any prophet to have Jesus say this of him: "And now, behold, I say unto you, that ye ought to search these things. Yea, a commandment I give unto you that ye search these things diligently; for great are the words of Isaiah." [^34]

How reassuring was Jesus' love to another prophet who fretted over the inadequacy of his own words:

"Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words. And when I had said this, the Lord spake unto me, saying: Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness; and if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them." [^35]

The divine attributes of power and knowledge follow upon our adequate development of the other attributes and sufficient righteousness so that we can, for instance, be safely entrusted with heavenly power. Knowledge, in its fullness, will not only induce genuine effort to learn all we can about truth, especially saving truths while in this second estate, but must also wait upon the restoration of our premortal memories and such other bestowals as may accompany our resurrected status. But meanwhile, we cannot be disdainful of gaining more knowledge or be careless in our use of present power.

As one ponders Jesus' greatness—nay, His perfectness—it is breathtaking to see His attributes at work; but it is also overwhelming!

Did Jesus not understand that we would, at times, feel intimidated by the very perfectness of His life? Of course He knew and knows! His omniscience—perfect knowledge—about the long developmental distance we have to travel only makes His entreaties and invitations to us all the more significant and encouraging.

He understands completely! Hence, His assurances are completely reliable; He will lead us along, giving us here a little, there a little. He knows perfectly our bearing capacity as well as our individual distances yet to be traveled.

Jesus' kindness and concern for His disciples can be noticed in His efforts to help them establish a wise pace even in their diligence. The wise use of time helps to fit us for eternity. On one occasion, when the Twelve had given their personal reports to the Savior, He could see how harried and wearied they were. [^36] When the press of the crowd upon them was so great that they could scarcely eat, Jesus took them apart to rest for a while in a solitary place. Who more than the Lord of the Sabbath understands about the need for rest?

Happily, His foreknowledge of our failures does not cause Christ to give up concerning us without providing us with the opportunity to repent and to follow Him. His foreknowledge rests upon His perfect awareness of our weaknesses and capabilities, while His relentlessly redeeming love makes of Him a true and perfect Shepherd.

The Father's entire plan of salvation has taken into account beforehand our prospective successes and failures, so that His plan will be fully executed and His purposes completely fulfilled through Christ. Unlike us, God can see the end from the beginning, "and thus it is"! [^37]

Thus we are to "confess" God's hand "in all things." [^38] This clearly does not mean that He causes or approves of all things that occur; rather, it means that He has taken all things into account from the beginning, and His purposes will still prevail. A failure to confess this is a failure to acknowledge God's attributes of omniscience and omnipotence—another example of not knowing "what we worship." Such is evidence of defective faith in a defective deity—like saying a god exists but does not preside, cares but cannot deliver, and has identity but not sovereignty.

One searches in vain for accurate analogies to portray what it is like for us in our own imperfections to ponder His perfections; clearly it is not for finiteness to comprehend infiniteness. For, in addition to believing in God, we are counseled to accept His omniscience, to believe "that man doth not comprehend all things which the Lord can comprehend." [^39]

Likewise, when the Lord asks us to confess His hand in all things, He is not seeking our ritualistic incantation concerning His powers. Again, He is after realism in us, including our acknowledgment that His omniscience has made allowance even for human errors of which He does not approve, but which are not allowed to frustrate His overall plan. We can count on His plans—even when He cannot count on us!

Our mistakes call forth the moments of reproof and correction that surely come to us, if we are humble enough to receive them. Did not a truth-telling prophet candidly remind a mighty, ego-encrusted King Saul that in an earlier time, "thou wast little in thine own sight"? Out of that very episode came a great statement on submissiveness: "And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." Saul, not without greatness, then acknowledged that he had erred because he "feared the people, and obeyed their voice," [^40] a circumstance not unlike that which Aaron experienced by listening briefly to vox populi instead of vox Dei. Even in this democratic age, the first great commandment still means what it says.

As we brush against each other in the day-to-day work in His kingdom, which is put in place "for the perfecting of the Saints," we sometimes assume we are better informed than we are. There comes to mind the experience of a less-than-fully-informed Moroni, who mistakenly concluded that another Church leader, Pahoran, was not doing enough in the stressful circumstances of civil war. Pahoran's meek response to his "beloved brother," Moroni, was not the last such reassurance that will be needed in the work of the Kingdom. [^41] Along with miscommunications are the feelings of being left out. Even John the Baptist, in whom there had been "no greater prophet," needed reassurance. [^42]

Being a true friend, Jesus customizes His communications to us for reasons of our readiness and need—and for divine tutorial purposes that we cannot always discern. Jesus reassuringly told an imprisoned Paul what his itinerary was: Rome was next! Yet He left a lonely, but trusting, Moroni with some uncertainty as to the likely length of his loneliness. Moroni wrote: "Behold, my father hath made this record, and he hath written the intent thereof. And behold, I would write it also if I had room upon the plates, but I have not; and ore I have none, for I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not." [^43]

Yet Moroni realized that he was watched over by Him who was perfected in His sensitivity to aloneness. Did not a wayfaring Jesus once lament that "the foxes have their holes, and the birds of the air nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head"? [^44]

There are other associational costs of discipleship. Alma forsook his wealth to follow and then was "rejected by those who were once his friends and also by his father and his kindred"—a contrast to a good man in Jerusalem who lacked that one thing: the capacity to forsake his wealth and follow Jesus. [^45] It is only within this very zone of our deepening trust of Him who has called us His friends that there can be a satisfactory resolution of the seeming perplexities growing out of the apparent collision of man's free will and the foreknowledge of God. With obedience borne of lengthy experience with the Lord, but without all the data concerning all the later events that would make his tedious and extra work useful, Mormon, that superlative editor, nevertheless prepared auxiliary plates. The Spirit of the Lord had entreated him, whisperingly, that there was "a wise purpose" in so doing. Significantly, Mormon added: "And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will." [^46]

Such is the trust that we need in God's omniscience, causing us to be entreated, freely, into participating in His purposes—and without fretting. Such trust allows us to be concerned with making a good choice rather than brooding over whether or not we had a choice. Besides, if we cannot accept and trust in the Lord's declaration that He has left us "free to choose," in which of His other declarations can we then trust? Being now limited in our information and limited in our perception, it is a good time to trust God!

As the object of the shaping, we can scarcely be expected to understand everything in the sculpturing of our souls. In our imperceptivity, we may, for instance, believe we are already quite symmetrical in certain portions of our personality, only to encounter an experience in which God suddenly and publicly shears off a whole encrustation. We had not even noticed the need, but we feel the pain; perhaps we were too pleased with our lives.

In acknowledging that we cannot comprehend all that God comprehends, this attitude should not apply alone to the galaxies, but also to the constellation of characteristics that make up our present personalities.

Did Peter, who once thought himself more ready for rigorous events than he was, know that his vouchsafing (saying that he would never deny the Savior) would require the dramatic learning episode that followed? Excruciatingly painful as it was, in the judgment of God it was necessary. Peter did not comprehend what God comprehended about his developmental needs, including what is certitude and what is not. As the cock crowed for the third time, Peter courageously began to face reality, a poignant reminder about how the Lord's omniscience both knows things about us that we do not know and then does something about these things—if we are willing. Besides, Peter had yet before him these experiences for which he was being prepared:

"But before all these, they shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake. And it shall turn to you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer." [^47]

These events would require genuine certitude, and any prematurity of response was to be avoided.

If some pride needs to be peeled off, off it comes, but in a time and manner that our Tutor thinks best. We will feel that pain, shame, and dismay. But if we can trust Him who is doing the sculpturing of our soul—even in the midst of "all these things"—we have developed some of that submissiveness which is so necessary in our further development. Usually, the more the truth is concerned with our personal developmental needs, the greater the possible pain or offense to our self-image. Hence the vital need for humility.

So it is that the general proving process of mortality is really the stunning sum of its billions of individual subsets, all of which is overseen by an all-knowing and all-loving Father and Son. But, though overseen by them, we must, through the mists of the moment, keep our eyes on them; there is actually nowhere else to look.

In the midst of one illustrative experience, Jesus challenged His friends, the Twelve: "Will ye also go away?" Then came the marvelous reassurance from humble Simon Peter: "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God." What was taught by Jesus on this occasion included His observation, "Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?" [^48] This was not taught out of bitterness or to demean the Twelve. Rather, He was reminding them, even in the midst of their loyalty, that they should understand that He knew one among them would betray Him, the Savior. How often in the months and years to follow might the faithful eleven apostles have reflected on that moment? Not in perpetual indignation over disloyal Judas—but in a deepening respect of the divine foreknowledge of Jesus for whom they were the special witnesses!

Though the Eleven—echoing King Benjamin's counsel—knew they could not comprehend all that Jesus comprehended, they were trusting. It is unlikely, indeed, that they worried over Judas's free will; it is certain they anguished and were saddened over his misuse of it.

As one ponders attributes like meekness and humility, he cannot help but observe how much of our mortality is spent in rearranging the furniture of our relationships and in interminable organizational shufflings because of ego rather than for genuine improvement. How many new emphases and new thrusts are simply new extrusions of untamed ego? Or represent a drunkenness of conscientiousness?

Instructive, indeed, is that circumstance in which the believing mother of James and John unmeekly pressed the Savior in behalf of her sons, hoping they might later sit on his right hand and on his left hand. Jesus, who was meek, did not reprove the worshipful and good mother, but spoke truthfully to her, saying she did not realize what she asked. [^49] Her petition resembled so many of our prayers; we do not realize the implications of what we ask. Furthermore, Jesus noted that this particular decision was His Father's anyway. Later that day, He further taught ten indignant apostles (presumably James and John as well) about being servant-leaders.

If, therefore, we truly want the best for our sons and daughters, we would want for them—not status—but more meekness, mercy, love, patience, and submissiveness.

Several times concern arose over precedence among the Twelve—one time with some "strife." Another episode involving Jesus' effort to disabuse His disciples about status occurred in connection with His final Passover feast. Again, He stressed to the Twelve their leader-servant role. Finally, having washed the feet of the Twelve, Jesus pleaded with the original Twelve to love one another as He loved them. Likewise, the Nephite Twelve were carefully counseled against having doctrinal and other disputations among them. [^50]

Surely Jesus has given us the model of the leader-servant in which the pattern evokes, "How can I help?", not "How can I help myself?" The leader-servant is perfectly epitomized by Jesus, and if we are to become like Him, so it must be with us.

Indeed, the very usefulness of our lives depends upon our willingness to serve others:

"But Jesus called them unto him, and said, ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant: Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." [^51]

Can we expect to become like Him, given our imperfections, unless we can learn to accept and apply needed reproof and correction such as was given in the episodes noted? How essential our capacity to receive correction and reproof is, for "he that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding." [^52] Deserved self-esteem depends upon our meekness.

In our personal development, the emery wheel of events can polish us, and the sandpaper of circumstances can smooth us. Too often, when so worked upon, we grow fearful instead of being trusting and submissive. But Peter overcame his fearfulness, and so can we.

Too often we behave as if we were in massive competition with others for God's love. But we have His love, unconditionally and universally; it is our love of Him that remains to be proven, such as through service to others. Magnanimity, after all, arises from meekness.

We are often overly concerned, for instance, with our acquiring or holding turf when, in fact, we are urged instead to let go of the things of the world. Any possessiveness for the things of this world is a wasted effort, for it is obviously on a collision course with reality. One's claims to turf will have no legal status in the kingdom of heaven anyway. It is, for example, our degree of attained meekness or patience—not our title to property or position—that will "rise with us in the resurrection" and will live on.

In seeking to demonstrate our friendship for the Savior, we cannot invoke, much as we might like to, the excuse that life was once much simpler, such as in the period of Jesus' mortal ministry. If anything, there are more than enough parallels between His time and ours to make it clear that circumstances are roughly and sufficiently comparable; so will be the tutorials. Therefore, in appealing to divine justice, we should be very careful indeed in the midst of common temptations about invoking circumstantial pleadings.

Nor does Jesus' influence on the tutored depend upon His personal proximity. The Comforter will teach us and strengthen us. After the ascension of the resurrected Jesus, the fullness of his apostolic ministry began to settle in upon Peter, who, far from shrinking from open acknowledgment of his acquaintanceship with the Savior, became (subsequent to the bestowal of the gift of the Holy Ghost and the ascension of Jesus) emboldened and courageous.

When Peter and John went together to the temple to teach, they blessed a lame man who was made to walk "in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth." [^53] This miracle occasioned the gathering on Solomon's Porch of a multitude who then were taught by Peter and John. Peter chided those present who had denied Jesus Christ in the presence of Pilate and who had preferred Barabbas to Jesus. However, he exhibited the same spirit of forgiveness shown by the Savior, observing that what had been done earlier had been done in ignorance.

Thus we see not only an emboldened but also a sweetened Peter emulating the Savior's qualities of merciful healing and forgiving. Before the Sadducees laid hands upon Peter and John that day, five thousand people believed two obscure fisherman! Did Peter and John, perchance, remember on that day how their Master taught another multitude of five thousand?

When arraigned later before Ananias, the high priest, and Caiaphas, Peter may have been stirred by still other memories as he declared by what power the lame man had been healed. It had been done by the power of Christ—whom they had wantonly crucified!

Now, as Peter and John stood before the council, it was a brave and moving moment, and as the illuminati "saw the boldness of Peter and John and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled." The council went into executive session and then threatened Peter and John, instructing them to "speak henceforth to no man" in the name of Christ. At once came that courageous and classic reply from Peter and John: "Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard." Fearing the people, the council again threatened them and let the apostles go. [^54]

It should not offend us, therefore, to see even great men growing and developing. Nor should we be offended to see the growth in ourselves as we move, grace by grace, from what we are to what we have the power to become.

On every hand, we see in the divine tutorials of the Lord given to His friends how this mortal experience—in order for us to reach the Father's high purposes for His children—could not consist of anything resembling play acting in which we go winkingly through the motions of stress, testing, and proving. The tutorials must be real, or the learning would be superficial.

It was so even for the Son, who, so much more than the rest of us, knew what lay ahead of Him and what the implications were of his every test and trial. With assurance as well as anticipation, He said to the Twelve, "I have overcome," even before He had experienced the fullness of the agonies of the Atonement. He asked that, if possible, the cup might pass from Him. Still later, He cried out, feeling forsaken. [^55]

Do we need more validation as to the complete realness of his proving experience? Or how in earnest God is about all of us and our individual tutorials?

God's tutoring of us is relentless even in its gradualness. Jesus observed, for instance, that when one is not willing to carry his own cross and come after Jesus, he cannot be Jesus' disciple. [^56] But quiet persistence depends on our obedience, taking up the cross daily.

How vital it is that we do what Jesus urged: "Settle this in your hearts, that ye will do the things which I shall teach, and command you." [^57] Did not Peter, who knew whereof he spoke, declare that after the faithful follower had "suffered a while," God would "settle" him? [^58] To carry our cross does require settled and genuine faith, including faith in the eventual feasibility of the Lord's call for us to be like Him, virtue by virtue and attribute by attribute.

So, while the Master repeatedly said that we are to follow in His footsteps, it is not as if we were headed toward some geographical destination but, rather, toward a developmental destination.

When the jarrings and the weariness come, or the sudden shocks, if we can maintain this perspective about tutoring, we can be seen through the difficulties of the moment. Nor should we be surprised if, having passed one test well, another seems to come so quickly. Was it not so for Him? He did not get three months off after the three great temptations or a weekend at the seashore after delivering the Sermon on the Mount. He was not allowed to extend His triumphal entry into Jerusalem into a year-long celebration. Quickly, so quickly, the realities of what He next had to do bore down upon Jesus.

So it is with us. If the Lord, in His love for us, presses things in upon us with rapidity as well as relentlessness, and if we feel crowded, perhaps we really are being crowded—but for our own sakes, and so that our "performance" can be consecrated "for the welfare" of our souls. [^59]

Later on, we will be grateful for the compression and sheer volume of the challenges, but right now, the volume is a vexation. Therefore, how great and continuing is our dependency upon the Lord, which is one of the first and fundamental facts of life, never to be forgotten, even when we are making genuine progress.

No wonder Jesus prayed so to the Father. And oh, how He prayed, never forgetting to call upon the Father. In this, too, Jesus was unique. Even the very righteous brother of Jared, a truly remarkable man, once was chastised during a visitation from the Lord because he "remembered not to call upon the name of the Lord." [^60] How vital prayer is, therefore, for all of us! How vital it is that even our "busyness" in doing His work not crowd out our prayers to our Father.

We, naturally and properly, petition according to our needs. He, however, in His perfect knowledge and love, will assess our needs according to that which is right for us. [^61] Would we really want it any other way, knowing how He regards and loves us?

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Luke 10:37.
[^2] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, p. 128. See also Luke 20:44; D&C 93:11-14.
[^3] Mosiah 3:7.
[^4] McConkie, The Mortal Messiah 1:417.
[^5] Matthew 4:3.
[^6] Moses 4:1.
[^7] Talmage, Jesus the Christ, pp. 134-35.
[^8] 2 Corinthians 12:9; Ether 12:26.
[^9] Matthew 4:4.
[^10] Deuteronomy 8:3.
[^11] D&C 84:44.
[^12] D&C 20:22. See also Hebrews 2:18; 4:14-15.
[^13] See Luke 23:35-39.
[^14] 1 Corinthians 10:23. See also D&C 58:15.
[^15] Psalm 91:11-12.
[^16] Matthew 4:7; 27:40. See also Deuteronomy 6:16.
[^17] Abraham 3:37.
[^18] Matthew 4:8-9.
[^19] Luke 4:6-7. Italics added.
[^20] Matthew 4:10.
[^21] JST Matthew 4:11.
[^22] See Alma 32:38-39.
[^23] See D&C 121:39.
[^24] Luke 22:28.
[^25] 1 John 1:6-7.
[^26] Alma 48:17. Italics added.
[^27] John 18:34.
[^28] Luke 18:8.
[^29] 3 Nephi 17:3.
[^30] Matthew 27:12; 14:23.
[^31] D&C 31:9.
[^32] John 11:16.
[^33] John 1:46-47, 51.
[^34] John 8:3-11.
[^35] Acts 4:32-33. See also Moses 7:18.
[^36] Acts 6:2.
[^37] Acts 6:7.
[^38] Acts 6 and 7. We usually think of balancing our discipleship in words and deeds by stressing more doing and less talking. We are to be "doers of the word," lest we be hypocrites. Spiritual symmetry requires, however, that "doers" also be willing to be declarative, as was valiant Stephen. The "how" of their religious life is in clear and happy evidence. But it would strengthen some to hear more of the "what" and "why" that produce such Christian living. Some followers do not make the aforementioned linkage clear, leaving those who are weak in the faith with unnecessary doubts. Understating the faith is not always, therefore, a matter of deficiency in deeds, but sometimes consists of the follower's failure to open his mouth because of the fear of men. (See D&C 60:2.) Stephen's deeds and declaratives were classically matched.
[^39] 3 Nephi 26:6-11.
[^40] Revelation 22:18-19.
[^41] Isaiah 8:14.
[^42] Luke 17:17.
[^43] Luke 4:28-30.
[^44] Mark 6:1-6.
[^45] Mormon 9:18-20; John 4:22. Italics added.
[^46] Luke 17:7-10.
[^47] D&C 84:38.
[^48] Luke 22:54-62; Acts 4:5-12.
[^49] Mormon 9:31.
[^50] Mormon 8:12.
[^51] D&C 1:24.
[^52] 1 Nephi 19:20; Hebrews 12:6.
[^53] D&C 35:17; 124:1; 135:3.
[^54] 1 Nephi 17:41.
[^55] 3 Nephi 19:24.
[^56] 3 Nephi 26:5.
[^57] 2 Corinthians 11:3.
[^58] D&C 58:4.
[^59] John 16:33.
[^60] 1 Nephi 15:5. Italics added.
[^61] Moses 7:44-46.
