Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am ( 1982)

4

Go, and Do Thou Likewise

Becoming like Jesus Christ requires doing the things He did—exclusive, of course, of those things He accomplished that were utterly unique to Him. The episodes or teachings selected for this chapter tell us some of those things concerning which we are instructed to "Go, and do . . . likewise." [^1]

To begin with, we can scarcely become like Jesus if we do wrong things or fall away, and a common cause of falling away is temptation. We are to "do likewise" regarding temptation, for the cease-and-desist requirements of gospel living are as vital as the start-and-persist portions.

Examining the temptations of Christ can be very instructive, particularly what we know about His forty days in solitary seclusion. There, while fasting and praying, He met temptations beyond those we can imagine. Even so, He set a pattern for us in surmounting temptation. Without our doing likewise, we could scarcely begin to be like Him.

Elder James E. Talmage asserts authoritatively that the realization that He was, indeed, the Messiah came to Jesus gradually. As a lad, He knew He was the Son of God. Yet as He grew, grace upon grace, and in wisdom and knowledge, there came a point when He knew with fulness who He was and what He had to accomplish. We do not know precisely when that full awareness occurred, but it surely preceded those special days of stress in the wilderness. [^2]

Unsurprisingly, Satan appeared at this time of maximum importance for what he hoped would also be a time of maximum vulnerability: "Lo, he [the Lord] shall suffer temptations, and pain of body, hunger, thirst, and fatigue, even more than man can suffer." [^3]

Perhaps this period of temptation was the most difficult of all for the Savior—except for those later hours in Gethsemane and on Calvary. The dawning of the enormity of what He had yet to do; the weight and fate of so many souls resting upon Him; the realization that He, though innocent, must, in achieving the Atonement, experience the "fierceness" of the justice of God; and the reality that He could actually choose—or refuse—to go through with it all: No one has ever faced anything like that! Yet Jesus was not exempted from the challenge of temptations common to mankind. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written: "Jesus was tempted—if we may so say—to fulfill all righteousness. It was part of the eternal plan. It gave him the experiences he needed to work out his own salvation, and it prepared him to sit in judgment upon his erring brethren, who, in a lesser degree, are tried and tested as he was." [^4]

Total obedience and submissiveness would be required; hence the Savior's prolonged fasting, subjecting His mortal body to His divine spirit.

Then Satan proposed to the hungry and weary Jesus the barbed challenge: "If thou be the Son of God, command these stones be made bread." [^5] Ironically, this first temptation came from him who once declared that, if chosen as Savior, he would not lose "one soul"; [^6] now Satan sought to overturn the salvation of all souls! So much for Satan's integrity and sincerity.

In this first temptation, grim hunger combined with the possibility of doubting His identity. Was not the Creator of the world entitled to some food? Had He not fasted long enough? Should not Father give Him a sign and fresh affirmation of His identity? Would He not suffer enough later on to make unnecessary further suffering in that place of solitude? Though Jesus may have had none such thoughts, this first temptation was not abstract or imaginary but real, for in all His temptations, as Elder Talmage wrote, Jesus was peccable—capable of sin—but remained sinless. [^7]

And so Satan strove, for if the wedge of doubt could be driven in now, how many more times and how much deeper later on? Especially on Golgotha, when the taunting "if" would be repeated—and at the apogee of Jesus' agony. If Jesus could not be sure now of His identity and mission, what about subsequent challenges, such as before Pilate when a few words of even mild disclaimer would surely have freed Him, for Pilate would find no fault with Him?

If Christ commanded the stones to be made bread now, why not, later on, command the legions of angels to rescue Him from the cross? If He let Himself feel forsaken now, could Christ "hold out" later on? If He used His power for personal gratification now, why not later on when, by using it, He could do so much good and for so many others?

Our puny minds can only infer, and it is very low-level inferring at that, the actual content of the drama that took place.

Count on Satan, however, to know what questions to put. In a moment of unimaginable hunger and of possible doubt of the Father and of self, the adversary, diabolically, did not select lesser temptations. Lucifer went for the jugular!

So it is with us. Our temptations, small or large, seem to match the moment. The evil one also avoids that which is most apt to be deflected by us.

Unlike our Lord, however, do we not justify a little self-indulgence occasionally in order to reward ourselves for being good? Understandably, do we not sometimes seek for added reassurance from Father—when we are amid personal stress and strain—or for a detour when the only way to go is through? Often in life, there is no "around." Do not we, too, know what it is to encounter divine restraint? God provides enough, but not all that we might like, by way of reassurance; there is sufficient "grace," but nothing extra. [^8]

This first episode involving Jesus' temptations is one from which we can derive not only encouragement and insight about what to avoid but also how to dispatch temptation. Yet the realness of what tempts us, encountering it at a time of maximum personal vulnerability, the adversary's admixture of doubt and appetite, and pervasive self-pity—all of these can so easily converge in a way that causes us to demand that the Father make a showing of His watchcare for us. After all, up to now have we not done reasonably well for Him?

However, as our model in all things, what did the Master do? He gave a definitive response to the first temptation with no equivocation: "It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." [^9] Jesus did not reprocess the temptation again and again.

Jehovah remained true to what He had said so many centuries before. [^10] Though Moses, a marvelous prophet, once briefly arrogated power to himself, this Jesus resolutely refused to do!

Had Jesus not (in this circumstance of solitude and aloneness) been true to Himself and His trust, could He centuries later have justifiably urged Joseph Smith and the saints of this dispensation as follows? "For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." [^11] Jesus' integrity was at stake, and He prevailed. By being subject to temptation, He knew firsthand, "according to the flesh," how to succor us in our temptations—as well as how to extend divine mercy when, unlike Him, we succumb.

The Lord has declared not only of this first temptation, but of all His genuine and varied temptations, that He "gave no heed unto them." Yet He was tempted, not representatively, but "in all points." Once put, however, Jesus dismissed each of these summarily. He did not temporize with temptations. He "yielded not." [^12] And neither should we.

Brooding over temptations can produce self-pity and a false sense of nobility. Prolonged consideration of a temptation only increases the risks—but it does not increase our options: the two options and the consequences remain the same regardless of our dallying.

Moreover, protracted consideration of a temptation does not increase the justification to succumb—only our rationalization. When we are well taught, we know, initially, what must be done. Therefore, to give heed to temptation is, in effect, to "give place" for Satan's seed to grow and sprout and to bring forth its bitter harvest.

So it was that Jesus, for the first recorded time, met the awful if. It was a word to be repeated later when the stress was even greater. [^13] So we should do likewise. Otherwise, to host an if is like hosting an insect that breeds and multiplies in the sun of circumstance. Soon one is crawling with ifs and is thereby overcome. Some doubters who are overcome even become proud of their doubts—rather like being proud of one's humility!

Just as quickly as Jesus thus dispatched the first temptation, there came a second. This follow-on episode, too, contains lessons for us. Even past victories can subtly make us vulnerable if we are not careful. It was Paul who warned: "Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." [^14]

The second temptation reiterated the if: Satan urged Jesus to cast Himself from the pinnacle of the temple to bring about a demonstration of the Father's divine protection. The adversary even cleverly quoted scripture, suggesting that Jesus would be spared and watched over. [^15] Jesus' scriptural rejoinder was immediate: "Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." All this, too, foreshadowed a later temptation. [^16]

So far as our salvation is concerned, immediacy in rejecting temptation has everything to commend it. Lucifer is best dispatched at the doorstep—not after he's been invited in and has unpacked his things.

A lesser soul than Jesus could have surely rationalized receiving some divine aid at this critical juncture. Would not an impressive miracle help the work? Elder Talmage asserted, in this second temptation, that Satan was actually tempting Jesus to tempt the Father. Did not Lucifer have a long-standing grievance with Father? Was it not bound up in that moment when the Father said, "I will send the first"? [^17] This later drama atop Father's house was but an extension of an earlier drama in our Father's premortal household. This later confrontation and temptation concerning identity and misuse of power was soon over, however.

The focus shifted in the third temptation. The Spirit took Jesus to a mountaintop, and there came the offer that could not be refused. Yet it was!

"Again, the devil . . . sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; and saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me." [^18]

Luke provides some amplification: "And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine." [^19]

From atop the Mount of Temptation, Jesus declared: "Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." [^20]

Perhaps the adversary hoped Jesus would actually consider a mortal Messiahship in which He could commence His reign at once. Perhaps the adversary hoped Jesus would reflect on how, by so doing, He could accomplish so much good, fulfilling the very type of Messiahship that, by the way, the Jews were confidently expecting.

Satan obviously hoped Jesus would take second place, so Satan could have that preeminence once refused him. The rebel made his new bid for ascendancy, but, again, he was dispatched!

As soon as these three major temptations were over, angels came to minister to Jesus. But Jesus, hearing that His beloved John the Baptist was in jail, dispatched angels to minister instead unto the latter. [^21] Does not this act of matchless selflessness and empathy tell us much about the divine nature of our Lord?

A defeated Satan departed from Jesus, but only for a season. Remember, Lucifer is an incurable insomniac. But Jesus had won an enormous victory!

What further lessons emerge for us from the temptations of Jesus?

Just as personal goodness in mortality consists of accumulating service rather than a single act, so temptation is not a one-time thing either. The points of our personal vulnerability, as Satan cunningly observes them, will be exploited. Lucifer will quote scripture if it helps, or cite supposed opportunities for us to do good. He will offer chances for self-indulgence and even provide the preparatory self-pity—whatever might induce rationalization on our part.

Therefore, our challenge is to do as Jesus did—first, to resist temptation by giving it "no heed."

Our doubts will also be used against us. Equivalent ifs will be flung at us, like satanic darts designed to inflict pain. Circumstances may be used to cause us to call into question our true identity and our past spiritual knowledge. In fact, is not apostasy a denial of that which was once genuinely known but which now comes to be doubted, discounted, and discarded? Neglected and unnourished, the tree of testimony is, alas, plucked up and cast out. [^22] But the tree was there, a fact to which its dried branches and roots are stark witness.

Power and authority and position, as Jesus taught and showed us, are not to be misused by us for personal gain or self-gratification. Almost all—not just a few—succumb to this particular temptation. Jesus was the enormous exception. [^23] Gloriously, Jesus did not succumb. Our opportunities to do selflessly likewise will occur more than once in our lives, and we are much more likely to do likewise if we are meek and humble.

Temptations continue with us as with Jesus to the end, and past victories should not cause us to be casual or overconfident. Later, Jesus even thanked the Twelve for accompanying Him, saying, "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations." [^24]

We can help each other in times of temptation as well as trial. We genuinely need, as John prescribed, the supportive fellowship of those who walk in the light. [^25] What's ahead is made more clear only as the adversary is put behind us. Lucifer clouds not only our view of the present but also our perception of the future.

We know the tempter will be completely bound in the Millennium—but we can surely constrain him much sooner, so far as our lives are concerned: "Yea, verily, verily I say unto you, if all men had been, and were, and ever would be, like unto Moroni, behold, the very powers of hell would have been shaken forever; yea, the devil would never have power over the hearts of the children of men." [^26]

In major episodes involving Jesus such as these three temptations, there are great truths to be savored!

Such is also the case in the less pondered episodes of the Master's life as, having reviewed Jesus' pattern of avoidance of evil deeds, we now examine His example in affirmation by good deeds.

Noteworthy, for instance, is how Christ met head-on false entreaties and praise that so often entrap us. "Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?" [^27] No one is more loving of men and yet more unsusceptible to the praise and flattery of men than Jesus.

He was also, on occasion, understandably wistful. Once He asked aloud, in what must have been more of a lamentation than a question, if, when the Son of Man came again (in the Second Coming), would He "find faith on the earth." [^28] Even this lamentation is a reflection of His deep love even for the faithless, and yet it is a recognition of the role and toll of free agency.

He knew and knows the bearing capacity of His disciples. Having taught the American disciples on one occasion, He then told them to go to their homes and discuss what He had taught them in their families and to prepare their minds for the morrow. [^29] Not only milk before meat, but even the milk was given gradually.

Being the perfect Teacher, Jesus knew the value of silence. He could have said so much, but He nevertheless chose, standing before certain of His accusers prior to His crucifixion, to answer nothing. He also knew, as we must come to know, likewise, the value of some solitude: "And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone." [^30]

He who was reviled reviled not in return. And, to be like Him, we must do likewise. "Be patient in afflictions, revile not against those that revile. Govern your house in meekness, and be steadfast." [^31]

Jesus discerned deep down goodness. Rather than let the impending but temporary skepticism in Thomas control all else, He called Thomas. Did not that insightful and brave apostle say, "Let us also go, that we might die with him"? [^32] Jesus knows the sheep of His fold not only for what they now are but also for what they have the power to become.

We are sometimes so quick to classify and to stereotype. The Nazarenes rejected Jesus because He was the carpenter's son. But, ironically, Nazareth enjoyed no great prestige for itself, for did not Nathanael (in whom Jesus said there was no guile) ask, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" Discerning Jesus saw possibilities in Nathanael despite the latter's susceptibility to mild stereotyping, and promised the believing Nathanael, "Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man." [^33]

Can we not do likewise and forgo some of our provincialism even when it arises out of the provincialism of others?

Furthermore, in Jesus, all the marvelous and eternal attributes are kept in a splendid symmetrical balance such as we observe concerning the woman taken in adultery. She went uncondemned by Him, but she was not sent on her way without knowing that she had sinned seriously. Unlike today's "rehabilitators," Jesus did not indulge in demeaning and expiating explanations of why she wrongly did what she did. Rather, He helped her to face stern reality. He encouraged her: "Go, and sin no more." [^34] Thus we witness interplay of Jesus' justice and mercy. Contrition was already present in the woman, as Jesus, through divine discernment, knew. Needing to be both corrected and reassured, there was, in His instructions, confirmation of her wrong but also assurance for her future. Nor did she seek to excuse herself on the grounds that she, as a victim of circumstances, was hopelessly locked into a pattern of living that simply could not be changed.

How different from the ways of the world in which some want to be excused from their sins because they were "made that way"! Can anyone seriously seek to instruct the Creator concerning how things are made?

While the gospel of Jesus Christ is the gospel of hope, it does not concur in the excuses of congenital, behavioral infirmities or in all-encompassing environmental excuses. What is mortal, conventional wisdom, compared to eternal standards? Was not each swine in the Gadarene herd following a clear and compelling trend? Totus porcus!

Strange as it is, there are those who deliberately cultivate a sense of fundamental hopelessness and who therein seek to justify, to cover, and to continue in their sins. Just as too much physical idleness can induce lust, so intellectual slackness provides the dusk in which wrong deeds are considered, rationalized, and then encouraged.

Fittingly, the lasting marks of Jesus' truths and traits are to be seen in the personalities of those who truly strive to do likewise. For instance, His selflessness and His warnings about being too concerned with this world's goods found their way into the life patterns among members of the Church in the meridian day:

"And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common. And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them all." [^35]

One also sees in the experiences of the Twelve, led by Peter, how they began to manage the burgeoning Church according to that which had been taught them by the Master, as in the episode concerning the welfare needs of certain Greek widows. Qualified individuals were called to minister to the needs of the widows in order that the Twelve could continue with their ministry, for, they said, "It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables." [^36]

The Twelve could easily but wrongly have contained their ministry to Jerusalem, becoming regional welfare administrators. They would surely have been busy, and the people there would have loved them for their personal attentiveness. But such was not their calling. Having been tutored and trained by the Savior, they increased in wisdom and stature. "And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith." [^37] Thanks to a wise decision, the Church grew, but not just in Jerusalem!

One has only to read the powerful answer of Stephen, the martyr, to his accusers to see how Jesus' widening circle of influence encompassed still others.

Stephen had been brought before the council by a false witness on a false charge of blasphemy, "words against Moses, and against God." Stephen had not said words against Moses or Jehovah but for them. In many ways, Stephen was prepared all of his life (though not solely) for the moment when he would be called upon to respond to his accusers, and he rose to impressive spiritual heights, for his words are deeply touching as one reads and rereads them.

Following his "testimony of Jesus Christ," as Stephen was being slain, he behaved with mercy reminiscent of Jesus', of whom he had just given powerful testimony: "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge." [^38]

Significantly, Stephen's testimony consisted not only of the fact that Jesus had been resurrected, but included implications that sent the Jewish hierarchy into a frenzy: Jesus was the sacred Jehovah and the expected Messiah! Stephen's testimony of seeing the Father with Jesus beside Him brought martyrdom. The establishment in our time is equally scornful of, and unnerved by, Joseph Smith's vision in which he, too, saw the Father with the Son at His side. Again, martyrdom followed.

Modern prophets in our day, like the Galilean fishermen, utter truths that many people are not able to bear. The establishment in the meridian of time was not threatened by the exalted Beatitudes of Jesus, but by the direct and clear testimonies of the exalted role of Jesus of Nazareth. Sufficient unto each dispensation are the stumbling blocks thereof!

This matter of how divine disclosure matches people's readiness to receive is seen in yet another example. Not even a hundredth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach is recorded in the Book of Mormon. The things written there represent "a lesser part of the things which he taught the people." Why is this so? The lesser part is provided, said Jesus, "to try their faith"—to see how much receptivity there would be. Mormon wanted to "write . . . all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people." [^39]

Given full divine awareness of the human tendency to stumble needlessly, the above scriptures are sobering. How vital the attributes of humility and meekness in this mortal proving process!

Stumbling over the scriptures (as did the Jews who would not pay heed to Jesus because He was from Galilee, whereas the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem) is an attitude that did not end in the meridian of time. So many have since interpreted the words of John the Apostle as indicating there would be no more prophets and revelations. [^40] Likewise, the very appearance of the words "The End of the Prophets" after the book of Malachi in the King James Version of the Bible has created a similar block for many. Hence the need for us all to be childlike in both our receptivity to additional revelations and our willingness to walk to the edge of available light before expecting more light.

Not only was Jesus fully and perfectly aware of the prophecies of the Old Testament that bore upon His earthly ministry—so, to a lesser degree, were His apostles. When Paul wrote about how Jesus was to the Jews a stumbling block, was he not merely echoing what another prophet, Isaiah, had foretold so many centuries before? "And he shall be a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem." [^41]

No doubt someday we shall see that the gradations of disclosure had to be so, perhaps in part as an act of mercy, lessening the condemnation of those who would have rejected the more part had they received even more.

In pondering the fearlessness of the Master during His mortal ministry, it is altogether too easy to ascribe His courage to the fact that He would have been protected from any physical harm by angelic protectors if necessary. Jesus' fearlessness rested upon His righteousness; therein lay His sole security. The powers of heaven were His only insofar as He remained as He did—righteous. It is the same with us.

But there are much more subtle forms of fear, as we all know. We sometimes fear what people will think of us more than what they will do to us. For instance, had Jesus been less filled with integrity than He was, He could have shaded the truth just a bit, hoping to curry the favor (or at least the neutrality) of those in power.

If He was not truly meek, Jesus could have put on more convincing displays of His power, hoping to increase His following. If He were less than our Lord He could have basked in more adulation, had He merely issued less stinging criticism of things as they then were.

But there was divine determination in Him to do what He had been asked to do, and to do it fearlessly. He was not afraid of being misunderstood. He was not afraid of being alone, though right. He was not afraid that all that He did would then, and in the centuries to come, go largely unrecognized. He was not afraid to ordain the Twelve, imperfect as they were, because He knew both them and the Source of their guidance. Though we cannot even approach His fearlessness, we can begin to do likewise by subduing our fears of men.

Christ's refusal to entertain these and other fears and his dispatching of them, permits us to view, in some small measure, His marvelous courage. Obviously, the eternal attributes are interactive, but courage calls the cadence for summoning these attributes into action.

Jesus' fearlessness, however, was accompanied by gentleness. When He healed ten lepers and only one returned to thank Him, He then asked, "But where are the nine?" [^42] There was no point in His lecturing the one—as we so often do, giving the right lesson to the wrong audience—instead of the other nine. After all, the one did return!

There for us to ponder is the often neglected but insightful second sermon of Jesus in the synagogue at Nazareth from which He earlier had been thrust out and threatened with death. [^43] We see His mercy in this provision of an added opportunity for those in the hometown of His youth; it was His "own country." This time, however, listeners were astonished instead of enraged. What happened next, however, is both illuminating and discouraging: He was rejected not because of what He said or how He said it—rather, because of who He was perceived to be: "Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary?" Then came Jesus' well-known lamentation: "A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house." [^44]

In short, "they were offended at him." No spiritual work, save the healing of a few sick folk, could be done. Then it was recorded of Jesus, who had seen so much disbelief at Nazareth, that "he marvelled because of their unbelief." Think upon it! They were His neighbors and had some awareness of at least some of His mighty works—yet all this was dismissed because He was a local individual. Often that which we, too, can do is so limited by the agency and the stereotyping of others.

May it also be that a whole people can likewise be airily dismissed, even resented, by their contemporaries and fellow citizens for the same reasons? Yes!

One wonders if the reaction to Jesus' first visit to Nazareth—rage—was not in some respects preferable to the deliberate disdain experienced in connection with his second visit. Satan's stratagems are apparent: If one cannot face truth, then he can merely dismiss it by stereotyping the source. Dismiss the message because of the lowly messengers.

A corollary to the above incident is found in the words of Moroni, who affirmed the "many mighty miracles" of Jesus. Moroni declared that if miracles dwindled among the children of men, it would be because of their unbelief. But why the unbelief? Because, said Moroni, people "know not the God in whom they should trust." Exactly the point Jesus made in the episode with the Samaritan woman! [^45]

It causes some pondering when one notes that unbelief may be connected to the failure of many to understand the nature of God. For the humble, knowing accurately what God is like facilitates genuine belief. But vagueness about God soon sours into disbelief, and when believing ceases, so, usually, does the doing. Likewise do the miracles.

What the Twelve heard Jesus speak about in the parable of the unprofitable servant provides another needed insight about doing. [^46] As with certain of His other utterances, this commentary seems harsh at first. Why should one be thanked merely for doing his duty? Why should not the weary servant see first to the needs of his master? Servants come second, and so on. Of course, apostolic obedience was being taught as well as the leader-servant posture.

But more was also being taught: God's generosity toward us is not to be expressed by the dilution of the demands of duty that He lays upon us. Where much is given, much is expected—not the other way around. Nor is divine generosity to be expressed by a lessening of God's standards concerning what is to be done. Rather, when much is given and much is done by the disciple, then God's generosity is overwhelming!

When we have given and done our all, we will one day receive "all that [our] Father hath." [^47] Therein lies God's generosity. When we do our duty, He is bound—and gladly bound. Being perfect in His love, He desires to reward us as befits a Perfect Father. Therefore, His generosity to His servants comes in the ratio of blessings given to duty done—but not in a slackening of His standards or in duties diminished. As we think upon it, would we really want it any other way? Kindness never takes the form of permissiveness!

Moreover, God's mercy and generosity have to do with what happens as we fail, not with insuring the absence of failures simply because the demands made were too light. Besides, how could there be real sanctification without real consecration?

Our comparative unprofitability in the parable cited is further explained by the lesser significance of what we accomplish even as doers, when that is placed beside what Jesus has done. Even so, how redemptive and filled with mercy Jesus is as we are given continuous opportunities to overcome our imperfections.

In contrast to Jesus' merciful redemptiveness, the adversary's approach focuses on Peter's lapse in the hall of the high priest, rather than on Peter's bold and ringing affirmation before the council. [^48] By playing upon the weaknesses of men, the adversary can easily persuade many that these weaknesses are so congenital that they cannot (indeed, need not) be overcome. However, the message merciful Jesus has given us clearly confirms that while our weaknesses are unmistakably there, if, like little children, we will follow Him, doing "likewise," we too can overcome and mature just as did Peter.

Embedded in this warming reality is the resplendent truth that with all of our imperfections, if we are humble and meek, we too can be used by Him. The fact that the perfect Lord works through imperfect people should not obscure the divinity of the callings that come to imperfect people, any more than people could rightly disregard John the Baptist's warning counsel simply because they did not approve of his rugged diet—or dismiss the doctrines of these plain Galileans merely because they were only fishermen.

The adversary would be pleased to have us focus on Paul's and Peter's differences over a particular, but passing, policy of the Church in the meridian of time. Though real, these differences do not tell us about the richness in the relationship of Peter and Paul in which they pursued their special brotherhood of the apostolic calling, proclaiming whithersoever they went—even unto death—their witness that Jesus lived, lives, and would come again!

To focus on Peter's failure to continue to walk on water ignores the fact that, for a few brief moments, he was a part of a genuine and unrivaled miracle. Though briefly, he actually walked with Jesus—whose special witness he was. What other mortal has done likewise?

Furthermore, even when leaders display imperfection, the spiritual sophistication with which those imperfections should be viewed is displayed for us by a marvelous and meek prophet, Moroni, who said: "Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been." [^49]

In a true disciple, no one regrets a lapse more than the sincere lapser.

Who more than writers of God's word, themselves, are as conscious of the imperfections in their writings? Moroni, for instance, wrote: "And whoso receiveth this record, and shall not condemn it because of the imperfections which are in it, the same shall know of greater things than these. Behold, I am Moroni; and were it possible, I would make all things known unto you." [^50]

And who, more than the Lord, knows what processing His truths through weak mortals costs? "Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding." [^51] Moreover, we should never use the imperfections of another as an excuse not to address our own imperfections.

The episode involving Thomas B. Marsh is very instructive. He let a dispute over milk cause him to focus, jealously rather than mercifully, on some minor imperfections in the Prophet Joseph Smith, which finally led to the excommunication of Brother Marsh. Lorenzo Snow, Thomas Marsh's contemporary, said that while he, too, noticed some minor imperfections in the Prophet, he was grateful that the Lord could use Joseph Smith for so very significant a work. Thus, there might be some hope for him, Lorenzo Snow. Indeed, here was hope for President Snow, who viewed others graciously and charitably as if through the "windows of heaven."

Another example is Aaron, who, though he erred significantly, still has one of the Holy Priesthoods named after him, and his calling by a prophet is still cited as a model. How generous and merciful is our God! It is interesting to read how each time Aaron erred, a loving and meek Moses mediated for him and prayed for him, reflecting the growing compassion and mercy Moses had. Now Aaron has the veneration of generations, for the Lord tutored him and magnified him.

Father Lehi joined briefly in murmuring when things got exceedingly difficult, but he soon hearkened to the Lord after being chastened because of his murmurings. Has not the Lord told us, "whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth"? [^52]

The tutoring of Joseph Smith "in [his] weakness" continued until the very end. Later this accolade was given: "Joseph Smith, the Prophet and Seer of the Lord, has done more, save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it." [^53]

In studying Jesus' brief post-resurrection ministry among the Nephites, it is instructive to ponder the precious things He did within the precious time allotted. These clearly showed His priorities and tell us much about what we are to do, including the avoidance of those things which could obscure the "simpleness of the way." [^54]

Christ presented Himself as witness to His own resurrection; He let the multitude feel and see His wounds; He testified of Himself; He instituted the ordinance of baptism. He established an apostolic priesthood organization through the calling of the Nephite Twelve; He gave much attention on how to pray, teaching His followers, almost clinically, how to pray, using His Twelve Apostles and dividing the people into twelve groups.

Significantly, as those disciples were attuned to the Spirit when in the posture and attitude of prayer, they were actually given what they should pray about: "And it came to pass that when Jesus had thus prayed unto the Father, he came unto his disciples, and behold, they did still continue, without ceasing, to pray unto him; and they did not multiply many words, for it was given unto them what they should pray, and they were filled with desire." [^55]

He taught the multitude concerning the sacrament. He ensured that the Gift of the Holy Ghost was bestowed upon the faithful. He blessed their children. He taught them about yet other sheep whom He was to visit.

He took time to instruct the Twelve. He commended the people for their faith. He entrusted to them a more complete understanding concerning the Gentiles. He gave them the Sermon on the Mount and the Sermon on the Plain. He urged and instructed them to search the scriptures, and expounded the scriptures to them. He reproved them for omissions in their own records. He rehearsed to them Malachi's words. He gave a description of the final judgment within which, significantly, some of the divine attributes are cited: "If they be good, to the resurrection of everlasting life; and if they be evil, to the resurrection of damnation; being on a parallel, the one on the one hand and the other on the other hand, according to the mercy, and the justice, and the holiness which is in Christ, who was before the world began." [^56]

He gave them clear instructions concerning the name of the Church and prevented disputations among them by giving them certain other instructions. As we see the Savior's simple directness, no wonder Paul wrote of the "simplicity that is in Christ." [^57]

For those of us who desire to contemplate our own ministry in the instructive context of what Jesus did in those special days, the above recitation is illuminating. But it is also sobering in its focus on fundamentals and in its simplicity. Remember, in our own ministry, we are to do "likewise." How simplicity adds to felicity! How complications can add to our vexations!

Our joy depends upon the degree to which we are like Him and serve as He did, even amid trial. Are we not advised that glory comes only after tribulation? "For after much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand." [^58]

Our only true peace really consists of that inner peace which comes from keeping His commandments and the assurances He has given us. In this world we are to have tribulation. Even so, He said, "Be of good cheer; I have overcome the world." [^59] For the faithful, there is short-term tribulation but long-term joy.

Temptation and trial are part of our toughening tutorials—the only toughening, by the way, that is also a sweetening. Even with all these reassurances, however, will we not feel, on occasion, as though—with so many deeds to be done—we are being overwhelmed? Undoubtedly. We may also feel that our particular assemblage of affliction is perhaps larger than that of anyone else. Nephi recorded this indicator of how he once felt: "And it came to pass that I was overcome because of my afflictions, for I considered that mine afflictions were great above all, because of the destruction of my people, for I had beheld their fall." [^60]

Nephi's capacity to lament genuinely over the wickedness of his colleagues is a reflection of his highly developed love for his associates and fellowmen. It was likewise with Enoch: "And as Enoch saw this, he had bitterness of soul, and wept over his brethren, and said unto the heavens: I will refuse to be comforted; but the Lord said unto Enoch: Lift up your heart, and be glad; and look." [^61]

Even in the midst of Enoch's "bitterness of soul" because of the wickedness of his brethren and their fate, he was told to "be glad; and look." What did he see which brought comfort? He saw the Son of Man coming "in the meridian of time" to effect the Atonement! Thus, time and time again, we learn that the objective reality over which we are to be of good cheer consists of those fundamental and basic blessings, such as the unmatched Atonement, that are irrevocably in place. The disappointments of the day must not obscure the basic blessings of eternity!

So much of our capacity to do "likewise" rests on our trust in God's timing, since His love for us is not at issue. To question His timing is a tacit questioning of His perfect love and knowledge. Moreover, part of our meekness, as we strive to do as He did, consists of trusting the Lord for placing us upon the earth at a particular time. Wishing to have lived in another time will not do as a substitute for performing in our own time, as Nephi, the son of Helaman, lamented: "Oh that I could have had my days in the days when my father Nephi first came out of the land of Jerusalem, that I could have joyed with him in the promised land; then were his people easy to be entreated, firm to keep the commandments of God, and slow to be led to do iniquity; and they were quick to hearken unto the words of the Lord—Yea, if my days could have been in those days, then would my soul have had joy in the righteousness of my brethren. But behold, I am consigned that these are my days, and that my soul shall be filled with sorrow because of this the wickedness of my brethren." [^62]

In this respect, Jesus gave us a needed lesson about timing. Did He not send forth the Twelve instructing them not to go "into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans"? Why? Because they were rather to go "to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." [^63] Did not Jesus for a moment withhold a healing from the daughter of a woman of Canaan? Though He enunciated that He had been sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, He made an exception in the case of this woman because of her faith, and her daughter was "made whole from that very hour." [^64]

Just how long it was from the time of divine constraint regarding sharing the gospel with the Gentiles until Peter and others received the marvelous divine instructions to take the gospel to them, we do not know precisely. But it did involve some time.

The issue for us is trusting God enough to trust also His timing. If we can truly believe He has our welfare at heart, may we not let His plans unfold as He thinks best? The same is true with the second coming and with all those matters wherein our faith needs to include faith in the Lord's timing for us personally, not just in His overall plans and purposes.

We see this willingness of the Lord to wait upon our readiness in yet another episode: his conversation with two disciples on the road to Emmaus. As Jesus joined them in the conversation, they did not know Him. Why did He not simply announce who He was, declaring in testimony His identity? Only later, as they invited Him as a guest in their house, were "their eyes opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight." [^65]

Embedded deep within these episodes is the almost overwhelming realization of the elaborate and personalized pains to which the Master goes in order to teach us when we are ready—but then with a thoroughness that makes the lesson everlasting.

Insights are embedded in even the smallest of episodes concerning which we are blessed to have a record. For instance, there is Jesus' declaration to Jeremiah: "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." [^66] We do not know precisely why Jesus told Jeremiah this. Perhaps Jeremiah needed some reassuring and reinforcing. But it stands as a pointed lesson for us all as to God's long-range planning and the inevitable role played by timing—and not just for His prophets! "To wait upon the Lord" carries several connotations for us all.

Yet this last episode does tell us something of Jesus' tutorial relationships with His prophets. Not only were these men foreordained by Him before they came to this life, but He also foresaw their adequacy to perform the mortal labors for which they had been previously set apart, an enormously important message for us all to ponder.

In addition, we learn that Jesus always honors those who honor Him. As we see Shadrach, Meschach, and Abednego in the midst of the fiery furnace, it is significant that walking among them as they were there unharmed was one in form "like the Son of God." [^67] Whether it is Paul in prison or three valiant young men taking a stand against a secularized king, the Lord is near at hand in our hour of greatest need—sometimes dramatically, sometimes quietly.

Our loyalty to principle in the midst of our fiery trials and to particular persons is yet another way of our doing "likewise."

And if we need any further verification about the significance of being meek and childlike, so far as qualifying for the Kingdom of God is concerned, it is seen in the readiness of children to receive revelations even greater than those given to some adults:

"And it came to pass that he did teach and minister unto the children of the multitude of whom hath been spoken, and he did loose their tongues, and they did speak unto their fathers great and marvelous things, even greater than he had revealed unto the people; and he loosed their tongues that they could utter." [^68]

Childlike faith in the need to "do likewise" is especially vital when, in our pseudosophistication, we rationalize that the deed to be done may not really matter after all, so why bother? It matters—and more than we know. To be submissive "even as a child doth submit to his Father" is a hard saying, but it is more than poetry; it reminds us of our true genealogy and our true possibility.

Among the resurrected Jesus' last recorded words to the people whom He taught in the Americas were words especially encouraging to emulators. To the Three Nephites Christ described what lay ahead of them; then, significantly, He promised that each, if faithful, would "sit down in the kingdom" of the Father. "Yea, your joy shall be full," He declared, "even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." [^69]

Since Jesus urges us to become even as He is, this bold but tender indication to these three individuals assumes staggering significance. For the promise was given not alone to them but to all the faithful. That such could happen at all should fill us with gratitude and wonder. These closing words of Christ are words that give special hope for the doers of His word.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Matthew 9:2; John 16:33.
[^2] 3 Nephi 17:20.
[^3] John 16:33.
[^4] Matthew 9:2.
[^5] 3 Nephi 1:13.
[^6] Acts 23:11.
[^7] Acts 27:22.
[^8] 1 Corinthians 10:13; D&C 50:40.
[^9] D&C 56:11; 64:31.
[^10] Matthew 9:10-13; 6:16.
[^11] Isaiah 53:3-4.
[^12] Philippians 4:4.
[^13] Mosiah 23:28.
[^14] D&C 76:107; 88:106.
[^15] D&C 45:26; 1:35.
[^16] Mormon 8:8; Ether 13:22; 14:21.
[^17] Moroni 1:2.
[^18] D&C 38:29; 45:63; 87:1-2.
[^19] Jacob 6:3; Ether 4:9; D&C 43:32.
[^20] Mormon 8:3, 5.
[^21] Moroni 10:34.
[^22] D&C 49:20.
[^23] D&C 104:17.
[^24] Matthew 26:11.
[^25] Job 38:7.
[^26] Mosiah 23:21.
[^27] Alma 32:6.
[^28] D&C 101:8.
[^29] D&C 84:38; Philippians 3:10.
[^30] D&C 59:15.
[^31] D&C 31:9.
[^32] John 11:16.
[^33] John 1:46-47, 51.
[^34] John 8:3-11.
[^35] Acts 4:32-33. See also Moses 7:18.
[^36] Acts 6:2.
[^37] Acts 6:7.
[^38] Acts 6 and 7. We usually think of balancing our discipleship in words and deeds by stressing more doing and less talking. We are to be "doers of the word," lest we be hypocrites. Spiritual symmetry requires, however, that "doers" also be willing to be declarative, as was valiant Stephen. The "how" of their religious life is in clear and happy evidence. But it would strengthen some to hear more of the "what" and "why" that produce such Christian living. Some followers do not make the aforementioned linkage clear, leaving those who are weak in the faith with unnecessary doubts. Understating the faith is not always, therefore, a matter of deficiency in deeds, but sometimes consists of the follower's failure to open his mouth because of the fear of men. (See D&C 60:2.) Stephen's deeds and declaratives were classically matched.
[^39] 3 Nephi 26:6-11.
[^40] Revelation 22:18-19.
[^41] Isaiah 8:14.
[^42] Luke 17:17.
[^43] Luke 4:28-30.
[^44] Mark 6:1-6.
[^45] Mormon 9:18-20; John 4:22. Italics added.
[^46] Luke 17:7-10.
[^47] D&C 84:38.
[^48] Luke 22:54-62; Acts 4:5-12.
[^49] Mormon 9:31.
[^50] Mormon 8:12.
[^51] D&C 1:24.
[^52] 1 Nephi 19:20; Hebrews 12:6.
[^53] D&C 35:17; 124:1; 135:3.
[^54] 1 Nephi 17:41.
[^55] 3 Nephi 19:24.
[^56] 3 Nephi 26:5.
[^57] 2 Corinthians 11:3.
[^58] D&C 58:4.
[^59] John 16:33.
[^60] 1 Nephi 15:5. Italics added.
[^61] Moses 7:44-46.
[^62] Helaman 7:7-9. Italics added.
[^63] Matthew 10:5-6.
[^64] Matthew 15:21-28.
[^65] Luke 24:13-31.
[^66] Jeremiah 1:5.
[^67] Daniel 3:25. See also D&C 38:7.
[^68] 3 Nephi 26:14. Italics added.
[^69] 3 Nephi 28:10. Italics added.
