Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am ( 1982)

5

Be of Good Cheer

Jesus has repeatedly instructed us in yet another way in which we are to be like Him: We are to "be of good cheer." [^1] Being of good cheer is the proximate preparation for ultimate joy. Being of good cheer—one day at a time—precedes that point later on when, if we live righteously, we can justifiably say what Jesus said: "Now behold, my joy is full." [^2]

Gospel gladness is possible even in the midst of affliction, because of the reassuring realities that pertain to our mortal circumstance. The everlastingness of certain things puts the temporariness of other things in perspective. God's promises to us are so rich that even difficult tactical circumstances cannot conceal our causes for genuine cheerfulness: God is in charge; God's plan of happiness is underway; momentary tribulation does not set aside the universal resurrection, which is a reality; individual identity and personality are thereby assured; death has been defeated by Christ's atonement; and Satan and his misery-causing minions will finally be defeated. Each of these (and many more) form the litany of reassuring reality.

Thus we should not let the gray mists of the moment obscure the bright promises and prospects of eternity. Gospel gladness is a precious, precious perspective—essential to have, if one is to keep his attitudinal balance while traveling the straight and narrow way. The way is often no more than a path. It inclines sharply, and it is strewn with loose rocks. Indeed, there are points along the way to be traversed only on one's hands and knees.

As in all things, Jesus is also our attitudinal Exemplar as to cheerfulness.

When, just prior to the great intercessory prayer in Gethsemane, Jesus told Peter, James, and John to "be of good cheer," such an attitude was certainly not justified because of immediate circumstances. Instead, it was possible because Jesus had "overcome the world." [^3] Contemplate, however, the grim experiences that then lay immediately ahead, scarcely justifying an attitude of cheerfulness. Gethsemane was imminent. So were Judas's betrayal; the capturing of Jesus, who was Peter, James, and John's beloved leader; Peter's disheartening disavowal; and Jesus' unjust trial. The populace's chilling preference for Barabbas rather than Jesus would soon echo in the air. The Shepherd would be smitten and the sheep scattered. Then there would be those awful, final moments on Calvary.

Therefore, what, pray tell, was there to be cheerful about? Yet in the face of all of this, Jesus told them to "be of good cheer"!

The glorious, irrevocable, and long-awaited Atonement was about to be accomplished. The adversary had failed to stop it. The resurrection was assured. Death was soon to be done away. Christ had overcome the world—not the reverse. These irrepressible realities, both then and now, give rise to gospel gladness, permitting us to be of good cheer even in the midst of tactical tribulation. True cheer is grounded in those signal triumphs but is also to be found in all the attendant developments.

Meanwhile, however, though our trials are tiny compared to His, alas, we are often grumpy. Jesus was of good cheer because then current conditions did not alter His sources of ultimate joy. Are not our fundamental sources of joy the same as His?

On still another occasion, Jesus used the same encouraging words when, having healed a paralytic, He did not emphasize the health restored; rather, He said, "Be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee." [^4] Like freedom from death, emancipation from error is always a special reason for being of good cheer.

When the Nephite members of the Church were virtual hostages and their lives were forfeit if the prophesied signs of Jesus' coming did not occur, yet they were told by the Lord to "be of good cheer." Why? Because on the morrow He would come into the world. [^5] The first coming of the Savior, a milestone finally to be passed after centuries of expectant waiting, was at hand—yet another fundamental cause for rejoicing.

A failure on our part to achieve and sustain more than we do such a cheerful and precious perspective is yet another manifestation of the human tendency of "looking beyond the mark," of focusing on lesser things.

When Paul was in jail after having borne his testimony before a powerful political group in Jerusalem, Jesus stood by and counseled him to "be of good cheer." [^6] Why? Had not Paul been struck on the mouth at Ananias's order? Were not forty Jews plotting his death? Did not his trial for sedition lie just ahead? And also Paul's shipwreck? Cheerfulness was possible because Paul had done well in his ministry in Jerusalem and now was ready for Rome, where he would also testify with great power and persuasive authority. Let the intervening, tactical tribulation come!

This lesson about justifiable cheerfulness even amid perilous passages apparently had been driven home to Paul, for during his voyage to Rome, he assured his fearful shipmates that not one of them would lose their lives, though their ship would be lost. Therefore, He encouraged them to "be of good cheer" in the midst of their anxieties, and his prophecy was fulfilled. [^7]

It remains for us, therefore, to be of good cheer even when, as was the case with the original Twelve, current circumstances seem hopeless. In fact, seemingly sad circumstances may actually reflect implementation, not disintegration. Indeed, the unfolding of God's purposes may require the collapse of other things.

How often is it necessary for dismantling to occur in order for something better to be put in place? Was there ever a remodeling without distress and inconvenience? Was there ever fulfillment without certain things coming to an end? Moreover, the fundamental causes for such rejoicing and gospel gladness are clearly the same for us as for our predecessors.

It may seem to some of us so very hard to cling to those reassuring and renewing realities when tribulations and difficulties press in upon us from all sides. But these are the realities to which we will—and should—finally cling in the moments of truth. Why not, therefore, said Jesus, profit from good cheer at the outset and throughout each day, rather than finally relying upon it anyway—but only after unneeded anxiety?

Even when, momentarily, we lose our grip on gospel gladness, the Lord is long-suffering. We can regain lost perspective, favoring once again in our way of living that which is everlasting, not fleeting; the unending, not the momentary. By forgoing now, we can possess more later.

If we have a sense of proportion here and now, our portion hereafter will be significantly larger. Then, the mercy and love of God will provide for us such wondrous surroundings that "eye hath not seen" and "ear hath not heard" such things as the Lord will have prepared for us there. Has not He who is perfect in truth told us that in His Father's estate are many mansions—not a solitary mansion with a "No Vacancy" sign? Whatever it is that we righteously hope for here, if we are truly obedient it will be breathtakingly exceeded by what is given to us there.

The preciousness of gospel perspective may be thought of in still another way. Through the marvel of telecommunications in our time, we obtain satellite pictures of what we compositely call "the weather." We even see pictures of storm fronts moving in. Yet, just because we know a winter storm is coming, it is no less cold; the snow still falls with all of the attending and harsh consequences. But the overview permits us to know that the storm front, however severe, will pass away.

Likewise, the storm fronts that come into our lives will not last forever. We can surmount the drifts of difficulties and we can hold out if we maintain our perspective and faith. But while we are in the midst of all these things, the experiences that can be for our long-term good are very, very real. We may feel that such are simply more than we can bear. Yet if we have faith in an all-knowing and all-loving God, we understand He will not give us more than we can bear. [^8]

Just as we know there is a sun just beyond today's cloud cover, so we must not doubt the continued, watchful, and tutoring presence of The Son in spite of the stormy seasons in our lives. Of such real, but transitory, things like the local weather, it might be said, "This too shall pass away," but of Jesus' words it is rightfully said that His "words shall not pass away." [^9]

Jesus refused to be one of "woeful countenance." Not only did He refuse to let the establishment of the time tell Him with whom He might dine; He also refused to insist that people look mournful when they were fasting. [^10] Though He was called "man of sorrows," [^11] that description refers to His bearing of our sorrows—not His; it does not describe His day-to-day bearing!

Indeed, given the overarching and resplendent realities, Jesus was able to teach His disciples to have a spirit of rejoicing about life. Hence we find Paul, who had known persecution and imprisonment, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, rejoice." [^12] And why not? Had Paul not known rich and reassuring experiences? Can we not likewise take justifiable nourishment from our storehouse of memories—especially in stern seasons and in difficult days? Church members of another time did so in the face of an advancing army. Though fearful, they were reminded by a prophet that God could and would deliver them; this "hushed their fears." [^13]

There is, however, one kind of pain and cheerlessness that Jesus would help us to avoid: suffering for our sins. He has told us that unless we repent (and oh, how He invites us to repent!), our suffering will be exquisite, for we must suffer even as He. Clearly, unrepentant individuals cannot now know good cheer.

Jesus even used the word fierceness to describe that justice of God which He would gladly spare us, if we would but repent. [^14] Such suffering is whole-soul torment, not just the pain of body. He would surely spare us all of those forms of suffering and cheerlessness.

But as to other forms of pain that are common part and parcel of the human experience—from these there can be no full immunity. The cares of the world that, on occasion, can rob us of cheerfulness are certainly real cares, but they are not lasting cares; they pass with the passing of this world. Like the pleasures of the world, the cares of the world are fleeting.

Someday, when we look back on mortality, we will see that so many of the things that seemed to matter so much at the moment will be seen not to have mattered at all. And the eternal things will be seen to have mattered even more than the most faithful of the Saints imagined.

Furthermore, the attribute of being of good cheer is especially needed for those of us who are destined to live in a time of "wars and rumors of wars," when "peace shall be taken from the earth." [^15]

Protracted war can seem to be ceaseless, especially to those who are intimately involved. This appears to have been the case in Book of Mormon times: "And no one knoweth the end of the war." In an even earlier period, we read these words—"And the wars ceased not." [^16]

The anti-Christian overtones have been there, too: "For behold, their wars are exceedingly fierce among themselves; and because of their hatred they put to death every Nephite that will not deny the Christ." [^17]

The trench warfare of World War I went on and on and on. Some participants thought they would never see its end. Close on the heels of World War I came the Spanish civil war, the Second World War, the Greek war, the Korean War, the Arab-Israeli wars, the Vietnam war, Afghanistan, and on and on it goes. Wars, large and small, seem to be the continuing experience of twentieth-century man.

Even so, the almost unceasingness of war is but the fulfilling echo of prophecy. Who knows better than the Lord that wars originate in the hearts and minds of man? In 1832 He revealed to Joseph Smith the coming American Civil War. A year earlier He had declared to the Prophet that Joseph knew not the hearts of his own countrymen. [^18] Since then, there has been an almost unbroken chain of wars.

Can we presume to lecture the Lord on war? Or dare to use war as an argument against His existence or His Lordship? Do we need to warn Him about how the earth can be destroyed by fire? [^19]

Those who have known what has been called the "strange, mournful mutter of the battlefield" carry that awful sound indelibly imprinted upon their memories. Such individuals can appreciate the paradoxical mix of the camaraderie and loneliness that goes with war. The warrior-prophet Moroni wrote in A.D. 401 about his father's death and said, "I even remain alone to write the sad tale of the destruction of my people." The sense of lamentation becomes even more profound a few lines later: "I am alone. My father hath been slain in battle, and all my kinsfolk, and I have not friends nor whither to go; and how long the Lord will suffer that I may live I know not." [^20] Yet, though surrounded by proximate sadness, Moroni knew those ultimate reasons he had for being of good cheer. So it was that he testified of Christ and maintained his spiritual poise to the very end: "And now I bid unto all, farewell. I soon go to rest in the paradise of God, until my spirit and body shall again reunite, and I am brought forth triumphant through the air, to meet you before the pleasing bar of the great Jehovah, the Eternal Judge of both quick and dead. Amen." [^21]

Surely those of us who live in the last days cannot expect to be immune from the sufferings and feelings that war produces. We hope, however, that we can resist the coarsening effects of war and its tendency to rob us of any progress made in developing mercy, meekness, justice, and so forth.

When we pause to think of nuclear denouement, we find it almost instantly unthinkable. Yet we know that it is avoidable if mankind will keep God's commandments. If we do not, then again, as God told us (long before man so worried about incinerating the world), the earth can be destroyed by fire. The outcome turns on whether mankind chooses to respond as in Nineveh or as in Sodom, for those are now the choices; Eden is long since behind us!

Like war, poverty, too, can erode gospel gladness. But surely we do not presume to lecture the Lord on poverty either. He has said in connection with His high law of consecration, "But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin." [^22]

The Lord's cure for poverty is the only real cure available, but to be completely effective, it must be done in His own way. The world's way is the equivalent of using Band-Aids for arthritis. Of this world's resources, the Lord has said, "There is enough and to spare." [^23] The scarcity lies not in material resources, but in the love of men toward their fellowmen and in our lack of justice and mercy.

The people of the city of Enoch knew the sweetness of shared bread. And, for a few decades, so did the Nephites. The Lord takes no pleasure in poverty. Yet, without devotion to Him and His commandments, there will be poverty. Jesus foresaw how persistent poverty would be, and how long the poor would be with us. [^24]

To what degree we were permitted, before coming here, to see all the outcomes and the risks of mortality, such as war and poverty, we presently know not. A just God surely would have let us understand sufficiently about that upon which we are soon to embark. However, with whatever measure of understanding we then had, some "shouted for joy," [^25] a stirring reaction that ought to tell us enough in terms of our perceptions then, when we had some added perspective.

For now, it remains for us to be of good cheer in the midst of all these things that, if properly responded to, can be for our good.

Our human tendency is to forget the Lord, so adversity and afflictions are sometimes needed to put us in remembrance of Him. This should tell us how powerful and consuming the cares and pleasures of the world can become! And, also, how vital it is for us not to misread the role of affliction. [^26]

Alma observed how the very poverty of one group of people actually had humbled them so that "they were in a preparation to hear the word." [^27] Paradoxically, we pray for peace, but in conditions of peace, some are so slow "to feel after" the Lord that the Lord's counsel is paid little heed. [^28]

He who has called us His friends will not fail to tutor us as needed, whatever the conditions. All the more essential it is for us to be of good cheer. How essential it is for us, therefore, to understand first how all the basic justifications for joy are firmly in place.

Certain other teachings of Christ, however, contain within them developmental truths that we might prefer not to face at all. Such truths do not lend themselves to superficial cheeriness. In fact, when these doctrines or teachings first arrive within the circumference of our contemplation, they appear to have a bleakness and austerity about them. We are, nevertheless, expected to have enough faith and determination to explore them—to see what lies below their seemingly icy exterior. If, for instance, the doctrines that have to do with our tutorial training seem wintry or bleak, it remains for us to come to understand that even these reflect the kindness and mercy of God.

However, we must not mistake the seemingly icy implications for divine disinterest. What we are actually encountering is not His disinterest, but our own unfinished self—set off sharply and painfully against that which we must become. If, in recognition, the soul shivers, it is not from a lack of love from the Lord.

The stern sayings of the Savior, when applied, will bring to us expanded personal perspective, deeper personal progress, and a very much enriched future. There will be an enlargement of our capacity to love and to serve, a capacity that is an unending source of everlasting joy. Ironically, it will be personal compliance with the difficult doctrines that one day will drench us in eternal joy! Meanwhile, we will be greatly aided if we can be of good cheer.

One reason we need such extensive experience with routine and repetition in mortality is to learn that there actually are no such things as "routine" and "repetition." Developed capacity to love will teach us that this is so, as we become true sons and daughters of Him whose course is "one eternal round," but whose perfect love insures against boredom.

How could we expect to be joyous and to receive all that "the Father hath" if we do not strive to become like Him? And, in fact, can we, on our scale, be like Him without sharing in the "fellowship of his sufferings"? [^29] He shares with us His work; does that not suggest the need for our sharing, too, some of the suffering as well as the genuine cheer that He has known? Should not we also learn to distinguish, as did He, between temporary sadness and everlasting sorrow? between joy and mere pleasure? In dark days, therefore, we can make our own contribution to illumination by going about our lives just as He has commanded—"with cheerful hearts and countenances." [^30]

If in all of this there is some understandable trembling, the adrenalin of affliction can help to ensure that our pace will be brisk rather than casual. His grace will cover us like a cloak—enough to provide for survival but too thin to keep out all the cold. The seeming cold is there to keep us from drowsiness, and gospel gladness warms us enough to keep us going.

So when we say "He lives," we are also asserting how glorious are those realities that are justified cause for being of good cheer. Exploring what He is like (as well as knowing that He lives) provides for us the basic sources of joy and the real causes for cheerfulness. Since we are enjoined to strive to be like Him—disciple, dullard, and rebel alike—it is a breathtaking journey, a journey that can scarcely sustain unless first we learn to be of good cheer.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma 6:8. Italics added.
[^2] Revelation 12:17.
[^3] See Revelation 1:1-7.
[^4] Ether 4:12.
[^5] 3 Nephi 18:24. Italics added.
[^6] Abraham 3:27.
[^7] Hymns, no. 80.
[^8] John 15:15.
[^9] Matthew 8:20.
[^10] John 21:3.
[^11] Matthew 19:14; 3 Nephi 17:21-22.
[^12] Luke 23:43.
[^13] Matthew 4:8.
[^14] Luke 17:17.
[^15] Moses 1:35; 3 Nephi 28:1.
[^16] D&C 88:47.
[^17] Matthew 10:30; Moses 1:38.
[^18] Acts 23:11.
[^19] 1 Peter 3:18-20; John 10:16; 3 Nephi 15:17, 21; 16:1-3.
[^20] Moses 1:39; Psalm 95:7.
[^21] D&C 76:110-11; Philippians 2:10-11.
[^22] D&C 133:48-49.
[^23] 1 Nephi 14:12-14; D&C 100:16.
[^24] 1 Nephi 9:6.
[^25] Job 38:7.
[^26] Mosiah 23:21.
[^27] Alma 32:6.
[^28] D&C 101:8.
[^29] D&C 84:38; Philippians 3:10.
[^30] D&C 59:15.
