Neal A. Maxwell, Even As I Am ( 1982)

6

A Testimony of Jesus Christ

Now, as this volume draws to a close, the author desires to pay personal tribute to and to give further testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

Usually, when we declare testimony of Him, of necessity we do it in the simplest of terms, emphasizing the glorious reality of His existence, as did Alma: "And Alma went and began to declare the word of God unto the church which was established in the valley of Gideon, according to the revelation of the truth of the word which had been spoken by his fathers, and according to the spirit of prophecy which was in him, according to the testimony of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who should come to redeem his people from their sins, and the holy order by which he was called. And thus it is written. Amen." [^1]

These dimensions of testifying about Jesus have properly characterized the words of His witnesses in all ages. But as to commandments to be kept and of attributes to be developed, does not Jesus embody and exemplify each and all of these? Should we not, therefore, in testifying of "this Jesus Christ," also testify of His traits? Should we not also expect that the testimony of Jesus will cause anxiety among the wicked? Some will even "make war" with those who "have the testimony of Jesus Christ." [^2]

For John the Beloved, [^3] it was not solely the provocativeness of his witness that Jesus Christ lives that stung certain hearers. It was also, for some, the inciting implications—that Christ is a particularized God with a particularized personality, seeking to produce a particularized people—that disturbed.

Today, it is this same ingredient of testimony that causes the resentment and the resistance of many. They reject not only the actuality of Jesus but also His personality and the attending implications, because His personality carries within it insistent implications for each of us—what we can become and what the standards are by which all mankind will be judged.

If Jesus Christ were merely a name for some sort of vague and nonintervening "life force" in the universe, or if He were someone who had passively given us the Beatitudes but who did not press upon us His way of living, then He might be tolerated, even extolled, by those who otherwise rage against Him and His work. The acceptance of Jesus, however, is the rejection of so much else. Hence those who are too caught up in and entangled with the world cannot bear to be separated from that to which they have given themselves so unreservedly. Some have even grown quite proud of their friendship with the world.

If, therefore, acceptance of the Savior required only occasional genuflection, a periodic calisthenic of conduct, or an affable acknowledgment that He is there, that would be one thing. But to accept His personality as being our own serious model is a wholly different matter. Alas, for some, the latter requires too deep and final disengagement from the things of the secular world upon which so many hearts are so firmly set. As in times past, some mean to keep their place in the synagogue, even if it means losing their place in heaven!

How vastly different, therefore, is fully witnessing to the world that Jesus Christ is "the light, and the life, and the truth of the world." [^4]

When we think of Jesus Christ as the Light of the World, not only does His light illuminate the only pathway of life, but His light, in the dusk of civilization's decadence, also reminds us what true light really is.

This book's testimony is gladly given in a time of suffocating secularism with its varied Caesars to whom we are to render. However, no Caesar, even if brilliant or beneficent, can substitute for Christ.

This testimony is likewise given in a time of intense searching for solutions to human problems that, if only by their very massing, proffer an almost unique challenge in history. However, no amount of searching, if it consists of "looking beyond the mark," will produce a true vision of reality. The "mark" is Christ! To look beyond that mark is to fail fatally in perception. And without such perception, there will be no solutions, for without vision, the people perish.

This testimony is also given of Christ in a time when some churches have diluted their commitment to Jesus Christ and to His divinity. Manifestly, no ecclesiastical structure can withstand the world for long without the reinforcing rods of revelation; the resulting erosion will be so rapid that it can be measured in decades, not centuries. The failure of some to acknowledge the divinity of Jesus Christ as the Centerpiece of the Christian creed also insures erosion. Unlike the contention of some that Christian religion is odd and irrelevant in a time of strident secularism, the eternal verities tell us just the opposite: That which is not Christocentric is eccentric!

His church and its faithful people strive to follow the counsel of the resurrected Savior, who said, "Therefore, hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do." [^5]

Since some of Jesus' noblest deeds predate His unique Palestinian ministry, we ought to "hold up" that which He did before His mortal ministry—as well as that which He will yet do.

In searching the scriptures that describe God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, both as to their actuality and their personality, one finds that all mortal adjectives, however laudatory, are too anemic. Superlatives are overtaken by ordinariness when applied to them.

In our first estate, Jesus was the incomparable individual among all our Father's spirit children. He helped to prepare this planet for us, and He led—not pushed—us from our premortal post. I thank Him for the untold things He did, across the ages of that first estate (and even earlier), to prepare perfectly for His unique role. I further thank Him, the True Shepherd, for not deserting, then or now, those of us who are slow or stragglers.

I thank Him for encapsulating His exquisite mind in both perfect love and perfect humility. His brilliance is not the "catch-me-if-you-can" kind, but a pleading and patient "Come, follow me."

His premortal performance reflected both an astonishing selflessness and a breathtaking commitment to freedom as a condition of our genuine growth. I thank Him for combining His long view of our needs with that short step forward so long ago to volunteer His service as our Savior. Never has anyone offered so much to so many in so few words as did Jesus when He said, "Here am I, send me." [^6]

His duties have long been galactic, yet He noticed the widow casting in her mite. I am stunned at His perfect, unconditional love of all. Indeed, "I stand all amazed at the love Jesus offers me." [^7] I thank Him for His discerning way of loving us without controlling us, for never letting the needs of now crowd out the considerations of eternity.

I thank Him, in every situation, for maintaining His grip on Himself, which was also mankind's hold on the eternal future.

He who did not need to die Himself was willing to be bound by the chains of death in order that He could break them for all mankind. In eloquent example, He partook voluntarily and submissively of the bitter cup in the awful but, for Him, avoidable Atonement.

He was raised in a lowly town and gave us the example of rising above His beginnings but without renouncing them.

He is the perfect leader. He does not ask us to do what He left undone, nor to endure what He avoided or failed to endure. I thank Him for truly teaching us about our personal possibilities and for giving us directions by example—not merely by pointing.

He gives us enough, but not more than we can manage. I thank Him who did everything perfectly for sharing His precious work with those of us who then do it so imperfectly.

Just as He helped Father to create the universe, He also helped Father to create each of our little universes of needed experience, which can be for our good.

I thank Him for forgoing fashionableness and not only for enduring the absence of deserved appreciation but also for speaking the truth, knowing beforehand that cruel misunderstanding and misrepresentation would follow.

I thank Him for His marvelous management of time, for never misusing a moment; even His seconds showed His stewardship.

No Son ever complemented His Father so gracefully, honored His Father so constantly, or trusted His Father so completely as did Jesus.

Whether He is descriptively designated as Creator, Only Begotten Son, Prince of Peace, Advocate, Mediator, Son of God, Savior, Messiah, Author and Finisher of Salvation, King of kings—I witness that Jesus Christ is the only name under heaven whereby one can be saved.

I testify that He is utterly incomparable in what He is, what He knows, what He has accomplished, and what He has experienced. Yet, movingly, He calls us His friends. [^8]

We can trust, worship, and even adore Him without any reservation. As the only perfect person to sojourn on this planet, there is none like Him.

In intelligence and performance, He far surpasses the individual and the composite capacities and achievements of all who have lived, live now, and will yet live.

He rejoices in our genuine goodness and achievement, but any assessment of where we stand in relation to Him tells us that we do not stand at all. We kneel.

Can we, even in the depths of disease, tell Him anything at all about suffering? In ways we cannot comprehend, our sicknesses and infirmities were borne by Him even before they were borne by us. The very weight of our combined sins caused Him to descend below all. We have never been, nor will we be, in depths such as He has known. Thus His atonement made perfect His empathy and His mercy and His capacity to succor us, for which we can be everlastingly grateful as He tutors us in our trials. There was no ram in the thicket at Calvary to spare Him, this Friend of Abraham and Isaac.

Can those who yearn for hearth or home instruct Him as to what it is like to be homeless or on the move? Did He not say in a disclosing moment that "the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head"? [^9]

Can we really counsel Him about being misrepresented, misunderstood, or betrayed? Or what it is like when even friends falter or "go a fishing"? [^10]

Can we educate Him regarding injustice or compare failures of judicial systems with the Giver of the Law, who knew what perfect justice was, yet in divine dignity endured its substantive and procedural perversion?

And when we feel so alone, can we presume to teach Him who trod "the wine-press alone" anything at all about feeling forsaken?

Cannot the childless who crave children count on His empathy? For He loved children and said, "Of such is the kingdom of heaven." "He wept, and . . . one by one, [He] blessed them, and prayed unto the Father for them. And when he had done this he wept again." [^11]

Do we presume to instruct Him in either compassion or mercy? Even at the apogee of His agony upon the cross, He, in selfless love, consoled a thief beside Him, saying, "To day shalt thou be with me in paradise." [^12]

Can we excuse our compromises because of the powerful temptations of status seeking? It was He who displayed incredible integrity as the adversary made Him an offer that could not be refused—"all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them." [^13] But He refused!

Can we teach Him about meekness while enduring irony? His remaining possession, a cloak, was gambled for even as He died. Yet the very earth was His footstool! Jesus gave mankind living water so that we shall never thirst again, yet on the cross He was given vinegar.

Can we lecture Him on liberty, He who sets us free from our last enemies—sin and death?

Can those who revere human freedom yet complain about human suffering ever achieve real reconciliation except through His gospel?

Can those concerned with nourishing the poor advise Him concerning feeding the multitudes?

Can those who are concerned with medicine instruct Him about healing the sick?

Or can we inform the Atoner about feeling the sting of ingratitude when one's service goes unappreciated or unnoticed? Only one leper in ten thanked Jesus, who asked searchingly, "But where are the nine?" [^14]

Should those concerned with lengthening the life span offer to enlighten the Resurrector of all mankind?

Can scientists, whose discipline brings the discovery of the interweavings in the tapestry of truth, instruct the Tapestry Maker?

Should we seek to counsel Him in courage? Should we rush forth eagerly to show Him our press clippings and mortal medals—our scratches and bruises—as He bears His five special wounds?

Does not the "word of [His] power" actually bring entire new worlds into being and cause others to pass away? Yet in the midst of such galactic governance, He interviewed His Twelve unhurriedly "one by one," [^15] and later called a farm boy in rural New York.

Has He not invited us to observe His cosmic craftsmanship in the heavens that we might see "God moving in his majesty and power"? [^16] But do we not also see Him moving in His majesty and power as each prodigal finally completes his homeward orbit?

Though His creations are so vast as to be numberless even to computerized man, has Jesus not told us that the very hairs of our head are numbered? [^17]

Did not the resurrected Jesus stand by an imprisoned Paul, telling him to "be of good cheer" and calling him on his mission to Rome? [^18] Likewise, Jesus stands by the righteous in all their individual ordeals.

Did not this good and true Shepherd forgo repose after the glorious but awful Atonement in order to establish His work among the lost sheep who were disobedient in the days of Noah? Did He not then visit still other lost sheep in the Americas? Then still other lost sheep? [^19] What can we tell Him about conscientiousness?

Indeed, we cannot teach Him anything! But we can listen to Him. We can love Him; we can honor Him; we can worship Him. We can keep His commandments, and we can feast upon His scriptures.

Yes, we who are so forgetful and even rebellious are never forgotten by Him. We are His "work" and His "glory," and He is never distracted. We are the "people of His pasture and sheep of His hand." [^20]

Therefore, in addition to my boundless admiration of His achievements and my adoration of Him for what He is—knowing that my superlatives are too shallow to do more than echo his excellence—as one of Jesus' special witnesses in the fulness of times, I attest to the fulness of His ministry.

How dare some treat His ministry as if it were all beatitudes and no declaratives! How myopic it is to view His ministry as all crucifixion and no resurrection! How provincial to perceive it as all Calvary and no Palmyra; all rejection at a village called Capernaum and no acceptance in the City of Enoch; all relapse and regression in ancient Israel and no Bountiful with its ensuing decades of righteousness!

Jesus Christ is the Jehovah of the Red Sea and of Sinai, the Resurrected Lord, the spokesman for the Father in the theophany at Palmyra—a Palmyra pageant with a precious audience of one!

He lives today, mercifully granting unto all nations as much light as they can bear and messengers of their own to teach them. And who better than the Light of the world can decide the degree of divine disclosure—whether it is to be flashlights or floodlights?

Soon, however, all flesh shall see Him together. All knees shall bow in His presence, and all tongues confess His name. [^21] Knees that never before have assumed that posture for that purpose will do so then—and promptly. Tongues that never before have spoken His name except in gross profanity will do so then—and worshipfully.

Soon, He who was once mockingly dressed in purple will come again, attired in red apparel, reminding us whose blood redeemed us. [^22] All will then acknowledge the completeness of His justice and His mercy and will see how human indifference to God—not God's indifference to humanity—accounts for so much misery and suffering. Then we will see the true story of mankind—and not through glass darkly. The great military battles will appear as mere bonfires that blazed briefly, and the mortal accounts of the human experience will be but graffiti on the walls of time.

Before that reckoning moment, however, both your ministry and mine will unfold in the grim but also glorious circumstances of the last days.

Yes, there will be wrenching polarization on this planet, but also the remarkable reunion with our colleagues in Christ from the city of Enoch. Yes, nation after nation will become a house divided, but more and more unifying Houses of the Lord will grace this planet. Yes, Armageddon lies ahead—but so does Adam-ondi-Ahman!

Meanwhile, did not Jesus tell us what to expect by way of heat in the final summer? Did He not also say that He would prove our faith and our patience by trial?

Did He not provide a needed sense of proportion when He spoke of the comparative few who will find the narrow way leading to the strait gate? Did He not also say that His Saints, scattered upon all the face of the earth, would, in the midst of wickedness, commotion, and persecution, be "armed with righteousness and with the power of God," for He is determined to have "a pure people"? [^23]

His work proceeds forward almost as if in the comparative calmness of the eye of a storm. First, He reigns in the midst of His saints; soon, in all the world.

So as the shutters of human history begin to close as if before a gathering storm, and as events scurry across the human scene like so many leaves before a wild wind, those who stand before the warm glow of the gospel fire can be permitted a shiver of the soul. Yet in our circle of certitude we know, even in the midst of all these things, that there will be no final frustration of God's purposes. God has known "all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men." [^24]

Thus, gladly and unashamedly, I add my small voice to the anthem of apostolic appreciation by acknowledging and adoring Jesus of Nazareth, Savior and King.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma 6:8. Italics added.
[^2] Revelation 12:17.
[^3] See Revelation 1:1-7.
[^4] Ether 4:12.
[^5] 3 Nephi 18:24. Italics added.
[^6] Abraham 3:27.
[^7] Hymns, no. 80.
[^8] John 15:15.
[^9] Matthew 8:20.
[^10] John 21:3.
[^11] Matthew 19:14; 3 Nephi 17:21-22.
[^12] Luke 23:43.
[^13] Matthew 4:8.
[^14] Luke 17:17.
[^15] Moses 1:35; 3 Nephi 28:1.
[^16] D&C 88:47.
[^17] Matthew 10:30; Moses 1:38.
[^18] Acts 23:11.
[^19] 1 Peter 3:18-20; John 10:16; 3 Nephi 15:17, 21; 16:1-3.
[^20] Moses 1:39; Psalm 95:7.
[^21] D&C 76:110-11; Philippians 2:10-11.
[^22] D&C 133:48-49.
[^23] 1 Nephi 14:12-14; D&C 100:16.
[^24] 1 Nephi 9:6.
