Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter One His Time and Place

Boyd Kenneth Packer was born on 10 September 1924 in Brigham City, Utah, the tenth child and fifth son of Ira Wight Packer, a thirty-nine-year-old garage mechanic, and Emma Jensen Packer, a homemaker, aged thirty-six.

The year of Boyd's birth was one of portent. On a world scale, seeds of unrest were germinating in turbulent soil and they would flower into World War II just as Boyd reached manhood.

Abroad, 1924 began with the death of Lenin, architect of Russia's revolution and its first communist head of state. Stalin survived and forced all opposition leaders to surrender. Thus he became the undisputed master of the Soviet Union.

In Italy in 1924 Mussolini abolished non-Fascist trade unions and annexed Adriatic lands.

Found guilty of high treason in April 1924, Adolf Hitler, Nazi leader in Germany, was sentenced to prison for five years. There he began writing his book Mein Kampf.

In London, Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin appointed a new Conservative cabinet in 1924.

That year the government of Japan protested the barring of its immigrants to the United States.

At home, the death of former President Woodrow Wilson in February 1924 ended his dream of creating a league of nations that would "make the world safe for democracy."

Despite flourishing businesses and increased production in the United States during the 1920s, workers' wages and purchasing power declined. Five years after Boyd's birth the stock market crash plunged the nation into a deep depression.

The historic ocean-crossing flights by Americans in the late 1920s and the round-the-world attempts in the 1930s marked advances that would reach a level of supremacy in air power during the coming World War II.

Thus the period of Boyd K. Packer's birth and childhood was marked by events out of which that war evolved.

In contrast with the global scene of political change and power struggle was the peaceable community of Brigham City, Utah, a town of approximately 5,500 people. This small city had its roots in pioneer colonizing that began almost as soon as the pioneers entered the Salt Lake Valley in 1847.

William Davis, the first settler, took his family there in 1851 together with two other families, later to be joined by still others. They built a row of log rooms by the forks of Box Elder Creek. Two years later the settlers were ordered to move their log cabins into fort formation as protection from the Indians.

In 1853 Brigham Young called Elder Lorenzo Snow of the Quorum of the Twelve to select fifty families who would further colonize this Box Elder site, and then assigned Elder Snow to preside over the new community. Some of the families selected were Scandinavian; others Elder Snow had converted in England. They came a few at a time and were housed in the fort. A year later a second Scandinavian company arrived. The colony continued to grow.

Elder Snow wisely chose men of faith, devotion, and ability-teachers, masons, carpenters, blacksmiths, shoemakers, and other skilled and conscientious workers who would ensure the community's economic success.

Lorenzo Snow had been taught the principles of the united order by the Prophet Joseph Smith. With his appointment to colonize and direct the development of Box Elder came the opportunity to put a cooperative plan into operation.

The Brigham City Mercantile and Manufacturing Association was formed in December 1870. Lorenzo Snow was elected president in January 1871, with seven directors. Boyd's great-grandfather, Jonathan Taylor Packer, was one of them. Within four years of its incorporation virtually the entire economic life of this community of four hundred families was owned and directed by the cooperative association. Fifteen or so departments were later expanded to forty branches of industry. These included a woolen mill, a tannery, a shoe factory, a hat factory, cattle herds, dairies, a cheese factory, sawmills, as well as tailor, furniture, blacksmith, wagon, and tin shops.

The success of the Brigham City cooperative sprang largely from the leadership of Lorenzo Snow. He fostered it only in the sense that most of the people owned some stock in the corporate enterprise. The cooperative was not, however, to interfere with a member's domestic affairs-one's home and land were separate and apart; only one's business was held in common.

For all that, the cooperative community functioned by united order general rules. These directed that members not take the name of Deity in vain nor speak lightly of sacred things. Prayer was fundamental to family and personal life. The Word of Wisdom was to be observed. Children were to be treated with kindness, and quarreling was to be avoided. Charity was encouraged and selfishness disapproved.

Families were to foster home production. Apparel and deportment were to focus on simplicity and appropriateness. Economy and prudence in the management of property were enjoined. Members were expected to be virtuous and honest.

Had the order's rules been made specifically for the Packer family, they could not have been more fitting. These personal standards were part of the traditions brought to that generation from four great-grandparents, Jonathan Taylor Packer and Lyman Wight and their wives.

The Packer family knew and honored their pioneer heritage. The cooperative's traditions were the unspoken code by which they lived. Not that the rules were preached at home; rather, the principles were taught by example and by the parents' quiet expectations that family members would be as obedient and good as their forebears had been.
