Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Two His Ancestry

Boyd K. Packer's ancestry linked two families-one British, the other Scandinavian.

His British Packer line has been traced back to 1460 to Thomas Packer through nine generations, the first six of which include two clerks of the Privy Seal of England: William, and his son John. John's son Philip inherited Groombridge Manor in Kent; and Philip's son Philip was the immigrant from Ireland to America in 1683.

The American Packer line descends through three generations who settled in Pennsylvania. One served in the colonial army during the Revolution. The third, Moses, became a member of the Society of Friends in Pennsylvania and later migrated to the western frontiers of Ohio.

The fourth descendant from Philip the immigrant was Jonathan Taylor Packer, Boyd's great-grandfather, who was born 26 July 1817 in Perry, Richland County, Ohio. He was twelve years of age when his father, Moses, died. The family resided in central Ohio, not far from Kirtland, where they heard of the newly organized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Having investigated its doctrines and being convinced and converted, Jonathan and his two brothers joined the Church-Jonathan at the age of eighteen. He walked the eight hundred miles to Missouri, where he cast his lot with the Latter-day Saints there. Through their expulsion from Missouri and Nauvoo and their crossing of the plains, Jonathan arrived in the Salt Lake Valley with the second pioneer company in the early fall of 1847.

Jonathan's first wife, Sarah Ewell, died, leaving him one son, Nephi. He next married Angeline Avida Champlin, who would bear him nine children. He later married Christiana Petrina Sundby, and was living in Fort Herriman, about thirty-five miles southwest of the Salt Lake settlement, when their son Joseph Alma, Boyd's grand-father, was born on 13 January 1859.

When Joseph Alma was about eighteen months old the family moved to Brigham City. It was here that Jonathan became one of the first directors of the Brigham City Cooperative and Manufacturing Association. He was called to settle the community of Cannonville, Utah, and became its first bishop. He later left with other Saints for Safford, Arizona, where he died 29 January 1889 at age seventy-one.

At the last, Jonathan was tenderly cared for by his daughter-in-law, Mary Ann Packer, in her home. On 17 January 1889, twelve days before his death, she had written to his daughter Martha: "Your Father says for you all to be faithful to the principles of the Gospel and asks the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob upon you all and[bid[s] you all good bye until he meets you in the morning of the resurrection."1

At age fifteen Boyd's grandfather Joseph Alma began to work in the Brigham City cooperative blacksmith shop. After serving his apprenticeship for six years he married Sarah Adeline Wight in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City on 11 October 1880.

Joseph Alma built a blacksmith shop on First North and Second East in Brigham City but later moved his shop to near the courthouse. For thirty-five years he followed that trade, one which greatly influenced the life of his son Ira Wight Packer, Boyd's father.

In later years Joseph Alma served two missions to the Indians in Montana. His wife, Sarah Adeline, and their daughter, Vida, accompanied him on his last mission (1916-1918).

Ira was born 6 April 1885. He grew up helping in the blacksmith shop and learned much of what was known then about metal. He knew how to weld and drill, to fix and cut, to bolt and shape.

Ira's first years of school were spent in Brigham City, but when he was thirteen his father moved his blacksmith and wagon shop to Corinne, Utah, a few miles to the west. There Joseph Alma bought 265 acres of land, built a home, and purchased twenty-five cows and twenty-four horses. He eventually closed the shop and farmed fulltime.

Ira's teen years were spent working on the farm. In the home his sister Vida helped loom rugs, stuff straw mattresses, churn butter, and make ice cream using ice cut from the river in winter and stored in sawdust. Garden produce and dairy products were traded for store commodities.

The Packer home received occasional visits from gypsies as they passed through, and Indians were a familiar sight in the town. In spring and summer, work was heavy and never-ending. In fall and winter there was school, though the children stayed away when snow fell deep and drifted.

Home-talent programs, picture shows accompanied by a player piano, and dances were held in the Opera House. Ira first met Emma Jensen, Boyd's mother, at one of these dances.

Emma's father, Peter Simon Jensen, born in 1860 in Tyvelse, Denmark, married Amelia Anderson on 16 August 1882. Amelia, born in 1861, came from Usolkattan, Loreig, Sweden.

This couple's first child, Boden, died within two months of birth. The second, William Peter, immigrated to America with his father when his parents joined the Church. Father and son settled in Malad, Idaho, where other relatives had preceded them.

As soon as Peter Simon was able to send for her, Amelia joined him and their son in Malad. Four other children were born to them in that place. Boyd's mother, Emma, born 14 May 1888, was one of them. Charles and Laura lived, but James Oscar died as an infant.

Emma was four when her father moved his family to Sandy, Utah. On the way they traveled through sagebrush along a poorly defined road, stopping the first night in a little log cabin. (When Boyd was a teenager, his mother pointed out to him the cabin, which stood in a field west of the highway between Malad and Plymouth, Utah, and was still there until recent years.) The Jensens' trip took several days to complete. Thereafter Emma's father found work at the Magna smelter.

The family had been in Sandy only a year and a half when Emma's mother died of typhoid fever. Peter Simon came near dying. His stepmother, Sophia Jorgensen Jensen, came down from Bear River, Utah, and took the children back home with her. Laura lived with the Ole Hansens until she was grown. Emma's brothers, Charlie and Will, stayed with other relatives until their father recovered from his illness and came for them. Charlie, ill with heart trouble, lived at Ira Anderson's home in Elwood (a neighboring community) until he married. Will and his father went to work on the Brigham City cooperative farm in Corinne.

Meanwhile Emma stayed with Grandmother Jensen, who spoke no English. Emma's childhood was rich in Danish tradition but poor in material advantages. She was expected to help both with farm labor and heavy housecleaning. One of her tasks was to help roll up the rug, carry it outside, hang it on the clothesline, and beat the dust out of it. She swept up the straw padding and carried it out to be burned. She scrubbed the rough, uneven floorboards, then helped carry clean new straw and spread it so thick that, after the rug was again stretched and tacked down, the furniture leaned back against the walls until continual walking in the room leveled the matting evenly.

The young motherless girl also had other challenges. On one occasion her grandmother cooked bean soup. The beans had become damp and had started to sprout, but the thrifty grandmother had to make do with everything there was, so she made the soup. Emma could not eat it. She thought the bean sprouts were worms.

Emma occasionally missed school because of a nervous condition, possibly the result of unhappiness. In her later years Emma seldom spoke about the hardships of her childhood. She did, however, express her unhappiness about a teenage worker's behavior in the orchard where Emma was picking fruit with others. The girl mimicked a spastic cripple who lived in the community. While others were amused, Emma was indignant. The trials of her childhood had developed within her a deep sympathy for the unfortunate.

When Emma was eighteen her grandmother suddenly left to live with her daughter in Preston, Idaho. With no place else to go, Emma moved into her father's home. He had remarried, and Emma spent most of her time hiring out, cooking for men who worked on the canal or picking fruit and garden produce to earn money.

Emma grew to womanhood with a great love of nature. She often told about wandering along the banks of the Bear River in the early evening, listening to the plaintive and beautiful call of mourning doves. Whenever she heard their call later in life she would remember those lonely years and say, "I love to hear the song of the doves."

Perhaps his mother's love of birds was quietly transmitted to Boyd. Certainly his love for them has been lifelong. His mother also loved flowers, as he does, and she had a gift for both growing them and arranging them.

As Emma grew to womanhood she participated in the simple entertainments the small community of Corinne offered. One evening she attended a Church dance at the Opera House and there met Ira Wight Packer. Emma was short, full-figured, with dark hair, clear skin, a happy smile, and kindness in her eyes. Ira was large of stature, gentle of touch, and even-tempered. He had a quiet sense of humor and a look about him that invited trust and confidence. When he met Emma, he was already skilled in his trade as a mechanic.

The two were immediately drawn to one another, became friends, then sweethearts. After a brief courtship they traveled by train to Malad, Idaho, where they were civilly married on 16 February 1907. The couple returned to Corinne and at first lived in part of the home of Ira's father, Joseph Alma. In April that year, when the weather permitted, they traveled to Salt Lake City, where in the temple they were sealed for time and eternity. The next day they returned to the temple to do the temple work for Emma's mother, Amelia Jensen.

Having been only six when her mother died of typhoid, Emma's memories of her were indistinct but loving. She grieved all her life that the location of her mother's grave in Sandy had never been found.

Whatever unhappiness Emma had experienced in her childhood and youth was compensated for in the personal fulfillment and joy she found in her marriage to Ira. She was home-centered and deeply committed to their eternal marriage, thus ensuring for their children not only that kind of daily example but also the love and security for which she, as a child, had longed while deprived of both.
