Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Four Childhood

It was four-fifty-five in the afternoon of Wednesday, 10 September 1924, when Boyd Kenneth Packer was born. His mother, attended by Dr. A. D. Cooley, had safely brought forth the tenth of her eleven children and her fifth son. It was her first child to be born in a hospital, a converted two-story home.

Holding her new babe, she must have been aware of the shimmering autumn day set between two brief periods of storm.1

From what we know of the family, the older children would have cared for the home and the younger children in Emma's absence. Yet she was a little impatient until she could rejoin them.

On 2 November 1924 the new baby was blessed and given a name by D. H. Matthews-Boyd Kenneth Packer.

His next older brother, Doyle, had been born with a skin disease that was often fatal in children aged about five or six. The layers of Doyle's skin were not laminated properly, and any irritation would cause large blisters to form over his body. To protect him from bumps he had a round walker which allowed him to move around safely. A soothing ointment, Poslam, also helped him.

On 7 September 1927, when Boyd was nearly three and Doyle four, Emma gave birth to her eleventh and last child, William Lamoin. No longer the baby, Boyd liked to look after him. Bill, who has been a bishop and a high councilor in Brigham City, says, "Boyd has never stopped looking after me."

At the time of Bill's birth their sister Verna was nineteen. She had a natural sense for style, which apparently was perceived by the manager of the local J. C. Penney store. He invited her to work at the store. At that time she and Opal worked at the cement plant sewing sacks. Clerking in a store sounded much more appealing, so Verna accepted his offer. She later became buyer for the women's department.

Verna developed her skill as a seamstress, all her life finding joy in sewing for family members. In an early effort to make short pants for Boyd and Doyle she forgot the front flies and made them the same front and back. The little brothers neither knew nor cared about her mistake as they posed for a picture. Verna also made pajamas for each family member for New Year's Day, a gift that became traditional over many years.

Boyd's sister Donna remembers him as "a happy child with plenty of smiles, and a bit of mischief." This happiness was rooted in the security of family and home. Shortly after his fifth birthday Boyd was stricken with a high fever. His legs gave way and he was placed on a cot near the large oak table in the living room. Old Dr. Pearse diagnosed his illness as pneumonia and prescribed the current treatment for it. The front room was closed off and its windows opened to the cold, fresh air. Bundled up to keep warm, Boyd stayed there for six weeks.

Wearing her winter coat, Emma sat beside him as often as she could. She talked and read to him. In the evening Ira took his turn. Each time he gave Boyd a few coins to save for new shoes when he was well. The fever finally subsided. He was allowed to get up but he could not walk; the sickness had been polio rather than pneumonia.

In the picture taken of Boyd after his illness and during the period there is a different look about him than before or after. There is an old look in a young face.

Years later when Boyd applied for flight training in the Air Corps, he reported on medical forms that he had had pneumonia. Had it been known that he had had polio, he would have been barred from military service. Actually, the disease was not accurately diagnosed until years later when Boyd suffered intense pain at night. He told his doctors of his bout with pneumonia and of having to learn to walk again. Total body x-rays then gave sure evidence of polio in the malformed bones of his knees and hip.

Boyd remembers the painful process of learning to walk again, crawling about on the floor, then pulling himself up to a chair.

After his illness he experienced fear that was new to him. It was something internal, apart from the security of home and family. Nightmares followed. He feels that these were partly due to the long illness and his struggle to walk again.

But there was more. A spiritually sensitive child, Boyd became vaguely aware of influences that existed beyond his safe family circle. Inner fear, then, became a reality to be reckoned with and eventually overcome. Fear finally left Boyd, but the feeling of inadequacy persisted.

During the summer after his illness Boyd walked with Doyle the four long blocks to the Brigham City Tabernacle for stake conference. It was Sunday, 29 June 1930.2 Tired from his walk, Boyd sat with Doyle near the back under the balcony. When Elder George Albert Smith of the Quorum of the Twelve, the visiting authority, arose to speak, Boyd's attention became riveted. Later he would testify: "I have never forgotten him.Â� I don't remember what he said, but I remember how powerful was the witness that he was a man of God."3

Because of that early imprint upon his soul, Boyd Packer has a deep reverence for the capacity of a child to respond to the promptings of the Spirit.

In September of that year, 1930, Boyd turned six and entered first grade at Central School, located across from the Brigham City Tabernacle. When the weather turned cold his mother provided him with a hand-me-down plush coat-a girl's coat. Sensitive about it, in fact abhorring it, he wore it and was embarrassed as only a child can be about such matters.

His report cards show that, overall, Boyd enjoyed school and did well.4

Boyd's teachers were Regena Jensen in first grade, Leola Seely in second, and Doril White in third. Because of Doyle's slow start and skin problem he was held back a year, and from then through high school he and Boyd were in the same grades. Their fourth-grade teacher was Leola Seely; their fifth, Miss Leona Cuthbert (who mixed up their names to come out "Doyd and Boyle"); and the principal, Mr. Frye, taught sixth grade.

Boyd liked geography, social studies, history, art. Phonics helped him to read and spell. He disliked mathematics, an aversion that continued throughout his military and university studies.

Report cards tallied times tardy, of which Boyd had none, and absences from school, of which he had from fifteen to twenty-eight per year-the result of contagious childhood diseases to which children were exposed.

Boyd scored well in deportment, but in early grades he seems to have had a short interest span. He admits to daydreaming and wishing to be out of doors. Records show that he was underweight for his age and height until the sixth grade.

At the end of each term Boyd's report cards were signed by "Mrs. Ira W. Packer." Doyle recalls that Emma always took an interest in her children's schoolwork, attended their school functions, and as a room mother made cookies and king-sized cakes for special events.

He also recalls that she initiated one of the first school-lunch programs for elementary grades. It began with small bottles of milk served with crackers, but it expanded to include a bowl of hot soup and a sandwich which she and other mothers made in their homes and delivered to school. Their efforts resulted in the building of a kitchen in the school basement. Thereafter, school lunches were prepared and served from there.

Emma also made sure that Church ordinances for the children were performed. Soon after his eighth birthday, on 1 October 1932, Boyd was baptized in the font at the Fifth Ward meetinghouse by Robert Francis Johnson, a priest. He was confirmed the same day by Elder Anthon M. Hansen.

About this time Boyd began drawing animals and birds. At first he drew them upside down-the feet and legs progressing down to body, neck, and head. As his powers of observation improved he drew his subjects right side up.

Boyd drew on newsprint, which Ira obtained free at the Box Elder News. He says that for the other Packer children "drawing was a disease to which they were exposed and of which they had mild cases, but with me it was a serious affliction."

Because of his natural aptitude and skill, Boyd's art helped to compensate for his lack of physical prowess and to give him more confidence among his fellows. Beyond this natural aptitude, other influences helped Boyd in his visual expression: keen powers of observation, an imaginative approach to play or work, simple materials and tools his parents provided, and their encouragement.

There was much to capture a child's imagination on the Packers' acre located at 627 South Main Street. The home faced west. Sidewalks were unpaved, and a ditch ran along the other side of the street. Their backyard ended at First East and was bordered by an irrigation ditch.

In the orchard to the east of the house there were pie-cherry, apricot, and peach trees. Scattered in large areas to the south of the home were Emma's cosmos, which grew taller than Boyd when he played there. The garden out back provided vegetables, with corn standing high in late summer and serving as a jungle for the children's safaris.

Along the board fence on the north separating the Packer and Glen properties were two rows of shasta daisies. A ditch ran between the rows, making a hiding place for childhood games. A gravel driveway extended from the street to the back of the house.

Boyd remembers his mother's love for her flowers. In front were beds of black-eyed Susan, nasturtiums, petunias, larkspur, chrysanthemums, pinks, zinnias, pansies, bachelor's buttons. Emma's American Beauty rose bloomed to the left of the front porch, and a Talisman climber competed with Virginia creeper vines to reach the upstairs screened-in porch at the south corner of the house. Boyd liked to help his mother in the fall when Emma gathered the dried seeds and carefully marked them for replanting the next spring.

There was a sandbox at the back of the home, shaded by lilacs. The remodeled chassis of Ira's old Veelie automobile served for the children's playhouse. The attic of the wash-shed in the backyard became a hideaway for "cowboys and Indians."

During Boyd's childhood his playmates were his sister Donna and brothers Doyle and Billy. Donna remembers the small licorice babies purchased from the corner grocery. "We fashioned little wings for them and flew them around the lawn. We also made newspaper wings for ourselves and flew about in the pretend-stories we had made for the licorice babies."

Doyle too remembers their fascination with flying. He and his brothers made cardboard wings and were on their way to climb the billboards across the street for their trial flight when Emma intercepted them and, Doyle says, "probably saved our lives."

Donna recalls that on summer nights bats would fly about. Then the children would run after them singing, "Bat-bat, get out of my hat and we'll give you a slice of bacon; and when we bake, we'll make you a cake, if I am not mistaken." Also at night they would spread a quilt on the lawn and, sitting in the middle with their backs to the center, would draw up the four corners to cover them. There they studied the stars and the moon and saw nighthawks in the sky.

One of the older cherry trees had a limb which resembled a bicycle. Two branches came out of it like handlebars, and another two down below served as pedals. "With a little bouncing up and down," Donna says, "it almost seemed like we were riding. We all took our turns on that favorite limb."

All was not play for the Packer children, however, for each had his chores to do. But even in their work they devised ways to have fun. All took turns doing dishes in the free-standing sink with no draining board. And all helped to pick, peel, and can fruit in season.

One time their good spirits were dampened when the legs of the large kitchen table gave way and some fifty two-quart bottles of peaches shattered on the kitchen floor. Groans mingled with laughter as they counted the loss and then shoveled up the broken glass and cleaned the sticky linoleum.

Each boy teamed with a brother or two, chopping wood, cleaning the yard, irrigating, pulling weeds, picking vegetables and fruit, not only at home but also for neighbors.

One work experience was painful for Boyd. He and Doyle rode in the back of a truck to pick beans in Perry, Utah. When it was about to discharge its passengers Boyd jumped from the truck before it had completely stopped, injuring his weak hip. From then on he walked with a slight limp.

Ira gave the children coping saws and discarded glass-box boards from the garage. With these, their imaginations soared. They made guns from the boards, triggers from clothespins, and ammunition from rubber inner tube bands. Donna recalls: "We became cowboys and Indians. We shot at make-believe objects and at each other."

The boys spent hundreds of hours fashioning animals and birds with the coping saw. Boyd found he could carve his animals in bas relief and color them. To paint them he used dregs from paint cans a neighbor had discarded.

He recalls: "We played a lot with small wooden horses we made. And we created little farms, placed sticks in the ground, and ran strings through to make fences."

Boyd also experimented with a magnifying glass in sunlight to burn designs into his boards. One day the neighborhood bully, seeing him sitting on the lawn so occupied, demanded that Boyd give him the magnifying glass. When he refused, the boy knocked Boyd down and sat on him, holding the magnifying glass to the sun and focused on Boyd with the intent of burning him.

Hearing her brother's cries, Donna came around the house at a fast clip. Although younger and smaller than the bully, she tore into him with such fury that he let go and started to run. She chased him up the street, caught him on the Glens' front lawn, and gave him a sound thrashing.

Each spring the children looked forward to the sheep herds being driven from desert to mountain ranges. These passed half a block south of the Packer home in a noise-filled cloud of dust and were followed by barking dogs and by herders on horses. The excitement propelled Boyd and his brothers to chase after them. On one occasion Billy, the youngest, wandered off alone in the midst of the herd. A worried Ira rightly guessed where he had gone. It was one of the few times when Bill Packer remembers his father being angry. After rescuing him from the herd, Ira made sure that his son would never again leave without permission. Permission, however, was sometimes given for the boys to follow the herds to the foothills. At such times Emma packed a lunch for them and added her words of caution to be careful.

It was not only following the herds that drew Boyd to the hills. Bally Johnson's pond was a favorite place. Another pond, located on the Christopherson property, was surrounded by orchards. Fascinated by any living creature in this pond, Boyd found a giant water bug, small leopard frogs, tadpoles, and ducks. In the sage of the hillsides they saw rabbits and lizards, small desert swifts, and occasionally blue-tailed lizards that measured eight or ten inches long. These Boyd brought home and kept in a box covered with screen. His sisters sometimes complained about the "treasures" they found in his room.

His explorations in the hills once led him and a friend, Jimmy Potter, to danger. They climbed up the mountain to Slide Rock, an area which in ancient times had been cliffs but had since broken into large boulders. There they rolled rocks down the mountain. Tiring of this, they explored further and found an opening under one of the large rocks. Jimmy slid in and persuaded Boyd to join him. They found another opening below and, continuing, went deep under the large pile of boulders. Having a flashlight, they discovered a long-eared bat, which they caught.

Deciding that it was time to leave, they found that sliding into the cave was far easier than climbing out over the slick rock. Realizing that a shift in the rocks could crush them and that no one would be able to find them, they became frightened. With great care they helped each other up into daylight again.

In the Packer family, holidays were traditional events. For Easter they took picnics to Little Mountain, west of Corinne, or to Box Elder Canyon, where Emma and the children had stayed when her daughters were ill.

On Decoration Day they decorated family graves with flowers from Emma's garden or artificial flowers she and the girls had made. At these times Emma felt deep sorrow that her mother's grave was not there, because its location was not then known.

All of Brigham City celebrated the Fourth of July. The music of the band was stirring to a people whose lives were focused on home, church, and community.

Brigham City was a fruit-growing community, and its annual Peach Day parade was another event that drew the whole county. Residents exhibited handcrafts, artwork, and food items. Town dignitaries, as judges, gave prizes to winners. One year Boyd won a prize for his circus of carved wood animals.

Returning home from the town festivities, the Packers ate Emma's white cake topped with Opal's caramel icing and Ira's ice cream treat. To bake a perfect cake with no temperature gauge was an accomplishment. Emma tested the temperature by feeling inside the oven of the coal range with her hand. Opal hand-stirred the creamy frosting until it set.

Thanksgiving was a time to feel gratitude for home ties and for being together around a table set for family members and also for others who might be in need. The turkey or goose as well as other makings of the holiday feast were provided by Ira's customers in payment on their bills.

But Christmas was the crowning holiday of the year. Before the days of electric tree lights they placed small candles on the branches and watched so that the branches did not catch fire. Gifts, other than homemade, were usually provided by Verna. One of Boyd's most memorable presents from this Santa was a cast-iron circus wagon with a bear in it. Doyle's was its duplicate but held a tiger. Favorite Christmas treats included Emma's Danish jelly tarts, still a tradition in the homes of her children.

Whenever the Packer children performed in school or church Ira gave them a quarter and treated the family to ice cream.

The three youngest boys had parts in Central School's annual operetta The Kitchen Clock. Boyd was "Stew Kettle"; Billy, a "Dustpan"; and Doyle, a "Night Serenader." Doyle kept one of the programs. It is dated March 28, 1936. Upon seeing it for the first time in fifty-two years, Boyd immediately recited the lyrics of his song.

After Boyd and Doyle's sixth and final year at Central School their family met a time of change and challenge. To avoid the necessity of constant travel back and forth between home and garage for Ira and the boys, and to move his maturing children within blocks of their high school and town jobs, their father decided to remodel the upstairs floor of his garage building at 75 South Main Street into a large apartment. That floor had originally housed a wagon repair shop.

In place of its wide ramp that ascended from the backyard to the second floor, Ira built a narrower ramp which was to serve as the main approach to the apartment. Ira and his son Ron, a skilled carpenter and mechanic by that time, partitioned and finished eight rooms to accommodate the family, including Grandfather Packer. The front with its six arched windows became the living room.

The children watched the remodeling with mixed feelings. Gone would be the orchard, the garden, Emma's flowers, and their play areas. While the spirit of their home would remain the same, the uprooting would be painful. Each sensed in his own way that the move would begin a time of permanent change in all of their lives.

1 Utah State University, Department of Agriculture, Utah Data Bulletin, September 1924, U.S. Weather Bureau.

2 George Albert Smith's stake conference visits to Brigham City Tabernacle, Church History Library.

3 Unpublished talk, Council of the Twelve meeting, April 1970, ms. p. 2.

4 Brigham City, Central School, report cards 1930-36.
