Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Five As a Youth in Brigham City

William L. Packer says that consistency is one of his brother Boyd's most striking characteristics. "He hasn't changed a lot," Bill says, "except that after his service in the military he was more quiet than before and more devoted to the Church."1 Bill's comment suggests that during Boyd K. Packer's childhood and youth he developed traits, interests, and skills upon which he simply continued to build.

One of these was his art. He created gifts for family members, many of which have been kept and treasured. Even his childhood sketches were collected by his sisters Verna and Donna.

When their friends Harold and Lillian Felt arrived at Brigham City in 1934 to establish a mortuary, Boyd's parents welcomed them into their family circle. Lillian describes the miniature farm and animals that teenage Boyd fashioned to amuse her children when he tended them one Christmastime.2 If their make-believe world needed circus animals, he made them. For their jungle scenes he cut out birds from garage throwaway boards and painted them with residue from a sign painter's cans. Boyd's creative ability was possibly an extension of the Packer children's imaginative games. His brother Bill says, "Boyd was always a character, a wit, and fun-loving, especially among those he knows well."

Despite the talents that gave him a measure of satisfaction, Boyd often felt inadequate. He was sensitive to things that set him apart from others. These same feelings plagued him in junior high school. His lack of physical strength resulting from polio kept him from participating in contact sports and made him dread gym.

Except for his feelings of inadequacy Boyd's memories of junior high are few. He remembers the school, four blocks east of the Packer apartment and garage. The junior high occupied three floors on the east end of the Box Elder High School building and used the old gymnasium in the basement. The high school had a new gymnasium and a football field across the street on the north. These were located where the old co-op tannery and hat factory had stood.

Boyd remembers that he liked science, but his A's were in English, geography, and art.3 When Boyd began high school he made friends with Robert Baird, who was crippled from childhood polio and confined to a wheelchair. Later Robert learned to walk with crutches. At the time Boyd did not know that he too had had that crippling disease.

Robert raised pigeons, and Boyd determined to have some of his own. With his earnings from picking fruit and vegetables he began to purchase fantails and rollers, but only a few homing pigeons because their training cost money. At first he housed his birds in boxes. Later he built a coop for them out of old garage doors and wire screen.

"The pigeons became the center of my interest," he recalls, "and I think they were a great protection to me during those years. They kept me home a great deal more than otherwise I might have been." His civics class included a section on choosing a vocation. "I determined that I wanted to be an ornithologist and study birds all my life."

Boyd belonged to a pigeon club in Brigham City whose members offered their homing pigeons to help in the 1938 elections. The birds could bring returns from remote towns in Box Elder County that had no telephone service-Clear Creek, Stanrod, Kelton, Yost, Lynn, and Grouse Creek. For this project the boys fastened to the legs of the pigeons small capsules like those used by the military. Harold Felt loaned his car for the transport of their birds over the four hundred miles involved in reaching the remote areas mentioned.

At the schoolhouse of each town where elections were held they left two pigeons-one bird as a backup in case the other should be killed by a hawk. Election officers wrote the returns on tissue paper, placed them in the capsules, and released the birds early the next morning. That election year, returns came in a full day earlier than in any preceding one.

For Boyd, pigeons also served as barter. He admired his brother Ron's ability as a hunter, and he longed for a .22 rifle. He remembered Ron's courage in saving his own life by shooting from his forearm a five-foot rattlesnake which bit him while he was fishing in the Blacksmith Fork Canyon in Cache Valley. Not having a knife, Ron had then shot through the flesh to cause bleeding and remove as much venom as possible until his friend found him, administered first aid, and brought him to Dr. Pearse in Brigham City.4 Boyd was eight at the time.

So Boyd traded some of his pigeons for an old .22 rifle. Its sights were crooked and he had to compensate by aiming at somewhere else other than the target. "That way," he explains, "I was able to hit what I was not aiming at."

From their mother's example the Packer children developed the desire to beautify their surroundings. Bill tells how he and Boyd labored to satisfy their mother's longing for the green lawn and flowers of their former home. They grubbed and raked the hard-packed dirt behind the garage, planted lawn seed, and watched its green shoots come up. But the soil was so saturated with oil from old cars that the grass soon yellowed and died. Mother Emma shared their disappointment and contented herself with hanging baskets of geraniums across the wide back porch from which the entry ramp descended.

Two years before the Packers had moved to the apartment permanent changes had begun to take place which left deep impressions in family members. These set lifelong patterns in caring not only for their own but also for others.

Boyd was ten when Grandfather and Grandmother Packer came to the old home for Christmas dinner and stayed to visit and play table games before returning to their home. The next day, 26 December 1934, Boyd was alone with his mother, who was doing the laundry, when unexpectedly his father came in looking very serious. "Can you stand a shock?" he asked his wife.

Before he could go on, Emma said: "It's your mother. She is dead." His mother's spiritual perception and attunement made a lasting impression upon her son.

After the funeral, relatives crowded into the grandparents' small home. To lessen the congestion Emma sent Donna and her brothers Doyle, Boyd, and Billy home to stay until the company left. Donna remembers that cold December day. Their grandmother was dead and they were disappointed at having to leave the gathering. Donna bought canned soup for their meal, fired up the coal stove to take the chill off the kitchen, and did her best to cheer and amuse her brothers.

Back at the grandfather's home, serious discussions were held. Joseph Alma's health was poor and he could not live alone. Ron, the eldest son, who was planning soon to marry Hazel Olson, suggested a possible solution. He and Hazel could step up their wedding date, move in with the grandfather, and care for him until the apartment was finished, which would include a room for him.

Ron and Hazel cared for Joseph Alma in his home until the family moved into the apartment. Then he lived out the remaining years of his life with them, spending much of his time reading the scriptures. This example of caring for their own was thus set for the children to follow.

For Boyd the lesson was profound. One of his most frequent statements in recounting experiences or observations is, "From that I learned a great lesson."

Soon after their move to the apartment Boyd's sister Donna attended a genealogy class offered in the Mutual Improvement Association. She took Boyd with her. She was sixteen; he, thirteen. Both showed marked interest in the subject. Each began a book of remembrance and paid for small photographs of their ancestors to paste on their family charts. Grandmother Sarah's picture was one among the others. Their interest in family history has never dimmed.

When in 1937 Boyd began his freshman year at Box Elder High, he enrolled in seminary with his brother Doyle. Records show that they did not pay their seventy-five-cents-a-year fee in a lump sum, as did most of the students, but in five- and ten-cent installments.

The seminary for Box Elder High School was the second in the Church, that for Granite High being the first. The standard curriculum at Box Elder was the Old Testament, taught by Harold Nelson; the New Testament, by John P. Lillywhite; and Church History, by Abel S. Rich. No class in the Book of Mormon was then offered.

In seminary Boyd received his first real exposure to the scriptures. Because of the excellence of his teachers in presenting gospel subjects and the moral-spiritual values embodied in the scriptures, he has never forgotten them nor their teachings. From this beginning Boyd moved in a direction that would later determine his choice of a profession and eventually qualify him as a teacher of moral-spiritual values.

In his sophomore year of high school Boyd still struggled with his old feelings of inadequacy and was particularly vulnerable to thoughtless actions of his fellows. He remembers vividly an incident which could have redirected his life.

One Sunday morning he started for priesthood meeting dressed in his first suit, a pass-down from Leon to Lowell to him. Although it was a little large for him, he felt well dressed. He looked forward to meetings, especially to the hymns, which always drew him to church.

He entered the foyer of the First Ward, where other youths were gathered. A Church leader's son, who progressively had been in deacons, teachers, and priests quorum presidencies, greeted Boyd in words loud enough for all to hear: "Say, that's a fine suit you have on, Packer, but didn't they have one that would fit you?"

Stung by his words, Boyd turned quickly and left. Hurt, angry, and too stubborn to cry, he walked rapidly toward home, knowing as he went that he could not go in the house before meetings were over. He went to his pigeons for comfort. Over and over he relived his humiliation, vowing that he would never, ever go back to church again. He muses, "I can see myself having left the Church over that incident." Yet as vivid as the experience still is, he cannot recall what made him return.

Examining the influences about him during that period, it is not difficult to see how hurt and anger could be dispelled before they hardened into rancor. There was loyalty to mother and father. There were brothers and sisters, who suffered the same privations and embarrassments as he, yet helped each other through them. For instance, he remembers that his sister Donna had accepted an invitation to a formal dance, then came home in tears because she had no dress to wear-not just no dress that pleased her but no dress appropriate for the occasion. Then Verna, her creative gift heightened by love, fashioned from a bedspread a stylish dress that was admired at the dance.

So Boyd could not disappoint his family over a personal hurt. Besides, he needed to be an example for Billy. And the care of his birds occupied him, as did his drawing and making things with his hands.

His seminary teachers were another influence. Studying the New Testament under John P. Lillywhite, who was later to become Netherlands Mission president and subsequently stake patriarch, enlarged Boyd's understanding about dealing with provocation or persecution. Beyond these, Boyd had had an early witness of the Spirit that a visiting Apostle was truly a servant of the Lord Jesus Christ.

As Boyd began his junior year at high school he was more confident, wittier, and more fun-loving than he had been during those more sensitive years. He inherited his quick wit and sense of humor from his father.

Elder Malcolm Jeppsen tells about the triple date that he, Verl Petersen, and Boyd had with high school girlfriends. They had taken their dates home and were returning to the Packer garage to let Boyd off. At the Brigham City Tabernacle they saw Carl Josephson parked in his police car. As they passed him, Verl leaned out and gave a convincing imitation of a siren-a device that was illegal in a private car.

"Sure enough," Elder Jeppsen says, "the police car whipped around with its lights flashing and followed us to the garage, where we stopped."

"All right, fellows," Officer Josephson said, "where's the siren?"

Boyd's cool answer was: "We just took her home."5

For some of their high school dates Boyd and Doyle used an old Nash which their father had reluctantly purchased from a Japanese man shortly before the attack on Pearl Harbor. The man had met Ira's refusal with such persuasion and urgency that Ira had relented. The boys called the car Shasta, because, they said, "Shasta be gassed; Shasta be oiled; and Shasta be pushed."

During that year Boyd worked on Saturdays and after school as a stock boy for J. C. Penney Company, a job Verna had helped him obtain. Opal worked for Petersen Electric; Nona, for Compton's Music and Photography; Ron, Lowell, and Doyle, for their father; and Leon, for the Harold Felt Mortuary.

Verna, in particular, was sensitive to the dating needs of her brothers and sisters. Boyd recalls that as he would leave home, she might press a dollar in his hand to buy his date a treat. On another occasion she fashioned a corsage from a garden iris so professionally that Boyd was proud to present it.

While the younger boys were still in high school Leon joined the air force, where he began flight training in April 1941. Harold Felt then hired Boyd to take Leon's place at the mortuary.

Leon successfully completed his course and graduated at Sacramento's Mather Field on 12 December 1941. His parents drove to California for the event. Boyd still remembers the Sunday afternoon of 7 December 1941, while his parents were gone. He was at a school-planning meeting when a student rushed in with the news of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor.

"There was much rousing talk among the senior boys," Boyd recalls, "and it was our fear that the war would be over before we juniors had a chance to enlist and get into it. Perhaps we felt an exaggerated sense of patriotism, but little did we know the effect the war was to have on all of our lives."

After Leon's graduation he was given leave and came home for a short time. When he was ready to drive the old Plymouth back to Sacramento his parents suggested that Boyd go with him and then return by train. The brothers left in a snowstorm. Near Reno, Nevada, their car slid off the highway into a barrow pit. Leon hitched a ride back to town for a wrecker. Before he could return, a semi-truck stopped and pulled the car out with a tow chain.

Another tense moment came when, crossing Donner Pass in the Sierra Nevada mountains, they slid off the road into a heavy snowbank within feet of a steep canyon drop-off.

Sharing that trip with Leon, who now wore his pilot wings, created within Boyd a desire to follow his brother into the service. While the possibility of becoming a pilot seemed remote to Boyd, the desire to do so was strong.

He returned to school and to his work at the Felt Mortuary. As Leon had done, Boyd drove ambulance and hearse, did odd jobs, and tended the Felt children when Harold and Lillian were away from their upstairs apartment.

After Pearl Harbor there was much patriotic fervor at school. Boyd's yearbook, The 1942 Boomerang, reflects the tenor of the time. Six full-page color illustrations show the flag, the national capitol, the Statue of Liberty, an air force bomber, and so forth.

The war with Japan and Germany was gaining intensity and there was a serious note of unrest and anxiety, especially among the seniors. When the Brigham City National Guard left to join the armed forces, everyone gathered to see them off.

Boyd and his brother Doyle joined the Utah Home Guard, which had been reactivated by the Utah legislature on 22 September 1941. They were issued uniforms and attended weekly drills and local maneuvers. Boyd spent part of a night with the local barber, Curly Burt, guarding the city water supply on Reservoir Hill east of Brigham City.

It was only a matter of time before the war would draw him and other family members and friends into military service. Even the limitation which had kept him from contact sports did not dampen his desire to enlist as a pilot cadet. "Although it might have been out of the question because of the stiff physical requirements," Boyd says, "my desire was to become a pilot like my brother Leon, and I could not let it go."

One night Boyd petitioned the Lord in the most fervent prayer of his young life. "I promised that if He would grant my desire to pass the physical examination and become an air cadet, I would do anything he wanted me to do for the rest of my life."

He continues: "That prayer was pivotal. There was no limit to the earnestness with which I prayed. It was an expression of beginning faith, and it was the beginning of developing some self- confidence."

In view of what would later follow it is noteworthy that among Box Elder High School's 1942 graduating class were Boyd K. Packer, who was to become a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles; Dantzel White, the future wife of Russell M. Nelson, who likewise would become an Apostle; and Malcolm S. Jeppsen, who in 1989 would be called to the Second Quorum of the Seventy.

Boyd at the time of his high school graduation

The war took on an even greater sense of urgency when Brigham City was chosen as the site for the armyÂs Bushnell General Hospital.Immediately after graduation Boyd went to work as a timekeeper for the plumbing-heating contractor Lord and Loryea, from Portland, Oregon. Percy S. Lord was one of the owners of the company and the senior boss, but he was rarely seen on that project. His brother, George Lord, superintended the construction at the Brigham City site, and Boyd became a friend of his son, George, Jr. The office manager, Earl Everest, with whom Boyd enjoyed working, was his immediate boss.Several times a day Boyd ran throughout the construction area to check with the plumbers. Mr. Everest called him Sea Biscuit after a famous racehorse.One day in late summer Percy S. Lord came to the Bushnell site to see how things were going. Boyd had ridden his bicycle early to work and was staying late to handle extra details occasioned by Mr. LordÂs visit. While he was thus engaged Mr. Lord came into the office and asked what he was doing there. Boyd told him that there was work he wanted to finish before going home. The man then asked how much he was being paid. Boyd told him.The next morning Mr. Everest told Boyd that the boss had authorized a raise for him that nearly doubled his salary. Of this Boyd says, ÂFrom that experience I learned that the extra effort one puts into his responsibilities is an excellent investment, and it became quite an incentive to me.

His sister Donna also obtained work at the Bushnell operation, and the earnings of the brother and sister made it possible for them to help their parents financially. They paid for a new electric stove for Emma and purchased cases of canned goods against the time when food would be rationed.Boyd finally applied for the air cadet program and, with two friends, went to Salt Lake City for the tests. A qualifying written exam was required before taking the physical. When his test was scored, Boyd was one point below the minimum for acceptance. His heart sank. The sergeant studied the test carefully. There were several two-part questions. He then said that they allowed for half of a two-part question. He found the two-part questions needed. One was, ÂWhat is ethylene glycol used for?

From working in his fatherÂs garage Boyd knew that it was used in automobiles as an antifreeze. He reflects, ÂKnowing that one thing made the difference on whether or not I was to become a pilot.

When one has examined the substantive aspects of Boyd PackerÂs childhood and youth, his brother BillÂs assessment of him seems accurate. He has been consistent and has not changed a lot. Yet the assessment is incomplete; it does not take into account the growth that took place because Boyd learned early to tap the source of knowledge and power through fervent, faith-driven prayer. Thus the seeds of courage and calm were planted in his childhood and youth. As he had earlier learned to walk again, he would now learn to fly.

1 William Lamoin Packer interview, 19 December 1989.

2 Lillian Felt interview, 8 January 1989.

3 Box Elder Junior High term reports, 1936-38.

4 Brigham City News, 19 June 1932.

5 Dr. Malcolm S. Jeppsen interview, 12 January 1989.
