Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Seven Courtship and Marriage

Boyd Packer's return home from Japan to Brigham City required a period of adjustment. The comparative plenty about him and the abject misery within the conquered country he had recently left caused him distress. He was still haunted by the sight of starving children sleeping on the streets at night or huddled in alcoves with damp newspapers drawn about their soiled, emaciated bodies against the cold. He remembered still the stench of death.

To sleep in clean sheets under his father's roof, to sit at his mother's table for a home-cooked meal, to be with brothers and sisters-these were blessings made poignant by the contrast of the Japan experience.

When he had left home four years before, Ronald, Opal, Nona, and Lowell were married. During his absence Verna, Leon, and Doyle also had found their companions. Now only Boyd, Bill, and Donna remained at home, and in October of that year (1946) Donna would marry Alfred Swiss. Each of the children had married, or would marry, after the Packer tradition, choosing companions not from backgrounds of wealth or prominence but from homes with strong family ties, with deep roots in Christian principles, and with firm adherence to integrity and the work ethic.

Boyd was now free to spend time out of doors, to hunt and fish and hike. He learned some taxidermy in order to preserve some birds for study for his paintings.

And also Boyd looked ahead. Having committed himself to become a teacher, he must obtain an education. Again, following the lead of his brother Leon, a former student body officer at Weber College in Ogden, Boyd entered that school. He lived at home and, not having a car, rode to school each morning with a neighbor who worked in Ogden. After classes he caught a bus to North Ogden and then hitched a ride home to work at his father's garage during the afternoon. Not being mechanically inclined as were his brothers, he kept the books and tended the gas pumps up front.

Since most of his and his brothers' military allotments had been sent home to help remodel his father's garage and establish his Chrysler dealership, Boyd's savings were meager. But along with other returning servicemen he received funds under the G.I. Bill of Rights that paid for tuition, books, and a small subsistence allowance. He bought a few civilian clothes while making use of his officer's gabardine slacks and their matching shirts, from which he removed the epaulets.

To his satisfaction he found that his military discipline, his consistent study habits, and his fixed purpose to become a teacher gave him an edge in his classes. From the beginning he did very well.

He also began to date with the intent of finding an eternal companion. Entertainments were simple: hikes and outings, school and Church dances, ice cream treats, sacrament meetings (then held in the evenings), reading, and discussions.

That fall Boyd attended the annual Peach Days Ball with a girl from his ward whom he had dated before his military experience and during his leaves at home. As was the case with him, she was dating others, and they soon found themselves drifting from rather than toward one another. It was at the ball that he heard the name of the new Brigham City Peach Queen announced-Donna Edith Smith-and saw her crowned. Boyd then remembered having seen her walking along the north side of Forest Street to junior high as he walked the south side to high school. He had noted how very pretty she was.

Despite her shyness, Donna had been persuaded to enter the queen's competition. After that competition the Brigham City Corporation and others pressed her to enter the Miss Utah contest. Bending to their wishes, she agreed. In this competition, held at the Utah State Fairgrounds in Salt Lake City, she became one of the ten finalists. Of the experience she says: "As I walked across the stage the thought came that there were other things ahead for me that were far more important than becoming Miss Utah. I count that evening's prompting concerning the purpose of my life as one of my early spiritual experiences."

About that time Boyd was working up front in the garage one afternoon when Bishop Lewis S. Wight of the Third Ward, a distant cousin, a fruit grower and dairy farmer, came to get gas in exchange for the milk he regularly delivered to the Packer apartment upstairs. He asked Boyd to speak at a Sunday evening sacrament service at the old Third Ward chapel with its stained glass window of the First Vision. Donna was in attendance. Her father, William W. Smith, served as counselor to Bishop White. Her grandfather Rasmus Julius Smith and his family had worshipped here.

When Boyd was introduced and came to the pulpit he was prompted to speak on obedience. He then urged Church members to willingly respond to calls that came to them. Donna Smith, who was dating several young men, one rather seriously, listened intently to Boyd Packer. She thought, "Now, this is the type of man I would wish to marry."

After the meeting the bishop told Donna he had a calling for her. Inspired by the message of Boyd's talk, she said yes.

The next day Boyd walked to the circulation desk at the school library and found Donna working there. It was the first time they had spoken. Her opening words gave him a start: "You have caused me a very serious problem."

"How is that?" he asked.

"Following sacrament meeting last evening, Bishop Wight called me to teach Junior Sunday School, and after your counsel about accepting calls, how could I refuse? You are responsible for my having to go home every weekend now."

Her words pleased Boyd. He began arranging for Donna's rides to Brigham City each weekend.

On their first date they went to a dance at Harper Ward, a one-room stone chapel north of Brigham City. It served as meetinghouse and, with benches placed against the walls, as recreation hall.

A later date held elements of frustration, especially for Boyd. Donna was an attendant to the county queen for the Days of '47 celebration sponsored by the Daughters of Utah Pioneers. The county queen was to be crowned at a formal centennial ball at the Brigham City armory. The event drew practically every adult in town, including Boyd's parents, brothers, sisters, and their partners.

The president of the Daughters of Utah Pioneers that year insisted that the queen and her attendants should not appear on the dance floor until they were announced for the inauguration ceremony late in the evening. This meant that the less-than-enthusiastic escorts of the contestants were required to stand around most of the evening and wait for this event to take place. For some time thereafter Boyd could never see that DUP president without grinding his teeth a bit.

When the ceremony was over he introduced Donna to his family. Then, before he could have even a single dance with her, his father, brothers, and brothers-in-law each claimed her for a turn. She took it with good grace.

By then Boyd knew that this was the girl he wanted to marry. Her lack of affectation strongly appealed to him, as did her ready smile, her thoughtfulness, and her uncomplaining nature. He had a sure eye for beauty and an innate taste for goodness. In Donna he found beauty and goodness in a perfect blend. Always he would honor her with the simple words, "Donna is perfect."

Then as he became acquainted with Donna's parents and three younger brothers, he loved them as well. Her mother, Nellie Jordan Smith, gave careful and devoted attention to her four children and her home. She had filled a full-time mission for the Church, and at the time of Boyd and Donna's courtship she was president of the North Box Elder Stake Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

William W. Smith, second counselor in the bishopric, was a good father. From his various business ventures he provided well for his family.

As with Boyd's parents, Donna's had come from faithful convert stock who had sacrificed everything for the gospel of Jesus Christ and His restored church. And each family had its roots deep in the communal beginnings of Brigham City, which had given to them a strong sense of place. Boyd and Donna shared a love for their hometown and its pioneer heritage.

While Boyd commuted to Weber College daily during the school year, Donna lived in Ogden at the home of Lydia Tanner, retired head of the Home Economics Department. From her she learned homemaking skills beyond those taught by her mother. In addition to her work in the library Donna was an active member of La Dianaeda girls sorority and president of the Whip Club, the Weber College service organization. She was greatly admired and much in demand for special school activities.

In late March of 1947 the sorority sponsored the school's Easter Prom, and Donna was responsible for theme and decorations. She confided in Boyd that the assignment weighed on her. His willingness to create Easter-theme drawings and to help decorate were just what was needed to relieve her concern.

Following the Easter Prom, Boyd gave Donna a diamond ring, its small stone set in solitaire. He would later replace it with a larger gem, saying of the first, "It was hardly big enough to be noticed, but it was enough." Donna adds, "Boyd did not actually ask me to marry him, but he did indicate that I was the one he wanted for eternity."

Both sets of parents were very pleased. Boyd's mother wrote to Verna in Portland that Donna was "a grand girl."

The dance had been held on Saturday, 5 April 1947. The next morning found the couple seated on the north balcony of the Tabernacle in Salt Lake City for general conference. That day they saw Elder Henry D. Moyle sustained as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Donna recalls receiving a sure witness that Elder Moyle had indeed been called of God. Boyd received that same witness. But in addition, he had the soul-shaking impression that one day he would be called from the audience to speak at that pulpit. This witness and his love for the girl beside him caused him to say in solemn retrospect, "I suppose I had some small interest in what was being said at the pulpit that day."

That witness placed upon him a heavy burden. When the impression was repeated as the years passed, he says, he would immediately "throw a rock on it and move ahead." But from that time on the Lord would tutor, test, and season him.

Between their engagement in early April and their marriage in late July, Boyd and Donna spent every moment they could together. The need to work and to finish that school year allowed them only small blocks of time, but they made the most of them.

Boyd recalls how Donna would watch for his shadow to appear at the opaque window of the side door to the Home Economics Department. Seeing him there she would slip out and, like a line in a poem he had read, send him on with a "cookie and a kiss."

They read the book Discourses of Brigham Young together, and they attended school functions and dances. For one of these occasions the only available vehicle for Boyd to use was his father's homemade wrecker. Ira had cut off the back of an old heavy-duty touring car, brought the back forward, and welded it to the front to create a one-seater. On the heavy back-frame he had built a hand-crank wrecker from gears of cars and tractors. Boyd describes it as "pure ugly."

He cleaned it thoroughly, thinking as he did so, "If she'll ride with me in this, we can go through life with few problems." Dressed in her best, Donna took his arm and stepped into the wrecker as unconcerned as if it were up to the standard that Boyd desired for her.

Donna's lack of concern about riding with him in the old wrecker gave him confidence to negotiate with a local realtor on the purchase of an old, run-down home in the southeast part of the city. It had been owned by a bachelor who had recently died. The house captured Boyd's interest as a place that he and Donna could restore and beautify. It was financially feasible and would be well within a teacher's income.

Thinking about this house led them to serious discussion about their future family. Donna wanted a dozen children, and Boyd, who knew the richness of life in a large family, agreed. That goal set, they decided that their mutual occupation would be their family, and that no activity would take precedence over it. Whatever he did to provide for them would be secondary to their mutual responsibility to their children.

They also decided that, since children must always be somewhere and doing something every waking moment, one or the other of them would always be with the children

To Boyd and Donna these commitments made previous to their marriage were as binding as were the eternal covenants that would follow in the temple.

During this period, few notes or letters passed between them, but Donna has treasured one from Boyd that said in part, "When I think of you, and all that we can accomplish together, when I see the dreams of eternity unfolding before us, Â� it is as though my heart were crying tears of thankfulness."1

About that time Boyd was presented with a test that was much more serious than Donna's challenge of riding with him in the wrecker. Donna's father, an enterprising and generous man, had successfully built several homes and was in the process of building two directly through the block from the one where he and his family lived. One of the new homes had been sold. The other, Donna's father told them, was to be his wedding gift to them.

His words touched something that was deep and elemental to Boyd's nature and made him resolutely say to himself, "We cannot do that." With all his heart he desired to provide for his bride himself, and he felt entirely capable of taking that responsibility. Thus that desire and the anticipation of fixing up the old home for them warred against the proffered gift, creating within Boyd a distinct crisis. He struggled with it, rejecting even the thought of the gift. Finding no peace, he went to his father and asked what he should do.

Ira listened with understanding. After deliberating, he said: "Son, what if in the future you should want to do this for one of your own children? Do you think that would be in order?"

Boyd was forced to answer, "Yes."

Ira continued, "Well, why is it out of order for Brother Smith to want to do this for his only daughter?"

It was a hard lesson for Boyd to learn: Even when you definitely do not want it, sometimes you must accept a gift from another so that the giver might receive the joy of giving.

Finally he yielded his will to the counsel of his father and Donna's and moved ahead. His willingness to submit to counsel helped to qualify Boyd for leadership in the family he and Donna hoped for. And his obedience to his earthly father advanced him a step along the path of his commitment to be obedient to his Father in Heaven.

The couple set their wedding date for 28 July 1947. Verna would travel from Portland. Leon would return from his military post at the Pentagon. And Boyd's parents would be home from their Centennial "pioneer trek" from Nauvoo, Illinois, to the Salt Lake Valley.

This trek was to be a great experience for Boyd's parents. Ira, an active member of the Sons of the Utah Pioneers, said: "One of the officers of the Sons of the Utah Pioneers came and told me there would be nine men selected from Box Elder County [and] one of them should be a mechanic [and] also have the necessary background for pioneer requirements. I explained that both of my grandmothers were handcart pioneers and both of my grandfathers had lived at Nauvoo prior to having been driven out. My grandmothers walked the entire distance from the Missouri River to Salt Lake City."

He added, "Two or three times I talked myself out of going, but it seemed to grow into a necessary trip."2

Ira and Emma first traveled to Detroit, where they picked up a new Chrysler and drove to Nauvoo. There they joined the other trekkers, creating canvas wagon covers for their cars and cutting out and painting plywood oxen for their front fenders. Elder Spencer W. Kimball and his wife, Camilla, were among the large group making the trek.

Following the route of the 1847 pioneers the trekkers entered the Salt Lake Valley through Emigration Canyon on July 22 and stopped at the new This Is the Place Monument. It had been a hundred years since Brigham Young declared from his makeshift bed in Wilford Woodruff's carriage, "This is the place."3

Packer children were among the thousands who gathered to greet the trekkers. It was a memorable day for them and their parents, who were full of stories about their unique pioneer experience.

Also there to welcome the pioneers were state and local dignitaries and leaders of the Church. Noticeable among these were President George Albert Smith and his counselors, President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and President David O. McKay.

July 24 found Ira and Emma and available family members gathered about the "pioneer wagon" in front of the Packer garage. Before leaving for the reception and dinner to honor the trekkers that day,4 Ira took brush and paint and "branded" his plywood oxen I.W.P. for him and E.J.P. for Emma. Then, standing back to survey the effect, he said, "The best team that ever pulled together this side of eternity."

Inspired by this team-ideal of pulling together, Boyd years later carved an ox with a yoke as the model that became the Packer family emblem. Copies cast into brass door-knockers mark the homes of Ira and Emma's descendants.

With Boyd and Donna's wedding just four days away, there was much to be done. Their reception was to be held in the garden at the home of Donna's parents. To block off the street view from the south lawn of the Smith home Boyd built a sectional lattice-work fence six feet tall and twenty feet long from lath Donna's father had salvaged from a building he had demolished. Boyd painted it white, and his sister Verna trimmed it with window-display flowers.

On 28 July 1947 members of the immediate family traveled to Logan in Ira's new Chrysler and William Smith's older LaSalle. As they were about to enter the temple, a distant relative came from his home across the street to inquire about the honeymoon car they might be taking. Suspecting a prank, Boyd pointed to the LaSalle, then walked with the others into the building.

Within the sacred precincts the sealing ceremony that would forever bind Boyd and Donna together was spoken by ElRay L. Christiansen, president of the Logan Temple. That same day Elders Joseph Fielding Smith and Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve were in the temple, going through a session with their wives. The wedding party had the privilege of shaking hands with these brethren with whom Boyd would later serve.

As the party left the temple, they found the LaSalle labeled "Just Married" and decorated with tin cans and streamers. Boyd and Donna drove away in the Chrysler. The two sets of parents picked up the wedding cake in Logan and drove to Brigham City. They laughed for weeks over the astonished looks of drivers who drew near to see the newlyweds and saw, instead, two older men up front and their wives in back balancing a wedding cake.

The night of the reception was clear, with a full moon lighting the garden. Friends and family filed by to extend congratulations and then to linger and visit.

Upon their return to Brigham City from a brief honeymoon, Boyd arranged for his final year at Weber College, from which Donna had graduated that spring. Donna's father had painted and papered the unfinished rooms in the home.

Before school started, the couple cleared the yard of gravel and rocks and planted lawns, front and back. By then Boyd was content about the matter of the home, and when Brother Smith later faced some financial reverses Boyd was able to help by taking over the payments.

Of their beginnings Boyd said: "We were as happy as could be with one another. And neither one of us would have cared where we lived as long as we could be together." And so began their married life, near the Smith home where Donna's life had begun.

1 Letter, May 1947.

2 Ira Wight Packer's account of his and Emma's trip to Chicago, Detroit, Nauvoo, and the pioneer trek to Salt Lake City, July 1947.

3 Utah Centennial Trek, Souvenir Program and Guide, 14-22 July 1947, pp. 35-37.

4 Utah Centennial Official Program, p. 15.
