Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Nine Brigham City Days

Boyd and Donna Packer began their life together with a practical understanding of the Father's plan for his children-a plan with which they were personally acquainted through the example of their parents. Although different in age and personality, each set of parents had held to the traditional roles of strong family-oriented father and equally strong home-oriented mother working together as a harmonious team.

Although Boyd and Donna could not at first have known what those traditional roles would entail (any more than they could foresee what having Donna's hoped-for dozen children would bring) it did not matter. They were committed to having their large family and to following their parents' example in the home.

Boyd's ambition in life was to be good: to be a good son both to his Father in Heaven and to his earthly parents; to be a good husband to Donna and a good father to their children; and to be a good teacher. All else would have to fit those priorities or be set aside. One thing mostly set aside during the raising of their young family and Boyd's obtaining an education was his art work.

Donna's priorities were to be a good wife: to willingly accept the responsibility of bearing and nurturing as many children as the Lord would allow them; and to help create a home of order and beauty. All other interests would be incidental. Together they decided that Boyd would preside; they would counsel together; and they would act unitedly.

The couple moved into their new home at 549 North First West in Brigham City in early August 1947. Their furniture consisted of a table, sofa, chair, bed, and dresser. They had no refrigeration, so on hot summer days Donna prepared meals that required none. After a time they purchased a Kelvinator refrigerator that has operated an unbelievable forty-four years without repair. She laundered clothes at her mother's until, at the beginning of winter, they could afford a used wringer-washer. She remembers hanging the wet clothes on lines and having them freeze dry. That winter was severe, and hungry deer came down from the mountains into the yards for forage.

Boyd was finishing his last year at Weber College, working at the Packer garage, finishing the basement of the house, taking his turn milking Brother Smith's cow for a share of the milk, and helping Donna with household chores. She remembers an incident that touched her. Noticing a small gold safety-pin fastened to the palm side of his wedding ring, she asked about it. He said simply, "That is to remind me to be good to you."

This small reminder was but an outward expression of the deep gratitude he felt for Donna. From her he drew daily strength and joy. She had truly assuaged the sense of loneliness he had often felt throughout his youth.

One bitter day as he waited for a ride from Ogden he became wet and chilled and came home with the flu. It was apparent to him and Donna that they must get a car. Earning the money to pay for it required diligence. Finally they were able to purchase a secondhand Ford.

About this time Boyd was called to teach the elders quorum and co-teach the Gospel Doctrine class.

In June 1948 he graduated from Weber College with an Associate of Science degree. On July 7 of that year, after a long and agonizing labor, Donna gave birth to their first child, a son, Allan Forrest. Her mother, who was managing the family motel, was not able to be with her, but Mother Packer was there to give comfort and encouragement.

That fall Boyd entered Utah State Agricultural College in Logan. He persuaded his advisors in the College of Education to let him do part of his student teaching in Brigham City seminary and part at Box Elder High School. Their permission to do so proved to be a distinct advantage in the sequence of events.

President John P. Lillywhite of the North Box Elder Stake, who taught in the Brigham City seminary, was the quiet, spiritual man who would later serve as a patriarch and was, Boyd says, "always patriarchal." His grey hair, dignified manner, and immaculate dress gave him the appearance of a leader. Twice he had presided over the Netherlands Mission.

On 10 April 1948 Boyd became assistant stake clerk in the North Box Elder Stake and set about organizing President Lillywhite's files. Seeing him so occupied one night, his bishop commented, "Boyd, you don't have to do that."

"No," answered Boyd, "I don't have to do it; I get to!" Boyd ever served because of covenants and in gratitude for the incomparable blessing of witness he had received.

Boyd learned many lessons from President Lillywhite, one being that of forgiveness. He was the John that Elder Packer later memorialized in his general conference talk, "The Balm of Gilead," which was to have untold impact upon many who heard or have since read it.1

During his student-teaching experience Boyd was closely observed by the seminary principal, Abel S. Rich. Brother Rich was president of the South Box Elder Stake. An enterprising man, he was considered the city's leading citizen: twice mayor of Brigham City, a county commissioner, and a member of the school board. He had also been president of the Canadian Mission.

From him Boyd learned lasting lessons about making decisions. He learned, too, that if you want to know the truth about a man you go to his friends, not to his enemies.

In her history Donna tells of an incident that shows the esteem these leaders were accorded by the Brethren in Salt Lake. Elder Harold B. Lee, as a member of the Council of the Twelve, had come to their stake conference while Boyd was assistant stake clerk. Donna wrote:

We slipped away between the morning and afternoon sessions and took the children to my mother's so they could be fed, while Boyd and I went over to the Zundells' home near the Third Ward building for dinner with the stake president and clerks.

Brother Lee, who had also been invited to dinner, had forgotten something so had walked out to his car to get it, and was just leaving the car as we drove up. We greeted him and, as he paused to shake hands, he made two important statements. "Never turn aside from learning from great men such as those inside" and, "my boy, someday you shall have great responsibility in the Church." That experience was burned into my memory because of the witness of the Holy Ghost.2

On 3 June 1949 Boyd graduated with a B.S. degree from Utah State Agricultural College, having completed it in three years with the help of credits from his military training. Consistent with the steady pace that had marked his maturing years, he planned to begin his master's program that fall.

The same evening as graduation, the Box Elder News Journal reported a community meeting held in the Brigham City Tabernacle which Boyd attended. The purpose of the meeting was to gain the support of the citizens for housing the Intermountain Indian School in the facility left vacant when Bushnell Hospital had closed its doors during the summer of 1946. Attending the meeting were Senator Arthur V. Watkins (R-Utah); Dr. John R. Nichols, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, from Washington, D.C.; Dr. George A. Boyce from Window Rock, Arizona, superintendent of Indian schools for the Navajo reservations; and civic leaders from various parts of the state. Arriving late was Church President George Albert Smith from Salt Lake City.

Each speaker had praised Senator Watkins for his work to obtain the Bushnell facility from the War Assets Administration.3 The meeting was well under way when President Smith entered the building. The audience rose to its feet. As the President took his place on the stand, the speaker at the pulpit readily gave over his place to him. Boyd recalls the President's words:

I regret being late, but I have come against the counsel of my doctor. I had to come because there is something I want to tell you. When the suggestion was first made that an Indian school be established in one of our Latter-day Saint communities, I wrote President of the United States Harry S Truman and urged him to use his influence and administrative power to consummate this action. In this way the American people could redeem themselves from some of the injustices that had been heaped upon the heads of the American Indians during the history of our country.

President Smith promised the citizens of Brigham City that anything they did to help and bless the Indian people would be answered with blessings upon their heads. His words pierced Boyd's heart. He thought: "Here is the prophet of the Lord, and I am just naive enough to believe that what he says is true. And whatever I can do to help, I will do."

Community leaders decided to send a fact-gathering committee to visit the Navajo Indian reservation in Arizona and New Mexico. They selected J. D. Gunderson as chairman of the committee, and Boyd, representing the younger citizens, was one of sixteen committee members slated to make the trip.4

While the committee was away, the News Journal of October 21 reported that President John P. Lillywhite had been called to preside over the Netherlands Mission for the third time. Soon after, Elders Albert E. Bowen and Henry D. Moyle released him as president of the North Box Elder Stake and installed Vernal Willie to succeed him. Boyd was sustained as assistant to the stake clerk Roland L. Gourley.

Upon Boyd's return from the Indian trip, the principal Abel Rich counseled him to apply for the position left vacant by Brother Lillywhite. Boyd wrote a brief letter to Dr. Franklin L. West, commissioner of Church Education, stating that he was acting at the suggestion of the seminary principal.

Two days later he received an equally brief letter from Dr. West stating that it was his intention to assign an experienced seminary teacher to Brigham City. If Boyd wished to, however, he might apply for assignment elsewhere.

Feeling that the letter was in error, Boyd could think of little else as he drove to school the next day. After classes he left Logan, turned off on a narrow dirt road, and found a secluded wooded place where he could go and pray. He left there with the assurance that he was going to receive the desired appointment.

While serving as assistant stake clerk he was also chairman of the building committee for the new Brigham City Seventh Ward chapel. As a fund-raising incentive he had made a small model of the proposed building. One day Bishop Lewis S. Wight, who was leaving for Salt Lake to confer with the Church Building Committee, invited Boyd to bring the model and come with him.

While they were stopped at the Packer garage for gas, the seminary supervisor, J. Carl Wood, caught up with them and suggested that, while they were at Church headquarters, Boyd should see Dr. West. This Boyd did, and the two visited briefly. His contract came in the mail a few days later.

He hardly had time to savor the good news before he and others of the Indian Committee were asked to report on their recent visit to the reservations. Boyd's comments reflected his deep concern for the Indian people he had visited. His heart had been wrenched when he saw a small Navajo boy, wearing nothing but a thin shirt, playing barefoot in the snow. These were the same feelings that had haunted him when he had seen the hungry, poverty-stricken children of post-war Japan.

Following his report, Boyd turned his attention to his seminary classes. At the same time he continued his own schooling in Logan.

Not only was the seminary appointment a fulfillment of his teaching dream but also through it he became closely associated with another seminary teacher, A. Theodore Tuttle, who had been hired the year before. Boyd had first met him in the stake offices while Brother Tuttle was serving as stake mission president. After meeting with his missionaries in the high council room he stopped to visit with Boyd as the latter worked on President Lillywhite's files. There was an instant rapport between them. Their friendship lasted for the duration of Brother Tuttle's life and brought them closer even than brothers.

Boyd's sense of fulfillment in seminary teaching was all he had expected it to be. He would later say: "The satisfaction of teaching is self-contained and it's quiet. You know when you've influenced someone, and that person knows it. Generally, no one else knows. In a sense, teaching is its own reward."

One of his students wrote about the impact of Boyd Packer's teaching: "Coming from a home where gospel teachings were not included, I remember how impressionable I was, and to this day can very clearly picture Elder Packer teaching us about repentance and how, like a bar of soap, it cleanses souls. I was impressed with [his] example of purity and humility and his personal life."5

Of particular satisfaction to Boyd was his pilot Book of Mormon class for seniors who had already graduated from seminary. They could choose to attend the new class before school in the morning. The first year, about thirty seniors chose to do so; the second, nearly fifty. As a result of this response and the approval in 1953 of William E. Berrett, administrator of seminaries and institutes, Book of Mormon classes became part of the standard curriculum.

To aid Boyd's teaching and her own assignment as Primary in- service leader, Donna created a subject file in two drawers of their filing cabinet. In a third drawer she kept household accounts and seed catalogs for garden planning. In the fourth, two files for each child-one for his best efforts in writing, art, and schoolwork, and one for his vital records. These she kept until the child, out of interest, created his own book of remembrance.

On 25 January 1950 Boyd and Donna's second son, Kenneth William, was born. Donna's Grandmother Jordan came each day to help. During her visits Donna heard the stories about her mother's British beginnings and the Jordans' early days in Enterprise, Oregon, and Howell, Utah. These stories fired Donna's interest in British family history.

On 12 March 1950 Boyd was ordained a seventy by Elder Ezra Taft Benson; on September 23 he was called to serve on the North Box Elder Stake high council under Stake President Vernal Willie; and on December 11 he was ordained a high priest by Elder Joseph F. Merrill.

One of his first high council assignments was to represent the North Box Elder Stake in fostering the Intermountain Indian School program. J. Edwin Baird, a counselor in the stake presidency of the South Box Elder Stake, acted as his counterpart. Brother Baird, a friend of the Packer family since their Corinne days, had been in attendance when Boyd gave the talk that so affected Donna. Of it he said, "I have never forgotten the spiritual quality of that talk nor the impression Boyd made upon me. He was devout, earnest, and had great comprehension of the scriptures."

In connection with his assignment to the Indian school Boyd became acquainted with Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve and Elders Milton R. Hunter and S. Dilworth Young of the First Council of the Seventy, who constituted the Indian Committee of the Church.

After Boyd began a seminary class at the Indian school his frequent travels over the Navajo reservation made him acquainted with officials from the Bureau of Indian Affairs, LDS mission presidents, and Catholic priests.

At the close of the 1950-51 school year Brother Tuttle left Brigham City to earn his doctorate at the University of Utah. Having completed his course work, but not a dissertation, he accepted a teaching position at the Church institute in Reno, Nevada. When in 1953 William E. Berrett was appointed administrator over all the seminaries and institutes of the Church, Ted Tuttle became a supervisor. Boyd was offered the Reno position left vacant by Brother Tuttle but, wishing to stay in Brigham City, declined it.

Living in Brigham City was a many-sided blessing for Boyd and Donna. Since Boyd was next to the youngest in his large family, his brothers and sisters were generous with their children's outgrown clothing, strollers, or playpens, and Donna and Boyd welcomed these gifts. Both were adept in fashioning the new from the used.

The dedication of the chapel in Howell, where Donna's grandmother had lived, provided Donna with a lesson about giving one's best to the Lord. She wrote: "The one long wall in the cultural hall had been put up in brick, and when they got it finished it was not square and true. The contractor, when told that the mistake could be hidden in the cornice and no one would know, said, 'I would know.' At his own expense, the builder took it down and redid it completely, saying that the chapel was an offering to the Lord and it should be perfect."6

After a strenuous summer of canning and gardening, Donna gave birth on 24 September 1951 to their third son, David Alma.

One night, after the Packers had retired, Boyd received a telephone call informing him that he had been nominated at the Democratic convention to run for the city council on their ticket. Boyd hesitated; he would need to talk with the principal Abel Rich in the morning before he could return the man's call. He was not sure whether he was Republican or Democrat. Boyd went to seminary certain that Brother Rich would get him out of this. Instead, his principal said, "Well, I guess we'll have to do all we can to see that we get you elected."

When 2,000 of the 2,100 possible registered voters turned out, Boyd received more votes than any other candidate.7

As a city councilor Boyd helped put through bond elections and helped to bring Brigham City's first sewer treatment plant into being. He found himself cast in the role of a community leader. Although he had no wish to continue in politics Boyd worked hard, learned from his associates, and experienced considerable personal growth. He also learned about taking criticism.

A member of his high priests quorum had eight acres of land with a two-story home that had once served as the co-op farmhouse. The land had generous irrigation rights serviced by a ditch that flowed past Boyd and Donna's home.

The city council moved to put sidewalks in that part of town. This meant that the man's ditch would have to be piped. He wanted a bigger pipe than that proposed because, he said, it would never hold the stream he needed. The city engineer told him it would be more than adequate. The council members upheld the decision. Not only did the home owner threaten to sue the city council but he also went to Boyd's home and scorched him with harsh words. As it happened, the installed pipe was twice as large as needed. Proved wrong, the man was more aggravated than ever.

While Boyd was yet in school all of Brigham City was saddened at the sudden death, on 14 August 1952, of President Abel S. Rich, who fell while helping repair the roof of his son's home in Ogden.

On the twenty-fourth of that same month Church President David O. McKay dedicated the Seventh Ward chapel. Having served as chairman of its building committee, Boyd gave the financial report during the service.8

By then Boyd realized that if he was to teach seminary in the way he wished he must emulate the Master Teacher. To understand how this could be, he determined to study the Lord's teaching methods and write his thesis about them. Certain faculty members objected to his choice of subject. Finally, however, Boyd received approval. Later his thesis9 became the basis for his much-used book Teach Ye Diligently.10

Dr. Wilford W. Richards, director of the institute and one of the great men of Boyd's acquaintance, was a strong advocate for Boyd and for his thesis. When Boyd had begun teaching seminary, Brother Richards wrote Dr. Franklin L. West highly approving his choice.

After completing his studies and his thesis, Boyd met his examining committee in late spring of 1953, tense and anxious to perform well. One committee member, however, seemed intent upon undermining his confidence. He spoke of the great privilege it was for Boyd to have been accepted to that university's graduate program and to have been instructed by so notable a faculty.

In answer, Dr. Richards spoke mildly, respectfully: "As you say, Boyd Packer is privileged to be the recipient of these advantages, but we, too, are privileged to teach such a sincere, hardworking student. Where would our university be without students?"

His words put Boyd at ease; he passed his orals with distinction, graduated with honors, and was elected to Phi Kappa Phi.

Boyd's parents and other family members attended the awards and honors convocation on 1 June 1953. A prominent professor of philosophy addressed himself to a lofty academic subject. As they left, Boyd's father, Ira Packer, said: "Well, that was a wonderful talk he gave. I think I would have enjoyed it even more if I had understood what he was talking about." Ira, however, readily understood Elder Harold B. Lee's message when he also spoke at the graduation exercises.

On 19 June 1953 Boyd and Donna's first daughter, Laurel Edith, was born.

With four children and plans for more, Boyd knew he must continue his education until he earned a doctorate. Only then could he qualify himself to increase his earning capacity. Thus he began the following school year to fill class requirements for that degree, distant though its attainment might be.

Boyd's focus on education was not limited to studies and seminary teaching but was also family directed. Realizing that a child learns best when he wants to know, he and Donna let no child's question go unanswered at the time of its asking. At one point he said, "If I were falling off the roof, I would stop in midair to answer one of the children."

On 23 November 1954 the Packers welcomed their fourth son, Russell LeGrand, into the family. And welcomed each child was, often hearing the parents say, "We are so glad you came to live with us," or "Without you in our family, there would be a big empty place."

Boyd is grateful for Donna's ability to create a spirit of peace to which the family gravitates. Always he could come home-home to orderliness, to a warm welcome, to a nourishing meal. No matter what riffles or problems might disturb the emotional climate in his outside world, he could count on a climate of peace at home. In turn Donna places a high value upon Boyd's support of decisions which she had to make in his absence; upon the power of his prayers; upon his wise family counsel, his skillful teaching, and his firm, kindly discipline of the children. They found that holding the children to a dependable schedule of naps, meals, play, chores, and bedtime helped not only in discipline but also in keeping them happier and more contented.

Boyd was not above learning from his children. "When our oldest son was a little fellow, he came in one day and in the course of conversation used, matter-of-factly, a profane word. It was worse than profane-it was a filthy word. I have always been grateful I restrained myself from spanking or punishing him in such a way that he never would forget the incident. Fortunately I said, 'Hey, where did you learn that word?' He told me he had heard it from one of the boys in the neighborhood. I said, 'That's not a good word.' He looked up at me in innocent surprise and said, 'It isn't? I didn't know that.' And he didn't know."11

Consistent teaching and guidance set proper bounds upon the children's behavior. To one who had spoken disrespectfully, Boyd would say: "Son, if you are in trouble with your mother, you are in big trouble with me. Do you understand?"

"Usually he would say yes, and I could tell him how we loved him and what a good boy he was. Then sooner or later he would prove it by changing his ways."

In appreciation, Donna tells how Boyd shared responsibility for the children's care. "If you have a new baby and another youngster cutting teeth, or one with a fever, you can be up and down twenty or thirty times a night. We finally divided our children into 'his' and 'hers' for night tending. I would get up for the new baby, and Boyd would tend the one cutting teeth. We schooled our ears to hear only the one over which we had charge and to sleep through the other's crying."

With five children the Packers found their small house crowded. Knowing of their desire for a yet larger family, Donna's father said one evening in early 1954: "I have heard that the owner of the old co-op farmhouse is going to sell, and you two ought to have it. It would be just right for you." The thought of its eight fertile acres, its water rights, its orchard and garden, and the old historic house sent Boyd and Donna's spirits soaring.

Its owner, however, was the man who had given Boyd that tongue-lashing over the water pipe issue, and there was still tension. Nevertheless Boyd lost no time in negotiating, and he succeeded in pacifying the man into accepting his offer. Despite the lengthy time it took to sell their small home, the family moved into the new one in July in order to harvest the garden and orchard. And they loved it. Even cleaning out the old basement was exciting. In it they found an antique string of Swedish sleigh bells that has ever since hung on their front door at Christmas.

Cleaning out the furnace room one day, Boyd, with a paper sack over his head and his face blackened from soot, carried out buckets of coal dust. Coming up the stairs he found Brother Tuttle and another seminary supervisor looking at him in disbelief. His embarrassment was washed away in their laughter.

That same year Boyd was selected by the Junior Chamber of Commerce as Brigham City's outstanding young man, and on 21 January 1955 he was given the Distinguished Service Award by that organization,12 a fitting end to his term as a city councilor.

At school's end he and Donna were invited to a dinner for seminary teachers at Aspen Grove in American Fork Canyon. Not wishing to leave the children, they declined, but were told, "We think you should be there." During the event President Ernest L. Wilkinson of Brigham Young University took Boyd outside and told him that he had been selected to serve as a supervisor of Church seminaries and institutes with Brother Tuttle under William E. Berrett.

After talking it over with Donna, Boyd accepted the position. For the next year he commuted to Provo, a distance of nearly a hundred miles. He also traveled extensively to observe and oversee the seminaries and institutes and their teachers. At the same time he finished his assignments in the stake high council and at the Intermountain Indian School.

The Packers' Brigham City experience culminated on 8 January 1956 with President David O. McKay's dedication of the chapel for Indian students just north of the school. That month there was a warm spell when the ground dried enough for Boyd to mow the lawns' shaggy winter growth in preparation for the dedication.

Elder Spencer W. Kimball came with President McKay and spoke at the meeting. Indian students gave prayers and musical numbers. By then 2,300 Indian students were enrolled in the school. Several hundred were now Church members.

Boyd recalls: "President McKay and Elder Kimball had overcoats that looked identical. Somehow they mistakenly put on each other's after the meeting. The President's came almost to Brother Kimball's ankles, and the sleeves of Elder Kimball's barely covered President McKay's elbows. Both were rich in humor and made the most of the situation."

1 Ensign, November 1987, pp. 17-18.

2 Donna S. Packer, personal history, p. 22.

3 Box Elder News Journal, 3 June 1949, p. 1.

4 Box Elder News Journal, 19 October 1949, p. 1.

5 Church News, 28 April 1979, p. 3.

6 Donna S. Packer, personal history, p. 22.

7 Box Elder News Journal, 7 November 1951.

8 LDS Seventh Ward Chapel, Brigham City, Utah Dedication Program, 24 August 1952.

9 "An Evaluation of the Teaching of Jesus in Terms of Selected Principles of Education" (Logan: Utah State Agricultural College, 1953).

10 Teach Ye Diligently (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975).
