Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Eighteen The New Revelation on the Priesthood

At the same time the LDS edition of the scriptures was being prepared for publication another matter was weighing heavily upon the soul of one of the Lord's great watchmen, President Spencer W. Kimball. Other latter-day prophets had wrestled with the same dilemma: that of obeying the divine command to preach the gospel to every kindred, tongue, and people, while being keenly aware that, because of race, some of those people were denied the full blessings of the gospel-that is, denied the priesthood and the temple ordinances. Thus these prophets had pleaded mightily with the Lord for answers to the problem, and none of them more intensely than President Kimball. Yet always the Spirit had indicated that the time had not yet come.

Now this prophet, small in physical stature but a spiritual giant, wrestled again, seeking and pleading in behalf of the faithful among all priesthood-denied people. Not only did he struggle, seek, and plead, but his brethren in the highest councils of the Church did so as well.

One day, during the Thursday temple meeting with his Counselors and the Twelve, President Kimball, who was pondering that matter, discussed it with his brethren. When it was Elder Packer's turn to speak, he read a scripture: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings" (D&C 124:49).

A few days later President Kimball asked Brother Packer where he would be the next Saturday. Elder Packer told him he would be speaking Friday evening at the Dixie College baccalaureate but would return by plane early on Saturday.

"Will you come to my office?" the President asked.

"Of course," Elder Packer responded.

Upon his return about one o'clock on Saturday, Brother Packer went directly to the Church Office Building. The security officer on duty said that the President was at home and wished Elder Packer to call as soon as he came into the building.

Reaching President Kimball by phone, Elder Packer offered, "I'll come right up."

"No, I'll come down and meet you."

Arriving shortly after this, the President entered his office. Elder Packer recalls his saying that he had "this thing" on his mind and wanted to talk about it. "There was no need to explain what this thing was," Elder Packer recalled. "We both knew how it was weighing upon him.

"He handed me his scriptures and said he'd like me to read to him from the revelations. So we started with the one from D&C 124:49 that I had read in the temple. For a couple of hours we just moved back and forth through the Doctrine and Covenants, the Book of Mormon, and the Pearl of Great Price, and then talked about what we read.

"The spirit of revelation seemed to be brooding upon the prophet that day. He asked me, assuming that the revelation was to come, how it might best be announced to the Church, and asked that I put something in writing. This I did and handed it to him a day or two later. He had asked one or two of the others to do the same."

On Thursday, 8 June 1978, in the Salt Lake Temple, the revelation was reaffirmed when the First Presidency and the Twelve approved the announcement that was to go out to the world. It was further reaffirmed in the temple on 9 June 1978 by all of the General Authorities available. They too unanimously approved the announcement.

The long-sought pronouncement that "all worthy male members of the Church may be ordained to the priesthood without regard for race or color" had become official.1

On 30 September 1978, at general conference, the assembled Saints voted unanimously to sustain the motion.2

Those of the Lord's watchmen who were present at those historic times will recall and have borne witness to the Spirit of revelation that attended them, and each has expressed gratitude for being part of the momentous experience. And none of the Twelve was more grateful for that day than Elder Boyd K. Packer.

From early on, his heart had gone out to faithful priesthood-denied people wherever they resided in the world. Close at hand were the black members of the Church in the Salt Lake Valley-the Genesis Group-whom he knew and encouraged. In the early '70s he was attending their Christmas social with his family. He told his brethren of the incident during their quarterly meeting on 17 December 1972. His youngest son had, much to his relief, climbed up on the lap of a big black Santa Claus, who said to the child, "I'll bet you have never seen a black Santa before, have you?" The three-year-old shook his head.

"Well, now," the Santa said, "I will tell you something. The white Santa is from the North Pole and the black Santa is from the South Pole."

Elder Packer continued: "We shook hands with all of them there, our brothers and sisters in that Genesis Group. They need our help, they need our prayers and our blessings and they need our attention. They really need our attention."

One who had received his help and attention was a tall black boy who reminded Elder Packer of one of his own sons. Another to whom he was drawn was the leader of the Genesis Group, Ruffin Bridgeforth, a faithful man.

Elder Packer said: "During President Harold B. Lee's administration he authorized us to have the brethren who belonged to the Genesis Group attend the priesthood session of general conference."

Shortly after the Official Declaration was ratified, Elder Packer recalls: "I went to President Kimball's office early on Friday morning. I told him that Brother Bridgeforth had not yet been ordained. He seemed surprised, knowing that of all these brethren, this man was the example, the pioneer. Then I asked how he would feel if we presented Ruffin to be a high priest instead of an elder? He pondered for a few minutes and said, 'Yes, that's right. You do that.' "

On Sunday during the sacrament meeting, when it came time for Brother Bridgeforth to be sustained and the stake president was about to stand, Elder Packer said, "President, have him presented to be a high priest.

"He was taken aback, but I assured him, 'President, it's all right.'

"After the meeting, we went to the Relief Society room for the ordination," Brother Packer continues. "Brother Bridgeforth invited members of the family whom he wished to be there."

After the ordination, Ruffin said that his wife would like to have a blessing. She was very feeble and had been brought in a wheelchair. Elder Packer readily agreed, but just as he was placing his hands upon her head he caught himself and said, "Ruffin, you now can give this blessing." And this he did.

There were many individual blessings proceeding from the new revelation, but Elder Packer later acknowledged in general conference an even more far-reaching blessing-that of having "the glorious revelation on the priesthood [come] just in time to be bound [in the new edition of the LDS scriptures] with all else that the Lord has revealed to His Saints in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times."3

It may be noted that precedent for its inclusion in the Doctrine and Covenants as Official Declaration-2 was President Wilford Woodruff's Declaration-1 on plural marriage, given eighty-eight years before.4

Helping to fulfill the priesthood promises of the new revelation in a land where they were singularly needed, President Kimball dedicated the São Paulo Temple in Brazil on 30 October 1978.5 Because peoples of widespread racial mixture reside in that country, it was especially gratifying that this prophet, who so loved all people, could be the one to open the doors of this new temple to all worthy members.

Elder Packer had carefully prepared his talk and then had it translated so that he might read it in Spanish. Before the dedication, however, President Kimball held a regional conference in Montevideo, Uruguay, Elder Packer being there with him. The priesthood meeting was held in a theater where they and other leaders were seated in large overstuffed chairs on the stage. Brother Packer sat next to the President.

Just as the meeting was about to begin, President Kimball, not feeling well, handed his conducting book to Boyd, saying, "Would you mind conducting?" Elder Packer hastily tucked the binder containing his talk for the temple dedication down beside the cushion of his chair before standing to conduct the meeting.

Returning to the hotel, he suddenly realized that in the press of conducting he had left his talk tucked in his chair at the theater. "Well," he recalls, "the talk could not be found and we were to leave early the next morning for São Paulo, where we would go directly to the temple dedication.

"Before going to bed I quickly wrote the story of my experience with the little Indian boy in Cuzco, Peru. Elder Robert E. Wells and his wife, Helen, then translated it for me and left it under the hotel room door about 2:00 A.M., enabling me to read it in Spanish at the dedication."

Learning enough Spanish to function in Latin America had been a long-term desire of Brother Packer's. He had determined to learn enough Spanish to get by as he traveled and ministered in those countries. For a three-week period during one summer vacation he had a young man tutor him for a couple of hours each week. Elder Packer made up cards and memorized some fundamental words. Then each time he was sent to Latin America he picked up and retained others. He had hoped to take a crash course in Spanish at the Language Training Center, but travel and meeting schedules prevented him.

Early in President Kimball's administration Elder Packer met Regional Representative Angel Abrea when in Argentina to reorganize the Mendoza Stake. They were interviewing together, but time ran short and it became necessary for them to split up in order to handle all of the interviews. Brother Packer felt fairly comfortable asking the usual questions in Spanish, but after a while one of the bishops spoke earnestly about a major problem. Elder Packer listened for about ten minutes and then called Brother Abrea to come in. "This bishop has a problem," he said. "Let me tell you what I think it is."

Brother Abrea talked with the bishop in Spanish and then said to Elder Packer, "You've got it exactly."

"This gave me courage," Elder Packer says. "I interviewed in Spanish and understood what was said that day. I felt overwhelmed by the experience, and when I came back I mentioned it in our report meeting at the temple. In the hall afterwards President Kimball sought me out, saying, 'I want to tell you what happened to you. You were given the gift of tongues. That gift has many expressions.' I was very touched by what he said. From that time on, although my Spanish is only about a quarter of an inch deep, I have tried to communicate with Spanish-speaking people in their language."

1 Doctrine and Covenants, Official Declaration-2, pp. 293-94.

2 Doctrine and Covenants, Official Declaration-2, p. 294.

3 Ensign, November 1982, p. 53.

4 Doctrine and Covenants, Official Declaration-1, pp. 291-92.

5 Deseret News 1991-92 Church Almanac, p. 270.
