Lucile C. Tate, Boyd K. Packer: A Watchman on the Tower ( 1995)

Chapter Twenty-Three The Art of Boyd K. Packer

Although Elder Packer's artistic talent has matured gradually, his subjects, themes, and inherent characteristics remain quite unchanged and are traceable from his youth. His subjects are family, animals, flowers, and the sites and associations of his boyhood home-but most often birds.

The membership of the Church has had brief glimpses of his paintings. In 1977 Deseret Book Company published Mothers, a booklet he wrote and illustrated with five sensitive bird paintings to honor mothers for their special day. In 1979 his book Teach Ye Diligently, was published, also by Deseret Book. Its jacket design was taken from his painting of eight family members, and its inside showed a number of his black-and-white sketches. In 1993 his small, charmingly illustrated A Christmas Parable was published by Bookcraft.

Brother Packer laments his lack of formal art training. He has moments of frustration over his lack of technical knowledge that sometimes makes it impossible for him to complete a subject as he visualizes it. When this happens he seeks help from those whose expertise exceeds his own in one phase or another of his work.

One time he came to such a point and did not know how to proceed. He sought help from James Christensen, who has made an international name for himself with his exquisite fantasy paintings. Jim told about it:

"He had three or four paintings for me to see. 'Look,' Brother Packer said, 'I don't need to be taught painting from the ground up. What I've got is what I've got; I know what I want to do, and what I want from you is a little help. What can I do better?'

"I gave him colors, I gave him brushes. Basically, then, I showed him some techniques. Then I looked at his paintings and said, 'This is a problem because of this; do this instead.' Then he said, 'What I'd like you to do is just paint on it a little and show me what you mean. Don't talk to me, show me.' So I did, and it was amazing. I came back three months later and he had applied everything I had shown him and more. You only have to tell that man something once. I wish I had him in one of my classes at BYU."

Brother Packer likes to paint, would like to paint better, but feels that his painting is adequate for its home application. But by those who know it is generally agreed that it is in his bird art that he reaches the apex of his artistic expression.

People hearing that Elder Packer carves birds sometimes think of decoys, as did a woman from California. But when she actually saw his bird carvings she said, "It was like seeing the Grand Canyon for the first time-so far above my expectations that it took my breath away." His carved birds in their settings of leaves or flowers often have that dramatic an effect upon the viewer.

A bird-carving friend, Lance Turner, who has won prizes in world competitions, said of Brother Packer's work: "Boyd is a great student of nature and particularly of birds. He has an acute sense of observation. He sees a lot of the subtleties that I would overlook-turning a foot, for instance, or having one foot down, or understanding the physical reasons that a bird hangs on a branch so it doesn't fall off. He is a master of the natural attitudes of birds and animals. His compositions and his bird attitudes are just beautiful."

Continuing, he said: "In carving, as in all else Boyd does, he attacks things with vigor; he has to. He can only snatch a few minutes here and there to do what he does."

His friend's comment explains why a bird carving often takes a year to complete. And Brother Packer's accuracy of detail, proportion, and attitude are hard won. He is a lifelong observer of birds, but also a lifelong student of their habitats, flight patterns, and characteristics. His reference books on birds number close to a hundred. And he does not depend upon observation and study alone, but he works from museum specimens-counting and measuring every feather. Of this his artist friend said, "If you get the proportions right and if you get the attitudes right, then the sheer mechanics of carving becomes secondary."

What the observer of his bird carvings experiences, however, is not the mechanics but sheer wonder that a piece of basswood and some brush loads of paint can be so constructed that it seems actually to breathe.

From boyhood his art has been characterized by strength and action. Even in repose, his subjects are never static. His keen sense of observation allows him, as his friend said, to capture the telling movement, the identifying attitude, and the accurate detail that give his subjects their aliveness. Even at a great distance he can identify a species by its flight pattern. "Are those geese?" a fellow observer asked about a formation in the distant sky. He replied, "No, they are ibis, a wading bird, related to the heron; the sacred ibis (threskiornis aethiopic) was venerated by the ancient Egyptians."

Underlying the visual expression of his art are basic qualities of character that guide the creative process beyond the media used. His reverence for life is apparent in his visual creations. At his touch, the physical is raised to the level of the spiritual. Being in tune with the source of inspiration, not only does he draw upon it to guide his hands but, while his hands create, his mind is refueled and refreshed, making of his art a welcome respite from travels, pressures, and challenges that are an ongoing part of the ministry. Also in the Packer home is the peace and quietude he requires, so that while his hands create, thoughts and insights come for problem solving, for pure knowledge to flow, and for revelation to come, not for his art alone but also for his talks, his teaching worldwide, and his input within the General Authority councils.

Basic to his creative process is Elder Packer's love of work, his total disregard for tedium, his discipline, and his efficiency. When he tackles something there is no wasted motion. Even in ordinary chores his approach is direct and knowing. He picks berries and fruit with two hands. He orders seeds for spring planting in January and plants before the recommended time. He and the grandchildren rake winter leaves between spring snows so early bulbs can shoot up free. For early spring color he plants primroses and pansies in outdoor tubs before the snow has left the ground.

Preparation is basic to his approach. Whether for a chore, a talk, or a painting, he lays it out in his mind, has materials at hand, and begins at the first opportunity. When a task loses luster, he takes a walk to the pond, has a word with a grandchild, or observes a bird's flight. These refresh him and unstop temporary blocks to his creative power so that he can return with fresh perspective to whatever he left. Then, too, prayer and pondering provide inspired impressions.

Elder Packer's artistic bent is as integral a part of him as are spirituality, compassion, steadiness, and humor. All are interwoven into a rich and complex entity that is constant yet ever-changing under the light of inspiration and revelation.

A chapter on the art of Boyd K. Packer would be incomplete without the homespun creativity of his companion, Donna, for she is artistic and innovative in making home a delight as well as a refuge. The casual observer's eye may rest upon Elder Packer's painting of the Savior and totally miss Donna's fabric-covered wall upon which his picture is displayed. Or the viewer may see only his blue jay carving or his painting of mountain peaks and not be aware of her handiwork with lace valances, pillows, and afghan throws that give the exact feeling of warmth and homeyness that are the perfect foil for his art. Her flower arrangements and table settings reveal her creativity. And if aware, one has not far to look for upholstered chairs, quilts, or children's toys that bespeak Donna's talent.

Her homemaking skills have developed out of the necessity to create beauty with meager means. As a result she still loves to remake, recycle, and redo. Both she and Elder Packer find satisfaction in working with used materials. Their creative imaginations see possibilities for enhanced rejuvenation in the old or the used. In this their creativity harmoniously dovetails.

Donna also encourages him to paint or carve as respite from the heavy pressures of the ministry. She helps make time for these by saving him from tasks that she can do. And she is uncritical. As a result he can always come home, to work, to eat and rest, or to create in an atmosphere of encouragement and peace. She is an eternal gift to him, and often he will say, "Without Donna I am nothing."

1 "Prayers and Answers," Ensign, November 1979, p. 21.

2 "The Candle of the Lord," Ensign, January 1983, p. 52.

3 Ensign, November 1979, pp. 20, 21.

4 That All May Be Edified, pp. 334-40.

5 Carlos E. Asay, memorandum, 15 February 1991.

6 Told by Boyd K. Packer at an informal gathering.

7 BYU Indian Week Address, 15 February 1979.

8 Boyd K. Packer, China Report.

9 Dallin H. Oaks, "Getting to Know China," BYU Devotional, 12 March 1991.

10 "Funerals-A Time for Reverence," Ensign, November 1988, p. 20.

11 At the funeral of General Leon Claron Packer, Brigham City, Utah, 29 November 1985.

12 That All May Be Edified, p. 119.

13 "Covenants," Ensign, May 1987, p. 22.

14 LeGrand Richards, "The Gift of the Holy Ghost," Ensign, November 1979, pp. 76-77.
