FIRST TEMPTATION TO MISSIONARIES.

It is not an infrequent occurrence that, when a man is called to take a mission, temptation is at once presented to him to make excuses; and he can see many apparently good reasons why he should be excused from the obligation; and here begins his first struggle. A striking illustration of this is conveyed in the following narrative:

Several years ago a man of very moderate pecuniary circumstances, and who had a family of small children dependent upon him for support, was engaged as a common laborer on a railway. One night he had a dream that impressed itself upon his mind. All that he could distinctly remember of this dream was that he received two letters, the contents of which he did not know. One letter, he understood by his dream, was from the manager of the railway company for which he was working, and the other was from the President of the Church, who at that time was the late John Taylor.

The man felt that this simple yet unusual dream had some significance, though he could not at the time satisfy himself as to its meaning. Pretty soon, however, it was made clear to him, and he was led to acknowledge that it was an inspired dream given to prepare his mind for what was coming. Word was conveyed to him from one of the railroad department managers that he had been selected to occupy another position in the employ of the company, where his work would be more agreeable and he would receive a larger salary. This was indeed joyful news to him, as he was then with his small earnings, having a hard struggle to make a livelihood for himself and his family. Almost simultaneously with this welcome message came a letter from the President of the Church, stating that he had been selected to take a mission to a far distant land, and asking him if he was willing to accept of the call. Here was a temptation placed before him. The questions that for a time perplexed him were: should he respond at once to the call to fulfill a mission? or would he not be justified in excusing himself for a year or two, and by so doing, with his advance in wages, save means to support himself and family during his absence? However justifiable the latter proposition appeared to him he rejected it and decided to accept the mission. He fulfilled it to the best of his ability, and in later years testified that he was better off financially than he would likely have been had he remained with his former employers and received the advanced wages offered.

A similar instance to the one just narrated was that of a young man who recently filled a mission. After receiving his call to go upon a foreign mission he sought and secured work in a mine. By this employment he hoped to raise sufficient means by the time set for his departure to take him to his field of labor, and, if possible, something towards paying his expenses while absent. The work he received about the mine was ordinary labor; but his employers soon learned that he was a trustworthy man, and just about the time when he had promised to start upon his mission an offer of a better position, with good wages, was made to the young man. Under other circumstances he would gladly have accepted such a tempting offer; but he had already given his word that he would accept the call into the Lord's vineyard, and he was determined to keep his promise. He refused the situation so kindly offered, and went upon the mission assigned him. He lost nothing in the estimation of his employers by this course. He had been straight-forward with them from the first, having informed them of his intention to leave at a certain time, and of the object he had in view when he applied for work. So well pleased were they with his services that they assured him he could get employment from them on his return if he desired it.

Some few years ago an Elder in the Church entertained the desire to some day fulfill a mission abroad. He did not feel that he was in a condition financially to go at that time, as he was in debt to the amount of some twenty-six hundred dollars. He calculated that if he was fortunate in his affairs he would be able to pay his debts in the course of a few years, and would then offer his services as a missionary. Before he had an opportunity to pay any of his debt he was called to take a mission to Europe. He at once made up his mind that he would try and go, trusting in the Lord to prepare the way for him. He went upon his mission and before his return his wife had the whole of his indebtedness paid off. His business was that of a farmer, and, although during his absence his work had to be entrusted to more or less disinterested parties, his farm yielded better returns, than his neighbors' farms. He acknowledged that the Lord had certainly blessed him for his obedience to the call made of him. Besides this, he enjoyed better health while away from home than he had for some years previously. He has recently returned after fulfilling a useful mission, feeling thankful for the privilege of going abroad in the service of the Lord.

Some who have been asked if willing to perform a mission have suggested that their call be postponed for a certain length of time in order to become better prepared. A number of such missionaries have been heard to admit that it would have been better for them if they had accepted the call at once; and some have, after asking for an extension of time, changed their minds and reported themselves ready to go without availing themselves of the time given for preparation, finding that the longer they remained the farther they were from being ready.

The late Apostle Parley P. Pratt, in his "Autobiography," relates that upon one occasion he hesitated before starting upon a mission that had been assigned him. He was in debt, and was building a house, and desired to finish it before leaving. Before it was finished the house took fire and was burned. Elder Pratt then decided at once that he was ready to fulfill his mission. He looked upon his misfortune as a rebuke for not responding when first called. Upon deciding to go, his friends came to his assistance, his debts were cancelled, and thus his way was made clear to perform his duty.
