PROVIDENTIAL AID RECEIVED.

After accepting a call to fulfill a mission, Elders sometimes find they are without the necessary funds at hand to carry them to their destination. But the assurance that prompts them to respond to the call also gives them confidence that this difficulty can be met and overcome in some way. The feeling that "where there's a will there's a way" seems to actuate their whole being, and very seldom if ever are they disappointed in their expectations.

A few years ago a young man was called to fulfill a mission and had reported himself as being willing to go. He hastily prepared to start by paying what debts he was owing and providing some things that his family were in need of, after which he found that he had no means left for paying his way to his destination, which was in a foreign country, and the time set for his departure was near at hand. A few days previous to the time of leaving, an acquaintance met him, and during the conversation that ensued the missionary informed his friend of his call to take a mission, but said nothing about his financial circumstances. Before parting the young friend handed the missionary a silver coin with this remark: "Here, I want to give you this to help you along; and you will find that others will help you, as I found in my experience when about to go on a mission a few years ago."

This was the first piece of money he had received to aid him on his way, but, true to his friend's words, others helped him, and money came from several sources where he did not expect anything, and had no reason to expect it. The result was that on the day of his departure he not only had enough to pay his way but sufficient to meet necessary expenses while absent during the first year of his mission.

Another such instance occurred in the experience of an Elder called to go to England several years ago. After receiving and accepting of his call he made what preparations he could to comply with it. He was however disappointed somewhat in getting some means due him. The result was that on the day previous to that on which he expected to start he did not have sufficient means to take him to New York. He knew not from what source he could get money, but still hoped to be able to go on the day appointed. That night he dreamed that he received one hundred dollars, but awoke in the morning and found himself in the same financial condition as on the day before. But his hopes were not blighted. He concluded that if the dream meant anything it was an indication that he would still succeed. During the day and before the time set for his departure he received just one hundred dollars from an entirely unexpected source, and was thereby enabled to start on his journey at the time appointed.

In the "Life of John Taylor" is related an interesting episode which shows how he was helped when in need of funds to pay his way across the ocean. It was in the year 1839, just after the Saints had been driven in a body from their homes in Missouri. Apostle Taylor, with others of his quorum, had been called as a missionary to England. With much difficulty, owing to sickness, he made his way to New York, but without means to proceed any farther. His experience in New York is here given as recorded in his biography:

"When Elder Taylor arrived in New York, Elder Woodruff had been there some time, and was all impatience to embark for England, but as yet the former had no means with which to pay for his ocean passage. Although supplied with all the means necessary on his journey thus far, after paying his cab-fare to the house of Brother Pratt he had but one cent left. Still he was the last man on earth to plead poverty, and in answer to inquiries of some of the brethren as to his financial circumstances, he replied that he had plenty of money.

"This was reported to Brother Pratt, who the next day approached Elder Taylor on the subject:

"Elder Pratt: 'Brother Taylor, I hear you have plenty of money?'

"Elder Taylor: 'Yes, Brother Pratt, that's true.'

"Elder Pratt: 'Well, I am about to publish my 'Voice of Warning' and 'Millennial Poems,' I am very much in need of money, and if you could furnish me with two or three hundred dollars I should be very much obliged.'

"Elder Taylor: 'Well Brother Parley, you are welcome to anything I have, if it will be of service to you.'

"Elder Pratt: 'I never saw the time when means would be more acceptable.'

"Elder Taylor: 'Then you are welcome to all I have.'

"And putting his hand into his pocket Elder Taylor gave him his copper cent. A laugh followed.

"'But I thought you gave it out that you had plenty of money,' said Parley.

"'Yes, so I have,' replied Elder Taylor. 'I am well clothed, you furnish me plenty to eat and drink and good lodging; with all these things and a penny over, as I owe nothing, is not that plenty?'

"That evening at a council meeting Elder Pratt, proposed that the brethren assist Elder Taylor with means to pay his passage to England, as Brother Woodruff was prepared and desired to go. To this Elder Taylor objected, and told the brethren if they had anything to give to let Parley have it, as he had a family to support and needed means for publishing. At the close of the meeting Elder Woodruff expressed his regret at the course taken by Elder Taylor, as he had been waiting for him, and at last had engaged his passage.

"Elder Taylor: 'Well Brother Woodruff, if you think it best for me to go, I will accompany you.'

"Elder Woodruff: 'But where will you get the money?'

"Elder Taylor: 'Oh, there will be no difficulty about that. Go and take a passage for me on your vessel, and I will furnish you the means.'

"A Brother Theodore Turley, hearing the above conversation, and thinking that Elder Taylor had resources unknown to himself or Brother Woodruff, said: 'I wish I could go with you, I would do your cooking and wait on you.'

"The passage to be secured was in the steerage—these missionaries were not going on flowery beds of ease—hence the necessity of such service as Brother Turley proposed rendering. In answer to this appeal, Elder Taylor told Brother Woodruff to take a passage for Brother Turley also.

"At the time of making these arrangements Elder Taylor had no money, but the Spirit had whispered to him that means would be forthcoming, and when had that still, small voice failed him! In that he trusted, and he did not trust in vain. Although he did not ask for a penny of anyone, from various persons in voluntary donations he received money enough to meet his engagements for the passage of himself and Brother Turley, but no more."
