FIRST EXPERIENCE IN THE FIELD.

The excitement or the interest of travel generally keeps up one's spirits while on the way; but soon the journey is at an end. Arriving at the headquarters of the mission to which they have been appointed, the missionaries are assigned to various conferences or fields of labor. During the short time they have traveled together they have become quite attached to each other. They appreciate one another the more through being alike newly separated from near friends and traveling through strange lands among strange people. It is another affecting experience to part from traveling companions; and when each one finds himself singly cast among strangers, or rather among new friends, he is for a little while lonesome. If he allows himself to take a cheerless view of the situation he may feel somewhat home-sick; and if he makes no effort to cast aside his gloomy thoughts he will soon be feeling extremely unhappy. He can encourage this feeling until it becomes a serious malady that can only be cured by the most heroic treatment, or else have the cause removed by a far less heroic method—that is by returning home at once. On the other hand, if the newly-arrived missionary fully determines to go to work immediately, to become familiar with the labor before him, to get acquainted with the people, and make himself at home among them, and take advantage of every circumstance that surrounds him, he will soon feel contented so far as personal comfort is concerned.

Although people are inclined to regard it as a trifling ailment, and extend no sympathy for those who suffer with it, homesickness is a very serious affliction. It is even fatal in some instances. A soldier of a Massachusetts regiment is reported to have died in Cuba recently through homesickness. Fortunately there are remedies for the complaint in cases where missionaries are attacked with it. The most effective remedy is for the one afflicted to go to work at once upon his missionary labors. He may meet with rebuffs, but such experience will be just what is needed to dispel the feeling of home-sickness and to inspire him with a determination to battle against discouragement.

A young man who lately returned from the mission field related that when he first arrived in his place of labor he felt symptoms of home-sickness. He determined to shake off the feeling at once, and went out to deliver tracts and seek to get Gospel conversations with the people. The first man he met opposed him and used considerable abuse. This treatment aroused him to put forth efforts to defend the cause he represented as well as his own character, for both were attacked. It also furnished a favorable opportunity for doing so, as the man made charges which he felt fully able to refute. The young man did not retaliate with abuse, but patiently and in a kindly spirit undertook to set the truth before his misinformed opponent. His pleasant manner and humble spirit conquered his antagonist and made him a lasting friend. The missionary received a standing invitation to his house, and besides this the gentleman who first opposed afterwards, with his family, attended meetings and they all became interested in the Gospel. The missionary continued his active efforts and had no more feelings of home-sickness. He subsequently became one of the most energetic and successful workers in the field.

Quite a number of missionaries who at first have become somewhat discouraged, and partially made up their minds to return home, have had dreams just at the critical time, and have been influenced thereby to continue in the field. They have dreamed that they had returned home without fulfilling their mission. The humiliation and chagrin they experienced in their dreams appeared so real that they have thereby had their minds changed by it, and once more determined to continue their efforts.

There have been instances where missionaries have returned home on account of home-sickness, but almost invariably they have felt dissatisfied with themselves until they have returned to their fields of labor and made a more successful effort to fill a mission.

It sometimes occurs that a missionary goes to his field of labor with a misapprehension of the nature of the work. Returned Elders in reporting their labors abroad often speak of the success they met with, and of the opportunities and needs there are for missionary work in the world. In listening to such reports a person sometimes gets the idea that those who go out as missionaries will find people anxiously waiting for them, and ready to receive their message. A missionary soon learns that such is not the case, and sometimes feels that it is only a waste of time for him to remain and try to do anything. How frequently has the remark been made by a newly arrived missionary, "Why, I could do more good at home than I am doing here!" But he soon discovers that to gain success he must work for it. If the people will not come to him, he finds that he must go to them. He must awaken an interest in the message he bears, and to do this he must be patient and diligent as well as prayerful. It is a common remark among missionaries that they are just beginning to do real missionary work that is satisfactory to themselves when they are about to be released.
