LACK OF ABILITY.

If he has not done so before, a young missionary, just beginning his labors, will soon discover his lack of ability to express his thoughts as he would like to. He may fully believe in the Gospel or may even have a strong testimony of its truth, yet he will find that it is not so easy to intelligently and fluently explain his reasons for the belief within him. He may be somewhat familiar with passages of scripture that go to prove the truth of the ideas he entertains concerning the Gospel but cannot readily turn to nor repeat these passages. By contrasting his ability in this line with that of missionary companions who have been longer in the field, he keenly senses this fact. As is sometimes the case, he may have gone to his field with the expectation that the Lord, through His Holy Spirit would inspire him with words to say, immediately when he made the attempt to speak, without any study or thought upon his own part. In his little experience at home he might have observed the remarkable improvement in some young man's speaking abilities after performing a mission. Not knowing what discipline this particular young missionary had to go through while absent, a person may thoughtlessly get the idea that his ability was acquired without much effort.

It is not long, however, before the new missionary realizes that it is necessary for him to do his part if he expects to make progress. He learns the truth of the saying, "The Lord helps those who help themselves." He discovers that he must store his mind with knowledge in order that the Holy Spirit may bring things to his remembrance. He finds that the Lord does not, unless for special purposes, reveal direct through His Spirit truths that are already known to mankind: for has He not commanded His children to "search the scriptures," to seek "out of the best books words of wisdom," and to "seek learning even by study, and also by faith"? These facts dawn upon his mind in an early stage of his experience. His very first attempt to present the Gospel in private conversation or by public speaking may cause him to realize the necessity of study and preparation. He may perchance, as is most likely, be confronted with a question that he cannot answer. He is baffled for the time being, but it only serves as an incentive to study and prepare to meet the question in the near future.

The writer recollects hearing of an instance where a young missionary who had newly arrived in the field, went to visit his relatives with the view of talking to them about the Gospel. His relatives, thinking perhaps that they were not well enough posted to discuss the subject with him and show wherein he was in error, as they supposed, sent for their minister to have him hear and answer their missionary kinsman's doctrines. The result of the conversation was very humiliating to the young missionary. While he knew he had the truth, the minister was easily able to vanquish him in argument, being versed in theological sophistry and posted on the scriptural passages that suited his purpose. The effect of the interview proved to be of much benefit to the Elder, although embarrassing at the first. The experience made him resolve to study earnestly and meet his opponent at a later date when he would set forth the claims of his people in a more satisfactory manner. This resolution he carried out. After preparing himself he sought another interview with the same minister at the home of his relatives. This time he was enabled to confound the clergyman in every argument brought forth to oppose him.

A somewhat similar instance was that of another missionary who had been asked some questions regarding the doctrines of the Latter-day Saints which he was not able to answer satisfactorily to himself. He felt deeply mortified on account of his inability, and undertook to study the questions thoroughly that he might not again be found unable to answer them. He afterwards remarked that he had never studied so hard before in his life; but he accomplished his object and felt well repaid for his efforts, as they brought so much enlightenment to his mind.

Being compelled to beat a retreat may be somewhat disheartening for the moment, but such an experience is what is needed to develop within the mind of the missionary a thorough knowledge of the first principles of the Gospel. With this added knowledge comes enlightenment through the Holy Spirit, and his testimony of the truth of the Gospel is strengthened. The more he learns about the Gospel the more beauty and truth he discovers in it, and the greater is his faith. His interest in the work grows, his enthusiasm is awakened and he becomes developed in many ways. He is more anxious to declare his message to the people and bear testimony to what he knows. His dread of obstacles decreases, and he actually takes pleasure in surmounting difficulties that arise. Opposition is a stimulant which he rather likes to meet.
