DISCOURAGING PROSPECTS—PLEASING RESULTS.

It frequently happens that a missionary works until nearly discouraged before he discovers any fruits of his labors. A young man who labored as a missionary in Great Britain some few years ago had an experience of this kind. He and his companion had spent considerable time in one field. They had labored faithfully and earnestly, but saw no favorable result. At last the Elder prayed to know whether he should remain in the district longer or report to his president the apparent conditions and get an appointment to some other field. His prayer was answered by a dream wherein he was shown that there were a few persons in the district who would soon request baptism at his hands. He was much comforted and encouraged by this dream and related it to his companion. They both remained in their field of labor, and it was not long before several of those who had listened to their testimonies applied for baptism.

The missionary who faithfully, patiently and persistently continues his labors in the field assigned him is invariably rewarded for his efforts, as many a one can testify. He may not baptize many, but frequently he may be the means of bringing the truth to some honest soul who is ready to receive it with his whole heart. Where such is the case the Elder feels fully repaid for his work if no other result of his efforts is visible.

Some few years since another young missionary in Great Britain was sent to a certain district to labor, where the prospects were not so bright as desirable. He, however, continued earnestly and humbly to perform his duty in bearing testimony to the people. He was there for months without seeing any results. But eventually he was led to a family who believed his testimony and embraced the Gospel. This family proved to be most excellent people, and their influence and energy were the means of bringing others into the fold, and the branch which was almost lifeless before soon became a most lively and prosperous one. The missionary felt more than repaid for his labors when he saw how they had been blessed of the Lord.

A similar occurrence took place in another conference of the same mission about the same time as that just related. A missionary had spent some eighteen months in one town. During that time he had several companions one after the other who labored with him, and between them they tracted the town quite thoroughly. Their labors in other directions to get the Gospel before the people were also diligently pursued, but apparently without any good results. The Elder who had spent so much time there was then released to return home, his last companion missionary was sent to another field, and others took their places in this particular town. It was not long, however, before these new missionaries began to reap a harvest of souls as the result of their predecessors' planting of the Gospel seed. A number of people were baptized within a few weeks, and, with the few old members of the Church residing in the town, a lively branch was established there. This happy result was of course greatly due to the efforts of the Elders who first labored there so long and faithfully, and who, no doubt at times felt discouraged at the prospects before them.

Missionaries are frequently led in a strange way to those who are searching after the truth; and often people of this character are brought in contact with the Elders in a remarkable manner. Not long since some missionaries were laboring in a certain district in England. In performing their duties they frequently passed a certain shop or store in the neighborhood of their lodging place. The gentleman who kept the shop, as well as his wife, noticed them pass the door, and recognized that they were Americans. Soon their interest in these strange men was awakened. They did not know that they were ministers of the Gospel, but felt impressed to make their acquaintance. At last the shop-keeper requested his wife to invite them in the next time they passed, stating that he desired to talk with them. His good wife soon saw one of the Elders passing and she stepped out and asked him if he and his companions would call and have a talk with her husband when they had the time to spare. Of course the missionaries were quite willing to comply with the request. They were looking for opportunities to present their message to the people. When they called to visit the family they explained their business, taught them the Gospel, which the man and his wife gladly accepted; and soon the Elders were made to feel as much at home in their midst as though they had been acquainted for years.

The following is an incident of missionary experience that recently occurred in Ireland: Two young Elders were one day distributing tracts in a small village. One visited on one side of the only street in the place and his companion took the opposite side. While going along in the performance of this duty one of the missionaries called at a place where he found a man and his wife digging potatoes. A tract was offered to the man, but he was not in a humor to receive "Mormon" literature, so he gruffly ordered the Elder off his premises, adding the threat that if he did not go he would brain him with his spade. His wife was not so unkind, and she remarked that she would accept the tract, saying that it would not do her any harm. "And where are ye from?" she inquired, recognizing the Elder was a stranger to the country. The young man replied that he was from Utah, in America. "From Utah!" she exclaimed, "and do you know our Micky?" The Elder replied that he could not say as to that, for he did not know what the full name of her son might be. "He works in the——mine, in Utah, do you know him!" said the woman in her anxiety to hear what he knew about her far-off son. The young man said he also had worked in that same mine, and if she would state his name he could answer the question. She at once gave her son's name, and sure enough he was known to the missionary. "O, yes," said he, "I am acquainted with him. We used to sleep in the same bunk!" With this the old lady clasped the young man in her arms exclaiming, "The Lord bless ye; and ye're acquainted with our Micky! and his father was goin' to brain ye wid the shpade!" She held to the young man and wept for joy. The missionary's companion, seeing from a distance the woman's actions, thought his friend was in trouble and hastened to the premises. The situation was soon made clear to him, and both were invited into the house and treated with the greatest of kindness.
