EFFECT OF HEARING THE GOSPEL.

There is no way of telling just how much good one does in distributing tracts and in bearing his humble testimony to the people, or how far-reaching are the results of his efforts. In a letter written by Apostle Anthon H. Lund from Stockholm, Sweden, to the Millennial Star is related the following incident.

"How a tract may preach the Gospel and bring conviction to the soul was illustrated in the case of a lady in Angermanland, related by Elder Holmgren. She had gotten hold of a tract called 'The Voice of Truth,' written by Erastus Snow. She learned it nearly by heart, and not knowing the address of the Saints, she wrote to the president of the 'Mormons' in Salt Lake City, and from there the Elders here were informed of her address. They found her anxiously awaiting them, and at once she obeyed the Gospel. She keeps a little store, and is always ready to explain our doctrines to her customers."

Another similar circumstance is related by Apostle Lund. In substance it is here given: A gentleman whose residence was in Belgium, while on a visit to London, met one of our missionaries, who gave him a pamphlet setting forth our doctrines. The gentleman took it home, and, out of curiosity, read it through. He was deeply impressed with its contents, and became anxious to see a "Mormon" Elder, but could not get the address of any. He therefore wrote to the President of the Church, asking for more information concerning the Gospel and inquiring where he could find some missionary of the Church. The letter of inquiry was forwarded to the president of the Netherlands Mission, who sent an Elder to visit the writer of it. The Elder called upon the inquirer after truth, and the latter listened with deep interest to the explanations of the Gospel. Before the Elder left the city the gentleman requested baptism.

Many years ago a gentleman heard a Latter-day Saint missionary proclaiming the Gospel in an open-air meeting in India. He heard nothing further of the message at that time. He afterwards returned to his native country, Great Britain, and not long ago heard some of our Elders preaching in a meeting in South Wales. The first testimony he heard had made a lasting impression upon his mind, and when he again heard the same glorious message he investigated the claims set forth by the Elders and accepted the Gospel.

A gentleman who joined the Church some few years ago in the Leeds Conference of the British Mission stated that the first Latter-day Saint missionary he met impressed him by his humble and unassuming manner. He was more impressed by the Elder's demeanor than with the subject of his conversation, and while in his presence for the first time he believed the Elder was indeed a servant of God. The man did not at once embrace the Gospel, but undertook to investigate it. In the meantime the young missionary was released from his labors and returned home, not knowing what would be the result of the humble testimony he bore to this particular person.

In 1884 Elders C. F. Christensen and W. F. Garner, two missionaries laboring in Carter County, Tennessee, were arrested on a false charge, and taken to jail. It was at a time when excitement concerning the missionaries in the South ran high. While on their way to the place of confinement, one of the brethren remarked, "We might preach to these men as they did to the jailor of old." These words and other remarks made upon that occasion made a lasting impression upon one of the gang of men who were with the officer who made the arrest, and from that time he began to search for the true Gospel. But he never saw any more "Mormon" Elders until 1893, although he had read some of our Church works. At that time he was prepared for baptism, and he and his wife received the Gospel. He afterwards wrote to Elder Garner, informing him of his conversion, and what led to it.

Such experiences as the ones related below are sometimes met with while tracting. The narrator is Elder Frederick Scholes, who at the time, June, 1894, was a traveling Elder in the British Mission.

"I had just left a Primitive Methodist minister after a prolonged conversation, and called at the next house, at which a lady answered the door and asked me to step inside. I commenced to talk of the Gospel message I had been sent to proclaim, and found her an attentive listener. She informed me that she had been praying to know which of the different religions was true, believing that the Bible is true, and that there is but 'one Lord, one faith, one baptism.' In answer to her prayers she had a manifestation, or a vision, and was carried away to a large hall; here she saw a man preaching the Gospel to her; after preaching to her for some time, he left her, saying: 'I will see you again and preach the Gospel to you.' During her recital of this manifestation she shed tears of joy, for her heart was full. She had desired to hear further of this person whom she had seen. Now she had that privilege, for she informed me that I was that person; she recognized me when she opened the door, and the words I had addressed to her were similar to the words spoken to her in the vision. I felt thankful to learn that I was chosen to bring 'glad tidings of great joy' to one who was searching after truth. I gave her some of our literature, with the admonition to read and learn further of the doctrine of which I had spoken. She has told me since then that she believes and will be baptized. On June 28, I had called at a number of houses leaving at each some tracts, and as usual informed the people I would call again in a few days and leave a more advanced tract, and also endeavor to answer all questions they might ask. One family, upon learning what faith the tracts represented, sent one of the children running after me with the tracts, saying they did not want them. A number would not accept a tract under any consideration.

"My next experience was with a minister. A lady answered my knock and accepted the tracts. I informed her that I would call again, and leave another tract, and endeavor to answer any question they might ask. I had gone but a short distance from the house when the gentleman of the house hurriedly stepped out, coatless and hatless, and hailed me. I returned, whereupon he gave me back the tracts which I had just left, saying he did not want them, he had heard somewhat of the 'Mormons,' but did not agree with their teachings. I inquired in what way he differed with them. He said the question would lead to a discussion and he had not time to talk with me, repeating that he had no need of the tracts. Having a 'Morgan tract' in my pocket, I offered it to him, asking him to read it. After a few excuses he accepted it. He then asked me a number of questions which I answered, and, becoming interested, he took out his watch and said he had fifteen minutes to spare, and asked if I would step into the house. He led the way into the drawing room, remarking that we would have a pipe and a chat; as I did not use tobacco, he asked me to have some tea. Not using tea, he asked if I would take coffee or chocolate. As I used neither he became solicitous as to what I did drink, and I answered, water or milk; whereupon he ordered milk and butter and bread brought up into the drawing room. I partook of the refreshments provided, and he smoked his pipe, and thus I had the privilege of conversing with him, fully three-quarters of an hour. Upon leaving he gave me his card and an invitation to call again. I not only left him the tracts he at first refused, but a full supply of the tracts I had with me. The repulsive demeanor he at first manifested, mellowed down into a more friendly attitude."

Such pleasing incidents as the first one narrated in the above letter are of not infrequent occurrence in the mission field. People have often been informed by dream or vision of the coming of missionaries with the Gospel message to deliver to them.

Two young Elders laboring in Southern Illinois after holding a meeting were approached by a young man who told them that his sister, living some distance from where they were, desired to meet them. When in the neighborhood, they called upon her, and she told them that she had seen them before and that their faces were familiar. They remarked that they had never before been in that neighborhood. The lady then explained that she had seen them in a dream. They gave her some tracts to read, and she soon applied for baptism, having been assured in vision that they were messengers of truth.

Sometimes a missionary's labors produce an unexpected result. It is difficult to get some people who show an interest in the Gospel convinced of the necessity of baptism. Often, though, when they are fully convinced they readily obey. An Elder who was recently engaged in missionary labors abroad made the acquaintance of a lady whom he met while distributing tracts. She seemed to be favorably impressed with his teachings; and the scriptural proofs he advanced in support of his claim that baptism was essential to salvation were convincing to her. Her admission of this fact led the missionary to believe that she might accept the Gospel; but upon a subsequent visit to her home he was given to understand that there was no more need of him calling upon her to talk upon the Gospel, as he had already shown her the necessity of baptism, and she had complied with that ordinance by having her minister baptize her.

Another missionary who had made the acquaintance of a lady called upon her and her husband a few times to talk with them upon religion. Having explained to them upon previous visits the first principles of the Gospel, the Elder finally ventured to advance a little further. He took occasion to state the views of the Latter-day Saints concerning the eternity of the marriage covenant—that a man and woman might be married not only for this life but also for the hereafter. On learning this the woman replied: "Why, bless your soul, if that's what you believe in I want nothing to do with you. I've had enough of my husband in this life already!"
