SIGNS THAT FOLLOW BELIEVERS.

Besides the miraculous aid and protection frequently afforded them in their labors, the missionaries abroad often have occasion to note remarkable manifestations of the Lord's power and goodness towards others.

The signs that Christ promised should follow believers are as much in evidence in these days as in former dispensations. The Latter-day Saint Elders witness these signs from time to time among those who accept their testimony and believe the Gospel. Often they are called upon to administer the ordinance of anointing and laying on of hands upon the sick and afflicted. As the result of such administrations they see some wonderful manifestations of the power of God. A few such instances of recent occurrence I shall here relate:

Some three years ago two Elders who were laboring in Warwick, England, made the acquaintance of a lady who was so ill that she had been confined to her bed for two years, and suffered great pain. They taught her the Gospel, and told her that the miraculous signs which the Savior said should follow the believers might be realized in her case if she would exercise faith. She read the books they loaned her and believed their words, and a day was appointed for them to come and administer to her. They came upon the day appointed and the ordinance was attended to. While their hands were upon her head, she afterwards testified, all pain left her; and immediately after the conclusion of the ceremony she was enabled to get up and walk. She retired to an adjoining room and partook of refreshments. She was entirely healed from that time, and was able to work and earn her own livelihood.

Elder Ephraim H. Nye, who at the time, June, 1899, was president of the California Mission, gave the following account of a remarkable case of healing which came under his observation:

"T. M. Shaw, of San Francisco was baptized a year ago last May. He was a painter and was employed as such at the Mare Island Navy Yards, but roomed at Vallejo.

"About ten days ago while at his work he suddenly fell to the ground and was unable to rise. The post doctor was called and upon examination found that he was stricken with paralysis; the whole right side being affected. He was carried out and taken to his room in an ambulance. The doctor proposed to give him some medicine but he positively refused to take it, declaring that he would be all right as soon as he could send for the Elders and have them come and lay hands on him. The doctor, however, told him that he would never walk or have the use of his arm or leg again, and in that condition he lay till the fourth day. In the meantime his wife, Mrs. Shaw, wrote for me to come, but as I was away the letter lay unopened, till she, becoming impatient, came to see why we did not respond. On arriving here and making known the situation, two of the Elders, F. B. Platt, president of the conference, and J. M. Hess, went to Vallejo, arriving there about noon, and found Brother Shaw in a pitiable condition. His right foot and leg, up to his knee, were apparently as dead as though they were a part of a corpse; they were cold and clammy, and so with the right hand and arm. He could not move a finger or toe on that side. The Elders proceeded to administer to him in the Lord's appointed way, anointing him with oil and laying their hands upon him. After the prayer he at once began to open and shut his hand, then raised it to his head. Mrs. Shaw as she saw him do that, gave vent to an exclamation of surprise and delight. Elder Hess asked him if he could now move his leg, at which he began to move about; and calling for his clothes, dressed and walked about the house and within an hour walked out and up quite a hill upon which the house stands.

"During the morning before the Elders came, a kind-hearted neighbor came in and while ministering to his comfort, pityingly remarked that he would never walk again. He at once told her that if the Elders came on that noon train, he would call at her house and see her during the evening. She said, 'Never; it is impossible, you will never have the use of that foot or hand again. 'Nevertheless, after climbing the hill and returning, he declared his intention of visiting the lady. So, accompanied by his wife, he walked to her house and knocked at the door. The lady opened it, and on seeing him threw up her hands and screamed with fright, while he, holding out the hand which had been so cold and lifeless, but was now perfectly natural, offered to shake hands with her and said, 'I told you I would come, and her I am;' and seeing that he was there and his wife with him, the lady had to acknowledge that a wonderful miracle had been performed."

Elder D. T. Edwards, a missionary who was laboring in Pennsylvania in the early part of the year 1897, relates this instance of miraculous healing:

"One little boy six years old had been sick with pains in his side almost continually since his birth. His parents were told by the doctors that he could live but a little longer, and he was also given up by his parents. On being asked to administer to him, we performed the holy ordinance. The pain left him, and he got up from bed soon after. This was done nearly four months ago, and the longest he was out of bed before, since his birth, has been five weeks. He is now well and hearty, and looks better than he has done in his life before."

Many such occurrences as those mentioned above, and some even more remarkable, might be related. Of course such cases of healing are not witnessed only by missionaries abroad, they are of frequent occurrence, among the Saints here at home. But to the missionaries who at times meet with discouragements, they are a source of comfort and joy, as are all the exhibitions of the Lord's goodness which they experience.
