MISCELLANEOUS EXPERIENCES CONCLUSION.

Missionaries often go to their fields of labor with a faith and determination that their efforts shall not be in vain. They believe implicitly in the promises made to them by the inspired servants of the Lord who set them apart and bless them before going abroad.

A little incident occurred a few years ago which illustrates the trusting faith possessed by some missionaries. A man called at one of the conference houses in Great Britain to inquire if any of the inmates had any old clothing they wished to dispose of. One of the Elders brought out an old pair of trousers for which he considered he had no further use. He was offered a shilling for the pair and was about to accept the offer when a newly arrived Elder exclaimed, "Let me have the trousers; I will give you a shilling for them." It made no difference to the owner who got them, so he sold them to the last bidder.

"They will do to wear while baptizing people," the purchaser remarked, and his companions smiled at the assurance he had that the investment was a profitable one.

As time rolled by, the Elder found occasion to make use of the trousers quite frequently, for during his missionary career he baptized between forty and fifty persons.

The following letter, written by Elder Albert Matheson a few years ago, while laboring as a missionary in the Southern States, is interesting as it shows the fulfillment of a prediction made to one of his fellow-missionaries:

"The mission of Elder Dotson has been of special interest and satisfaction to him. Some years ago, while nearly all of his relatives were not in sympathy with our faith, he received a patriarchal blessing, in which was a promise that he, if faithful, would have the privilege of bringing many of his kindred into the Church. When this promise was made the Elder could see no possibility of its realization, as his relatives were far removed from him both by distance and doctrine. Time passed on and he reached the age generally considered too far advanced for missionary labors in the South; but at last he received a letter from the Presidency of the Church extending to him an invitation to take a mission to the Southern States. But this did not clear away all difficulties. After his arrival at Chattanooga there were about ten chances to one that he would get in a conference in which his relatives did not reside. True Brother Dotson might have suggested that he work in a locality near his kinsfolk, but he had no idea that such a right belonged to him. It was his belief that the servants of God appointed for that purpose were perfectly competent to discharge their duty. This belief was strengthened in him when he received an appointment to labor in the neighborhood where his relatives resided. Not all the barriers were yet removed from his path, however. His relatives were not at all eager to join themselves to his faith. It was not until after he had worked diligently among them that he saw prospects of the fulfillment of the patriarch's promise; and just at this time threats of violence against the 'Mormons' in that neighborhood gave occasion for the Elder to seek quarters less hostile to truth-tellers. After a little the threatened violence subsided. He then went back and soon baptized eleven of his relatives, among whom was his aged father."

An Elder who was lately in the mission field relates that he had often thought while at home that he would like to perform a mission abroad; but having no education—not being able to read or write—he feared he would never have the privilege. An opportunity at last came for him to go, yet he still lacked education. While in a meeting about this time the inward promptings of the Spirit made known to him that if he would go the Lord would be with him; that he would be enabled to learn to read and write, and that he should fill a useful mission. He relied upon the promise received and went forth in obedience to the call made of him. Although past the prime of life, he readily acquired the arts of reading and writing. As a missionary he soon became very successful. By his humble efforts he was the means of bringing a number of souls to a knowledge of the truth, and within a short space of time he and his missionary companion baptized some nineteen people.

It is frequently remarked by those who speak from experience that a man loses nothing financially by spending a few years in the mission field; and that a mission gives one experience that is of inestimable value to him—an experience that he cannot get in any other way. The truth of these statements is repeatedly verified. A young man who returned from a mission some time ago made the remark recently that since his return he had been so prospered in his business that he had earned as much during the two or three years since his return as he would have done had he remained at home with steady employment such as he was engaged in previous to going upon his mission.

Some years ago when work was plentiful and wages were high, a young man of Salt Lake City was called to take a mission. Some of his friends, and even members of the family to which he belonged, protested against his going. They thought the opportunity to make money was too good to pass by. One brother of the young man encouraged him to go upon the mission assigned him, and remarked to those who did not favor it, that if he went he would be prospered upon his return and within a few years would be better fixed financially than his friends who remained at home taking advantage of the good times for making money. The young man fulfilled the mission assigned him, and was away for some three or four years. Upon his return he went to a new part of the country to make his home, without any resources except his ability to labor with his hands. Only a few years passed before the prediction made by his brother was fulfilled. He had been greatly prospered in his temporal affairs, and was better off than his friends who objected to his going upon a mission.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES OF MISSIONARY LIFE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
