James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER. I.

EARLY RECOLLECTIONS—THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH—THE POLICY OF MOVING "TO THE WEST" REVEALED—THE OBJECT OF THE GATHERING TO KIRTLAND—TIME SPECIFIED FOR REMAINING THERE—THE MOVE TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS FORESHADOWED.

IN THE spring of 1846, the writer was a soldier in the Army of Occupation, on the Rio Grande, under General Z. Taylor, ready to contribute his mite in the expected contest with Mexico, towards redressing the wrongs of American citizens and enlarging the public domain. There reports reached him of the expulsion of the Mormons from Nauvoo, accompanied with the suggestion that they would probably perish in the storms of winter on the bleak prairies of Iowa.

In the spring of 1849, he joined their fortunes by embracing their doctrines. The same season, in company with many others, he followed the trail of their pioneers across the desolate wastes between the Missouri river and the shores of the Great Salt Lake. The first object on the route that particularly interested him was a collection of dilapidated, tenantless houses, on the west bank of the Missouri river, near where the town of Florence now stands. On inquiry he was informed this had been the resting-place of the Mormons after their expulsion from the beautiful city of Nauvoo; the rest denied them in their own homes in Illinois they had sought from the mercy of savages, beyond the confines of civilization.

Near this way-mark of civilization was a place of sepulchre where rested, in the secure repose of death, stern, enduring manhood, elastic youth and prattling innocence, alike the victims of relentless persecution. No fence protected this humble mausoleum from the tread of the reckless emigrant, the prowling savage, and the wild beasts who found protection in the very desolateness of its surroundings. No costly monuments, with finely chiseled epitaphs, ornamented the ground and reminded the passer-by that here rested the opulent and influential. The humble condition of surviving friends was evident from the rude pieces of timber and the ill-shapen stones at the head of graves. There was a sameness in their appearance that required the recollection of surviving friends to indicate where wounded affection might drop a few parting tears, when the still operative forces of persecution compelled the remnant of this shattered people to bid adieu to the resting-places of departed loved ones and seek a home in the solitudes of the great desert.

A fast age and the great continental railways have made the trail of Mormon migration to the interior of the continent a thing of the past, but the dusty road, the dreary plains, the rocky heights, the almost impassible canyons, the stampedes of cattle, the lurking savage, the nights of sleepless vigils, the days of watchfulness and of dreary labor, the dying friend who had long hoped to enjoy a season of rest in a desert home, the grave by the wayside, hastily dug but deep to protect the debris of humanity from ravenous wolves, will forever remain fresh in the memories of those to whom they have been a living reality.

With these scenes vividly photographed on his mind for forty years, the writer's interest in the early history of the Saints has constantly increased.

A latter-day dispensation in which should culminate the redemption of the race, has been expected by seers and prophets down through the ages. A leader of that dispensation was also prepared, in whom should first be planted the principles of the Latter-day work. That leader is Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the nineteenth century.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints first assumed organized form in Fayette, Seneca County, New York, the 6th of April, 1830. Its journeyings from there to the Salt Lake of the Rocky Mountains was the filling up of a grand prophetic outline.

In October of that year Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson were required, by revelation, to accompany Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., into the wilderness among the Lamanites.

After necessary preparations, they bade adieu to brethren and family friends, and preaching by the way, continued their journey to Kirtland, Ohio, where they tarried awhile and labored, and, as a result of that labor, organized a branch of the Church of about one hundred and twenty-seven members. They were mostly from the followers of Sidney S. Rigdon, an influential Campbellite preacher.

The latter part of January, 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith and family, accompanied by S. S. Rigdon, who had been visiting them, moved to Kirtland, where they arrived about the first of February. This made it the headquarters of the Church, and a nucleus around which to gather its increasing numbers.

Soon after the arrival of the Prophet in Kirtland, the Lord said to him in a revelation, "And from this place ye shall go forth into the regions westward; and inasmuch as ye shall find them that will receive you, ye shall build up my Church in every region, until the time shall come when it shall be revealed unto you from on high, where the city of the New Jerusalem shall be prepared, that ye may be gathered in one, that ye may be my people and I will be your God." This indicated that still further "to the west" would be the center of future empire and another objective point towards which the movements of the Church would be directed. This view was further emphasized by a subsequent passage in the same revelation: "And behold it shall come to pass that my servants shall be sent forth to the east and to the west, to the north and to the south; and even now, let him that goeth to the east, teach them that shall be converted to flee to the west, and this in consequence of that which is coming on the earth, and of secret combinations."

In this we see a declared policy, which developed in the subsequent movements of the Church until they culminated in colonizing the Great Salt Lake Valley.

Elder P. P. Pratt and companions faithfully performed their mission and Elder Pratt in his Autobiography, sums up general results as follows:

"After much fatigue and some suffering we all arrived in Independence, in the county of Jackson, on the extreme western frontiers of Missouri, and of the United States.

"This was about fifteen hundred miles from where we started, and we had performed most of the journey on foot, through a wilderness country, in the worst season of the year, occupying about four months, during which we had preached the gospel to tens of thousands of Gentiles, and two nations of Indians; baptizing, confirming and organizing many hundreds of people into churches of Latter-day Saints."

Thus early was the way marked out for a future stride of the Church to the west of one thousand five hundred miles. Events proved that "the Ohio," with Kirtland as a center of operations was, from the first, only designed as a way station at which to gather strength for carrying out the policy of continuing "to flee to the west;" for, as early as September 11th, 1831, the Lord declared through his Seer, that it was His "will to retain a stronghold in the land of Kirtland, for the space of five years," and after that He would "not hold any guilty that shall go with an open heart up to the land of Zion."

An important factor in the gathering of this strength was the building and dedication of a temple. For ages the Priesthood in heaven and on the earth had been awaiting, with deep interest, the ushering in of "the dispensation of the fullness of times." The Seer, the circumstances of whose coming had been a subject of recorded prophecy, came. A suitable place, in which he could be clothed with authority for the fulfillment of his mission, was a necessity. That the Kirtland temple was the place in which this grand purpose was accomplished is evident from D&C 110, Doc. and Cov.

That the Church was organized, a people gathered, a town built up, a temple erected and dedicated in which a great event of the ages was consummated, within the short period of six years, evidences the rapid growth of the Latter-day work and the toils and sacrifices of the Kirtland Saints.

Even in this primary gathering place the location in the Rocky Mountains began to develop from the shadows of the future. Doubtless, many evidences of this might be gathered up, but the following will answer our purpose. Elder Lorenzo D. Young states in his Autobiography that, when very sick in Kirtland, Father Joseph Smith promised he should recover, live to go with the Saints to the Rocky Mountains and there receive many blessings.

We may reasonably assume that when the Prophet received the revelation counseling those that should be converted "to flee to the west," the idea was well defined in his mind that the culmination of the policy would be in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains.

While there was a grand purpose in the temporary occupation of Kirtland, it was, at the same time, necessary they should establish themselves in Missouri for a central gathering place when it became necessary to evacuate it.
