James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER II.

DISARMING THE SAINTS—THE EXPULSION FROM JACKSON COUNTY—"ZION'S CAMP"—THE NEW COUNTY OF CALDWELL IS ORGANIZED, TO WHICH THE SAINTS GATHER—THE PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH DRIVEN FROM KIRTLAND—THE KIRTLAND EXODUS—ITS ORGANIZATION—SCARCITY OF FOOD—NECESSITY FOR LABOR—MUCH SICKNESS IN CAMP.

IT IS a singular fact to contemplate, that the first ground from which the Saints were driven, was that on which will be built the chief city of the Western Hemisphere. Fifty-five years after that sad event they are still wanderers from their heritage, and the longing eyes of the faithful are directed towards the place, as are those of Judah to the Jerusalem of their fathers. When they will realize the fruition of their hopes remains an unanswered query.

The bitter feelings engendered by the slavery question between the people of the Northern and Southern States, made the slave owners of Missouri, like others, jealous and suspicious of northern people. This, with other causes, operated from the first, to give the Saints but little rest among these rude people of the frontier. Those in Jackson county had suffered almost constant annoyance, culminating in expulsion from their homes.

Preparatory to the accomplishment of this barbarous act, with the assurance of the Lieut. Governor of the state and others, that the object was to disarm the combatants on both sides, with the hope of insuring peace, the Saints surrendered about fifty of their weapons of defence. The mob, then secure from injury, were like savages let loose on women and children. They went about well armed in companies, on foot and on horseback. They frightened the distracted women and children with threats of what they would do to their husbands and fathers if they could catch them, and warned them to flee immediately or they would demolish their houses and massacre them before night.

Christian preachers acted a conspicuous part in these cruel proceedings; called the Mormons "the common enemies of mankind" and exulted in their afflictions.

Sunday, the 24th of November, 1833, about one hundred and fifty of these harassed people were driven from their homes in Jackson county. Some went into Van Buren county, others fled into Clay county and camped on the banks of the Missouri river. The exiles subsequently made every possible exertion to recover their property, but without success. The citizens of Van Buren county would not let the Saints rest in peace among them. This was a double hardship after having built themselves houses and provided food for winter.

In 1834, a military body, called "Zion's Camp" marched from Ohio to Missouri for the relief of the Saints. After a short time spent among them, Joseph Smith and others, on the 9th of July, commenced their return journey to Kirtland where they arrived the 1st of August. There the Prophet found the elements of discord and apostasy in several leading elders. Much opposition had been aroused against him by false reports and accusations. All of which disappeared before the light of investigation.

When driven out of Jackson county the Saints scattered into several counties, but perhaps more of them settled in Clay than in any other county, as they there met more kindness and consideration than elsewhere. Besides, it was the most convenient county for the exiles to gather to in their great distress. In time, however, causes similar to those in Jackson county operated to make the citizens uneasy at their presence. The success and influence of the Jackson County mob also assisted in developing the spirit of persecution in the surrounding counties.

The first general move made in Clay county, for the expulsion of the Saints, was on the 29th of June, 1836. In accordance with previous notice a respectable number of citizens met at the court-house in Liberty. The meeting was organized and a committee appointed to give expression to the object of the meeting, and the sentiments of the citizens of the county, with regard to the residence of the Mormons among them.

In perusing the minutes of this meeting we are struck with the open-hearted candor with which it gave expression to the public sentiment and the total want of consideration which popular prejudice engenders with regard to justice and constitutional rights. An excited populace regards no law that stands in the way of the gratification of its blind fury.

The Saints were required to remove from the county, and a committee of ten was appointed to wait on them and receive their answer. The 1st of July a considerable body of the elders of the Church in Clay county assembled and organized. The proceedings of the citizens who met on the 29th of June were read and a Preamble and Resolutions adopted in answer to them.

The Preamble expressed the gratitude of the Saints for the kindness shown them by the citizens of Clay County, and said: "Being desirous for peace, and wishing the good rather than the ill-will of mankind, we will use all honorable means to allay the excitement, and so far as we can, remove any foundation for jealousies against us as a people."

A committee of three was appointed to present the Preamble and Resolutions to an adjourned meeting of the citizens. This meeting accepted the reply of the Saints to their resolutions passed on the 29th of June. It was also urged upon the citizens to carry out, in good faith, the arrangements made between themselves and the Mormons. The meeting also recommended the Mormons to the good treatment of the people of the surrounding counties.

The Saints in Clay county selected a new location on Shoal Creek in territory attached to Ray county, and commenced moving on to it in September, 1836. Thus this move from Clay county was accomplished without much violence. The Saints gathering on Shoal Creek, petitioned the Missouri Legislature to incorporate a new county from territory attached to Ray county. This petition was granted about the middle of the following December and the new county was called Caldwell.

The mob in Davies county gave notice to the Saints in that county to leave by the 1st of August, 1837. At this time there were about one hundred houses in Far West, the chief settlement of the Saints in the new county.

In the autumn of 1837, the spirit of apostasy began to develop with much power in Kirtland. The Prophet had been to Missouri to aid in the direction of affairs by his presence and counsel. Returning to Kirtland about the 10th of December, he found several of the quorum of the apostles in open rebellion, and these with others united for the overthrow of the Church. So bitter did this spirit become that there was a show of armed force to destroy those who sustained the legitimate authority of the Church. So great was the pressure that Elder Brigham Young, a staunch supporter of the Prophet, left Kirtland for Missouri the 22nd of December, 1837.

The apostate power continued to increase until Joseph Smith and Sidney S. Rigdon were compelled to flee in the night. They left Kirtland on the evening of the 12th of January, 1838. They were joined by their families on the 16th, and pursued their journey to Missouri in wagons. They arrived in Far West the 14th of the following March. The head quarters of the Church were now removed from Kirtland to Missouri, and it was the signal for the evacuation of the former place. It had filled its mission and was no longer needed for the progress of the Saints "to the west."

The 6th of March, 1838, the seventies met in the temple in Kirtland to devise the best means of removing their quorum to Missouri. On the 10th of the month it was made manifest by "vision and prophecy," that they should go up in a camp, pitching their tents by the way. On the 13th, they adopted rules for their journey, which were signed by one hundred and seventy-five men. The privilege was given for any persons to go in the company provided they would abide the laws for its government. A Board of Commissioners was appointed to lead the camp, which was divided into companies of tens with a captain over each. A clerk, historian and treasurer were also appointed.

Elder Joel H. Johnson says in his journal: "On the 6th of July, 1838, I started from Kirtland, with my family, in company with the camp called `The Kirtland camp,' numbering in all, men, women and children, five hundred and fifteen souls; with fifty-eight wagons and a large number of cows. It consisted, principally, of the poor Saints of Kirtland, the sick, lame, blind, etc., with all who

"THE KIRTLAND CAMP."

could not move without help." Kirtland was the first place the Saints had gathered to and the third they evacuated in less than five years. Zion's camp was essentially a military organization not burdened with families. The "Kirtland camp" was the first company of Saints, of any considerable magnitude, that was an emigrating one, burdened with women and children, household goods, cattle, etc.

Traveling among avowed enemies organization for defence was a necessity. The following circumstance illustrates the temper of the people in many places. Near the town of Mansfield, Ohio, three of the company, Josiah Butterfield, Jonathan Dunham and H. Hall, were, for some supposed connection with the "Kirtland safety society money," arrested and lodged in jail. Threats were in circulation that the camp should not pass through the town; but as they continued their journey the next morning nothing disturbed them, except the repeated firing of cannon to frighten their horses as they passed the court-house. The court was in session and the case of the imprisoned brethren was called up, but no bill being found against them they were discharged a little after one o'clock p. m. This was on the 20th of July.

On account of a heavy rain, which had thoroughly wet the camp the night before, on the 21st the roads were muddy and traveling bad. To seriously increase the difficulties food was scarce, there not being half enough in camp for dinner. There was some appetite for raw corn before a supply could be obtained. Sunday the 22nd of July, the camp was one hundred and eighty-eight miles from Kirtland.

In these early times of trying experiences cleanliness was, as now, a part of the religion of the Saints. At proper times the company was halted at a convenient place for fuel and water, and the "Sisters" were notified that time would be given for cleansing linen, etc.

The 24th of July, while in camp for this purpose, the men obtained a job and performed labor to the amount of nineteen dollars. Some difficulties were thrown in the way of the people because they were Mormons. For this reason, in one place they could not buy forage and one man threatened to shoot Captain Dunham, the engineer.

About the 1st of August, the Kirtland company halted in their journey to recruit their teams. The men engaged in such labor as they could obtain in order to get means to continue their journey. No rations were issued to those who could not give a reasonable excuse for absenting themselves from labor. The doctrine that "the idler shall not eat the bread of the laborer" appears to have been rigidly enforced. Three brethren were appointed to settle minor difficulties. For some time the camp did not make much progress. Many were sick, and the evening of the 8th of August was spent by several of the Elders in visiting the tents and rebuking diseases and evil spirits. Elder Byington's child died, but many of the sick were healed.

Division crept into the camp and they did not properly improve their time in labor. The 20th of August the company began to break up. Two men who had been cut off from the Church left it with their families. About this time two children were born in camp. The men continued to labor as they had opportunity. They burned charcoal, erected a forge, and the blacksmiths repaired wagons, shod horses, and prepared to resume their journey.

Every man was expected to fill his place in the organization. For not honoring his office of tent-master a Mr. Hammond was cut off from the company. It was the duty of a tent-master to see that prayer was attended to at the proper time, that no iniquity existed in his tent, and also to draw the daily rations for those belonging to his mess.

At three o'clock in the morning of the 29th of August, the trumpet sounded to wake up the sleepers to prepare for the journey. The people appeared weary of inactivity, for "every heart leapt with joy, and even the children were so delighted that they appeared like a lot of playful lambs."
