James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER III.

THE COMPANY LEAVE THEIR ENCAMPMENT OF A MONTH—SEVERAL BURIED BY THE WAY—HUNGER IN CAMP—THE ECONOMIC METHODS OF THE SAINTS—ENTRANCE OF THE COMPANY INTO MISSOURI—GREAT EXCITEMENT AMONG THE PEOPLE—THE COMPANY ARRIVE IN FAR WEST.

AT NINE o'clock the camp ground which had been occupied for a month was vacated. The company traveled eighteen miles and that night was two hundred and seventy miles from Kirtland. The enmity of the people was shown in various ways. On Sunday, the 2nd of September, a malicious stage-driver turned out of his course and broke up a wheel of one of the wagons. The following day the company passed through Indianapolis, the capital of the state of Indiana. Although there were some threats from the people, no demonstration was made except hurling a brickbat at one of the men which did no harm.

There was much sickness in the country the company were passing through, and several of its members died and were buried by the way. It was autumn and winter was approaching. While it was still thought advisable for the company to try to go up to Zion in a body, a few families were counseled to find places to work through the winter, and get means with which to help themselves.

In accordance with this counsel the 10th of September, nine or ten families remained behind. On the 14th of September the company passed through Springfield in the state of Illinois. Much enmity was manifested in the countenances and conduct of the citizens. Fever and ague were prevalent in the country, and on account of sickness and destitution, many families had found stopping places before arriving at this place. The people of this camp had learned what it was to be hungry, as they were often short of food for man and beast. For the last one hundred miles of travel their food had consisted of boiled corn and shaving pudding. The latter was made by shaving the new ears of corn on a jointer or foreplane. It was pronounced excellent with a little milk, butter or sweetening. An occasional mixture of pork, flour, potatoes, etc., made it approximate quite a comfortable living. The cobs and refuse were given to the horses so that nothing was lost.

At this early period of church history the economic methods and patient endurance of the Saints made the following sentiment proverbial: "The Mormons would starve a host of enemies to death, for they will live where everybody else would die." At this time the company had become reduced from five hundred and fifteen to two hundred and sixty persons. They were five hundred and forty-six miles from Kirtland, and had been a little over five months on the way. Destitution, severe toil, sickness and death caused murmurings and division, and they had scattered along the route.

September 20th, 1838, the Kirtland Saints crossed the Mississippi river into Pike county, Missouri, and pitched their tents one mile west of the town of Louisiana, six hundred and fifty-six miles from Kirtland. The Saints in Missouri were in serious difficulty with the mob, and the travel-worn remnant of the Kirtland Exodus found no place to rest. They fled from the fires of persecution in Ohio to find themselves in a furnace of affliction in Missouri.

The following incident partially illustrates the temper of the Missourians. Elder John D. Tyler had charge of the loose stock of the company. The third day after crossing the Mississippi river, in passing through the town of Paris, those having charge of the herd were hailed and asked to what place they were driving the cattle. They were answered, "Towards the Rocky Mountains." "Well, you are going into trouble." Elder Tyler replied, "We have been in that place before and know how to take it." It may justly be said of the Missourians "they grumbled and growled like wolves."

In passing through the town of Madisonville the company met all sorts of exciting stories about the Mormon troubles. They encamped at night on the west side of the north branch of Salt river, on the ground occupied a few days previous by Elder Page's company from Canada. They were told that the governor of the state was just ahead with a military force to stop them. It was only one of the many flying reports that they so often heard.

The 28th of September, 1838, the company found themselves on Parson's creek, Lynn county, Missouri. The country was a natural paradise. It was well supplied with wild turkeys, prairie hens, quails, partridges, wild geese, ducks, snipes, deer, raccoons and squirrels. From this profusion of game some food was obtained for the camp. The following day a couple of wagons upset and hurt several persons, and there were also some sick in camp.

Sunday, the 30th of September, the camp traveled fifteen miles and encamped in Caldwell county, on the farm of Brother Oliver Walker who gave each one a large pumpkin and some shelled beans. The company began to enjoy the kindly hospitality of the Saints, and these friendly associations made them feel as though they had, indeed, entered the "Land of Promise."

The 2nd of October the company approached Far West. The Prophet, Joseph Smith, Elders Sidney S. Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Isaac Morley and George W. Robinson met them a few miles out and escorted them into the city. They encamped on the public square where friends greeted friends in the name of the Lord. Isaac Morley, Patriarch at Far West, furnished a beef for the camp, and Elder Rigdon provided a supper for the sick. The people needed the kind hospitality of friends for they had eaten but little for several days. By the way they had traveled, they were distant from Kirtland eight hundred and sixty-six miles. They had now reached the "Land of Zion," the headquarters of the Church, and the Kirtland exodus had culminated, but we will accompany them to their destination.

The 4th October, 1838, was an important day to the "Kirtland Camp." It ended their long and trying journey, "for they arrived at their destination and began to pitch their tents about sunset, when one of the brethren living in the place proclaimed with a loud voice—"Brethren, your long and tedious journey is now ended, you are now on the public square of Adam-ondi-Ahman. This is the place where Adam blessed his posterity, where they rose up and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel, and he being full of the Holy Ghost predicted what should befall his posterity to the latest generation."

The town of Adam-ondi-Ahman had been located in June of that year on the north side of Grand River, in Davis county, twenty-five miles north of Far West.
