James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER IV.

THE EXODUS FROM MISSOURI—THE COVENANT OF ASSISTANCE—SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS AS ILLUSTRATED IN A SKETCH OF THE LYTLES—KINDNESS OF THE PEOPLE OF QUINCY—HOW LEVI HANCOCK GOT OUT OF MISSOURI—BLESSING ON THE GREEN CORN.

MISSOURI was a "Land of Promise" to the Saints, to be retained only on condition of keeping the law of consecration which had been in part revealed in Ohio. This law was applicable to all members of the Church, and without its observance an inheritance could not be obtained upon the land of Zion. For evidence that the conditions were not fulfilled the reader is referred to Sec . 110, Doc. and Cov.

With divine requirements unfulfilled the Saints had not faith to contend with surrounding antagonisms, and the land of Missouri proved an uncongenial soil for their growth. Even with their failure in coming up to the standard of excellence required of them, the purity of their principles, their progressive spirit, and their unity of action, were too much for the crude intellectual and moral capacity of the average Missourian, and he made frequent spasmodic efforts to eject from his surroundings elements so antagonistic to his nature.

As before stated the Saints in Missouri were subject to great annoyances and, in the autumn of 1833, were expelled by mobs from their homes in Jackson county. They scattered out into Clay, Daviess, and De Witt counties. They were not permitted to rest in these places; they gathered into Caldwell county and located the town of Far West. These persecutions were a constant accumulation of unredressed wrongs heaped upon them by the Missourians. These wrongs generally culminated in confiscation of property, and often in imprisonment and death. Death sometimes by personal violence, but oftener by dieases caused by exposure to the elements and want of the necessaries of life.

When the Prophet, Joseph Smith, arrived in Far West, in March, 1838, it became the residence of the leading authorities of the Church, and it and the surrounding country, the gathering place for its members. The Missourians feared the Saints on account of their thorough organization, their unity of purpose and action, and offered violence to oppose their voting at the August election. At the town of Gallatin a knock down fight occurred between the parties in which the Mormons were victorious. This roused the popular excitement to fever heat. From that time antagonisms seemed to strengthen. Mobs became legalized military bodies under State authority; the judiciary instead of defending the injured became a mere tool in the hands of a vindictive populace.

The climax of tyranny and wrong was finally reached by the governor of the State, Lilburn W. Boggs, issuing a decree that the Mormons must either leave the State or be exterminated. The Saints were disarmed and their leaders imprisoned. In this defenceless condition they were robbed and abused by as graceless a set of villains as ever claimed connection with Christian civilization.

The crisis had come, and it was death or expatriation. The memorable exodus of the Saints from Missouri commenced in the autumn of 1838, and culminated the ensuring winter under circumstances of extreme destitution and suffering. It was a dark day. They were leaving their "Land of Promise" to which they had clung with great tenacity and there was no other in sight. There had been no prophetic utterances to indicate where should be their next gathering place. Only those who have passed through a similar experience can conceive of their sufferings, and they will never be written unless it is done by the recording angels.

They left ample evidence of their sufferings along their trail to the west bank of the Mississippi river, opposite the town of Quincy, Illinois, a distance of about one hundred and seventy-five miles. There hundreds encamped in winter storms with little protection except the forest along the river bottom, which furnished abundant fuel for their fires.

In fulfillment of a covenant made by the Elders, that they would not cease their exertions until their people were gathered out of Missouri, when those who owned teams had accomplished the deliverance of their families, they, and their scanty stock of household goods were unloaded and the team returned to Missouri to deliver others from perils and death.

Some Missourians living on the road traveled by the Saints, in their vindictive hate, ignored their usual customs of hospitality, and at night denied women and children shelter from the rigors of a northern winter, the icy air of which was often breathed by new born babes; others, with warm sympathies for suffering humanity, offered them such shelter and comfort as was practicable under the eyes of some vindictive neighbor.

Let it be recorded to the honor of the citizens of the town of Quincy, that they liberally administered to the wants of the fugitives from Missouri.

The misfortunes of a people are often best illustrated by individual experiences.

With the slender outfit of a wagon and a pair of horses Mr. John Lytle, his brother Andrew, and their families, in all ten persons, arrived on the west bank of the Mississippi river, opposite the town of Quincy, Illinois, in the month of February, 1839. In fulfillment of a covenant before referred to, their effects were at once unloaded and the team returned to assist others. After bringing out its owner and his brother, it made two trips bringing two families each time, when it was too exhausted for further labor in that direction. The Lytles encamped in the timber on the river bottom, with many other fugitives. At the time of their arrival the river was open and no arrangements had been perfected for crossing the people.

Their shelter from the chilling winds of winter was what the timber afforded, with quilts and wagon covers drawn over poles. In a day or two the weather turned severely cold, the river froze over, and the people crossed on the ice. Mr. John Lytle and family, with five other families, found shelter in a room about 18 X 20 feet. The only advantage of this crowded condition was protection from the cold. The first and only night this shelter was enjoyed, Mrs. Lytle gave birth to a son. Even in this extreme of destitution they were not permitted to rest, for the following day the owner ordered them to vacate the house as he had an opportunity to rent. A cabin was found barely large enough to shelter the two brothers and their families. To it the suffering wife and new-born babe were removed.

This miserable shelter was occupied but one night for they were again ordered to vacate. Fortunately another shelter was found, but at a considerable distance. To it, families and effects were removed. Under these hardships the tender infant sickened and died. The mother, destitute of every comfort woman is supposed to need in her condition, also sickened but finally rallied and recovered.

Hoping to find some relief and rest, Mr. Lytle and family made a visit to Pike county, Illinois. They found their relations embittered against their people, and a cool reception was the result. In a day or two they returned to the neighborhood of Quincy, and soon after continued their journey to Commerce where their people were already gathering. There they found a hearty welcome from fellow-sufferers as destitute as themselves. Levi Hancock was well known in the Church as one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies. Many will be interested in the following account of how he got out of Missouri. It may be considered an extreme case but doubtless, there were many others nearly paralleling it.

Levi Hancock arrived from Ohio in Far West, Missouri, in March, 1838, in company with the Prophet, Joseph Smith. He settled on Plum Creek, a short distance from the town. There he remained until the time had nearly expired within which the Saints were to leave the State. Up to that time he had spent his energies in assisting others to get away. The New Year of 1839 found him nearly destitute of the means of moving, or of providing ordinary necessities for his family. The mob had killed his only cow, robbing his family of even that limited source of sustenance.

He had a blind horse, but no vehicle to carry his little children and the few household goods still retained for family use. He had a small foot lathe. This he fitted up with belts of rawhide from the skin of his cow. With this crude machinery he turned hubs for two cart wheels, split spokes out of fence rails, and cut out felloes from the hewn puncheons of his cabin floor. From the puncheons he also made a box for his cart, and over a semblance of bows, an old quilt was stretched to shelter the contents of the box from storms.

Several inches of snow covered the ground when this destitute family were forced to leave the shelter of their cabin, to dare their fate in the cold of winter. It consisted of husband, wife and three children, the oldest a lad of about five years. The children were shoeless and the mother nearly so, having on her feet the tattered remains of a pair of shoes which afforded her feet but little protection from the cold snow.

To intensify the sufferings of the lad, and to add to the keen edge of those of the father and mother, a short time previous to starting, while out after the cow, he was met by a couple of Missourians and because he was a Mormon boy, was whipped with hickory withes until his back and legs were covered with welts and cuts, from which the blood trickled down to the ground. Exposure and traveling made these partially healed wounds very painful. The mother with wet chilled feet and limbs, and her deep sympathies for her little ones, about reached the extreme of human suffering and found some relief in tears. The husband and father, still trusting in a kindly Providence appeared as cheerful as an aching heart made it possible.

He prophesied to his suffering companion that she should be provided with a pair of shoes in a remarkable manner. In the middle of the first day's travel they stopped to rest and warm. A good fire was made, for wood was plentiful. The mother stripped the ragged, saturated shoes and stockings from her feet and placed them by the fire to dry. The dinner, consisting of parched corn—quite inadequate of itself to sustain the human frame, especially under such circumstances—was eaten. Preparing to resume the journey the mother reached her hand down to take her tattered shoes, and to her astonishment she held a new pair in her hand. Both husband and wife expressed their heart-felt gratitude for this gift of a kindly Providence, so opportunely supplying a serious want.

When it stormed mother and children huddled together under the old quilt cover of the cart. At night the meagre bed was made by the camp fire, with a log at the foot and one at the head to keep off the wind. On the single quilt that covered them was spread such outside garments as they could divest themselves of, and by sleeping together, a considerable degree of warmth and comfort were obtained.

They traveled the well-worn track of those who had preceded them and arrived on the bank of the Mississippi river, opposite the town of Quincy sometime in the month of February. An idea of the severity of the weather may be formed from the fact that the Mississippi river was frozen over and they crossed it on the ice.

Although the people of Quincy had shown much

CUT ADRIFT.

kindness to the destitute Saints, Elder Hancock continued his journey to the new location then called Commerce, now Nauvoo. There was enacted the closing scene in this family drama. It was still winter and the fact had a serious significance to the poorly sheltered, half-clad and famishing Saints. The faithful blind horse had nearly dragged out his life in the service of his master. That master could not feed him, and his heart rebelled against turning him out on the common with the certainty that he must gradually starve to death.

One day the lad, Mosiah, saw his father leading the faithful brute towards the river, with a wisp of provender under his arm and an axe in his hand. Curiosity prompted the boy to follow and inquire of the father what he intended to do with the horse. Without answering his question the father ordered him, somewhat sharply to return. As he did so, the last he saw of the horse he was quietly eating the provender and the master was cutting a circle in the ice around him.
