James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER V.

LOCATION OF NAUVOO—CAMP OF THE EXILES—THEIR SUFFERING CONDITION—THE LOCATION MADE HEALTHIER BY DRAINING—JOSEPH SMITH IN VISION PROPHESIES THAT THE SAINTS WILL REMOVE TO THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS—THE TWELVE LABOR TO CARRY OUT HIS PREDICTIONS—THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXODUS.

AN UNHEALTHY location, called Commerce, on the east bank of the Mississippi river, was the only gathering place available for the Saints. It was a commanding site for their future city near the head of the Lower Rapids, and one hundred and ninety-two miles above the city of St. Louis. The ground is regular and rises gradually from the river, with a plain at the summit. The first land was purchased for the Saints May 1st, 1839. The 10th of May the Prophet Joseph, lately delivered from a Missouri prison, moved on to the ground with his family in a condition of extreme destitution. Leaders and people occupied a common level. Burnings, plunderings and drivings had been a common lot. Leading men had suffered in Missouri prisons, and broken constitutions were the heritage of many of the people.

The camps of the Saints occupied the lower ground along the bank of the river. They presented a general appearance of great destitution. Houses, covered wagons and tents were luxuries enjoyed by few. There was slight protection from the scorching sun by day or from chilling dews by night. Their food was poor in quality and meagre in quantity. In a state of semistarvation, alternately chilled to the marrow with ague or burning with fever, death reaped a bountiful harvest among these victims of religious persecution.

On the bottom lands along the river, and extending a considerable distance above the camps, were a succession of ponds of stagnant water filled with decaying vegetation. In the heat of summer miasmatic vapors from these stagnant pools filled the air with seeds of disease and death. It was soon evident to the people that these sloughs must be drained by cutting ditches from them to the river. So urgent did this labor appear that men who suffered from chills and fever alternate days, labored on these drains the days they were free from these attacks. This labor was completed in the summer of 1840 and, from that time, there was a marked improvement in the health of the place.

The following from the recollections of Elder Mosiah Hancock vividly illustrates the great needs of the people: He says, although then only a lad the circumstance made too powerful an impression on his mind to be ever forgotten. In the summer of 1839 his father and family lived with the Prophet Joseph. The first green corn of the season was greeted with much satisfaction, as the fruit of their labors in their new location. It was boiled on the cob and placed in the center of the table. Around it were the Prophet, Joseph Smith, Sen., Levi Hancock, and others of his family. Joseph asked his father to bless the food. The Patriarch grasped an ear of corn between his thumb and two fingers. Holding it up from the table he said, "Oh God, the Eternal Father, we thank Thee for this corn, and we ask Thee in the name of Jesus Christ to bless and sanctify it, and strengthen our stomachs that we may be able to receive the same to the nourishment of our bodies, until Thou canst provide something better for us, this we ask Thee in the name of Jesus Christ, Amen." This blessing was asked with the tears trickling down the face of the aged father. He evidently keenly sensed his own needs and those of his people; more especially the wants of the sick and of delicate women and children. Another year of suffering and this Patriarch of the House of Israel passed away the 14th of September, 1840.

Nauvoo proved only another way-side station where the Saints might gather strength for the culminating move in this succession of exoduses. For advancement in the ordinances of the gospel, it was necessary that another temple should be built. The land of Missouri was so thoroughly under antagonistic influences, that progress in that direction was limited to selecting sites and laying corner-stones.

The corner stones of the Nauvoo temple were laid the 6th of April, 1841, less than two years after the first purchase of land for the new city. Within five years that temple was so far completed that the object of its construction was realized, and it was the chief object of interest in a beautiful and populous city. Considering the extreme poverty to which the Saints were reduced, by the Missouri persecutions, these historical facts evidence their wonderful vitality and recuperative powers, and modern history will scarcely parallel them where the chief incentives to action have been embodied in a religious faith.

There are many events in the history of the Saints bordering on the miraculous. Personal experiences are often surrounded with a halo of romance, and again others are enveloped in the dark shadows of tragedy. Faith in God and their mission have given them wonderful powers of endurance. Opinions may differ as to the character of that faith, but with it they have faced the fires of affliction, overcome the difficulties of the ever present, and found strength and comfort in assurances of a better future. In the shifting scenes the Church was passing through the Prophet Joseph, and those immediately around him, did not lose sight of the objective point in the command "to flee to the West."

At a meeting of Freemasons in the town of Montrose, on the west side of the Mississippi river, Joseph Smith, while conversing with his brethren, uttered the remarkable prophecy that the Saints would be driven to the Rocky Mountains. Elder Anson Call was present on the interesting occasion and in his autobiography, gives a more detailed account of the circumstance than the writer has found elsewhere. On the 14th of July, 1843, the Prophet Joseph, with quite a number of his brethren, crossed the Mississippi river to the town of Montrose, to be present at the installment of the masonic lodge of the "Rising Sun." A block school-house had been prepared for the occasion with a shade in front, under which was a barrel of ice water. Judge George Adams was the highest Masonic authority in the State of Illinois, and had been sent there to organize this lodge. He, Hyrum Smith and J. C. Bennett, being high Masons, went into the house to perform some ceremonies which the others were not entitled to witness. These, including Joseph Smith, remained under the bowery. Joseph, as he was tasting the cold water, warned the brethren not to be too free with it.

With a tumbler still in his hand, he prophesied that the Saints would yet go to the Rocky Mountains. Says Anson Call: "I had before seen him in vision, and now saw, while he was talking, his countenance change to white; not the deadly white of a bloodless face, but a living, brilliant white. He seemed absorbed in gazing at something at a great distance, and said, `I am gazing upon the valleys of those mountains.' This was followed by a vivid description of the scenery of these mountains as I have since become acquainted with it.

"Pointing to Shadrach Roundy and others he said: There are some men here who shall do a great work in that land. Pointing to me, he said: `There is Anson, he shall go and shall assist in building cities from one end of the country to the other, and you,' rather extending the idea to all those he had spoken of, shall perform as great a work as has been done by man, so that the nations of the earth shall be astonished, and many of them will be gathered in that land, and assist in building cities and temples, and Israel shall be made to rejoice.'

"It is impossible to represent in words this scene which is still vivid in my mind, of the grandeur of Joseph's appearance, his beautiful descriptions of this land, and his wonderful prophetic utterances, as they emanated from the glorious inspirations which overshadowed him. There was a force and power in his exclamations of which the following is but a faint echo. `Oh, the beauty of those snow-capped mountains! The cool refreshing streams that are running down through those mountain gorges!' Then gazing in another direction, as if there was a change of locality! `Oh, the scenes that this people will pass through! The dead that will lie between here and there!' Then, turning in another direction as if the scene changed again: `Oh, the apostasy that will take place before my brethren reach that land!' Not an iota of this prophecy has failed of being fulfilled." This narrative, in part is a testimony of that fulfillment. Elder Call continues, "Although I felt that Joseph was wrapt in vision, and that his voice was the voice of God, little did I realize the vast significance of those prophetic declarations compared with what I do now, with the experience of forty-five years that has intervened since they were uttered. As he drew to a close, the door of the house opened and we entered the building to transact the business for which we had gathered."

The following, from the History of Joseph Smith, indicates the development in his mind of plans for the fulfillment of what he had seen in vision:

"On Sunday, the 25th of February, 1844, in a meeting at the assembly room of the Saints in Nauvoo, Joseph prophesied that within five years the Saints would be out of the power of their old enemies, whether apostates or of the world, and he asked the brethren to record the prediction.

"About this time he was inspired to direct the glance of the apostles to the western slope, where he said the people of God might establish themselves anew, worship after their own sincere convictions and work out the grand social problems of modern life. This subject was present in his mind and often upon his lips during the brief remainder of his earthly existence. Frequent councils were held and he directed the organization of an exploring expedition to venture beyond the Rocky Mountains. * * * * * *

"His purpose was not to sever the Saints from this sublime republic by any emigration; he saw that this country's domain must soon stretch from ocean to ocean. * * * And though he did not live to see the exodus of the Saints nor to send out the first pioneer party of explorers, his inspired suggestion was carried out, and through it his prediction was fulfilled that the Saints in five years would be beyond the power of their old enemies."

The career of the Prophet was drawing to a close. He had appointed and endowed others with authority and power to carry out his inspirations, and he and his brother Hyrum were assassinated in Carthage on the 27th of June, 1844.

A short time before the death of Joseph and Hyrum, being hard pressed by their enemies, with a few friends they crossed to the west bank of the Mississippi river, with the hope of yet leading the way to the fastnesses of the Rocky Mountains, and of assisting the Saints in realizing the bright, prophetic visions of their future. But through the over persuasion of his supposed friends, the Prophet was induced to return to Nauvoo to meet his fate.

He saw the crisis and met it with the following sentiments welling up from the very depths of a strong but keenly sensitive soul: "If my life has ceased to be of value to my friends, it has ceased to be of much value to myself." "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter."

He was succeeded by Brigham Young, the President of the Council of Twelve Apostles, and under his leadership the plans of Joseph were perfected and carried out.

In Illinois, as in Missouri, the Saints suffered a long series of persecutions. They were the cause of much sorrow and suffering, of which the present and future generations will get only an occasional glimpse from what is recorded of them. Under the culminating pressure of these the Saints commenced their long-contemplated move to the Rocky Mountains on the 5th and 6th of February, 1846, by beginning to cross the Mississippi river and forming an advanced camp on Sugar creek, a few miles from Nauvoo.
