James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER VI.

THE TWELVE IN CAMP—EXTREME COLD—A LAST VISIT TO NAUVOO—EXPERIENCE OF ELDER MEEKS—THE HEROISM OF THE SISTERS—DEATH OF EDWIN LITTLE—BRIGHAM YOUNG VS. NAUVOO—SIXTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH—GARDEN GROVE—MOUNT PISGAH.

THE 15th of February, 1846, Brigham Young, Willard Richards and George A. Smith, with their families, moved across the river to the camp on Sugar creek, and the following day began to organize the people for the march westward. Previous to this the thermometer had indicated 20 ° below zero, and the Mississippi river had frozen over so that teams crossed on the ice.

About the same date that the movement from Nauvoo commenced, the ship Brooklyn sailed from the harbor of New York for the Bay of San Francisco with two

NAUVOO.

hundred and fourteen Saints, under the charge of Elder Samuel Brannan. The object was to plant a colony on the Pacific coast.

Before leaving Christian civilization and launching out onto the prairies of Iowa, Brigham Young, and others of the Council of the Twelve, returned to Nauvoo to see the deserted homes of their people for the last time, and to bid adieu to their beloved city and temple. There was much suffering in the camp on Sugar Creek. Violent storms, excessive cold and fatiguing labor made heavy drafts on the energy and vitality of the people, in many cases thinly clad and poorly fed. It is safe to assert, that the sum of suffering in getting away from Nauvoo and in crossing the prairies of Iowa will never be footed up by mortals, nor a tithe of the interesting and instructive experiences written.

The following narrative, showing how Elder P. Meeks got out of Nauvoo will illustrate some of the difficulties of the situation. It is dated Orderville, March 4th, 1882. "I am now eighty-six years of age. My faculties are more or less failing, and my memory with the others. But there are some events of my life which I shall never forget, for they are so thoroughly impressed upon my mind that they seem a part of myself.

"The persecutions of Nauvoo I endured with the Saints. I gave up my gun to a brother who, I thought, could make a better use of it. For a substitute I fastened a strong table-fork on to the end of a pole about six feet long. With this, when the alarm was given that our enemies were approaching, I repaired to the temple, prepared to do the best I could to defend myself and the Saints.

"About the time the latter were crossing the Mississippi I had been east and was returning home. I passed through Carthage where Joseph and Hyrum Smith were martyred. Some Mormon-eaters of the place, took my horse from me and, with oaths and imprecations, asserted that they could cut my heart out. They confined me in Carthage jail and in the room where Joseph and Hyrum had been shot. There I was compelled to remain in sight of the stains made by their blood. This was very unpleasant and caused many sorrowful reflections. I remained there eight or ten days, when it was very necessary that I should be in Nauvoo to care for my family and go west with the Saints.

"In these things was the extreme cruelty of the mob manifest. They were not willing to give us reasonable time to get ready to leave, and when we were making every possible exertion to do so would perplex, detain and sometimes rob us, as they did me of my horse. The sheriff of the county knowing that I was innocent of any crime, and that I wished to get away with my people, favored me all he could. Having occasion to go to Nauvoo, he drew up some bonds for my appearance at court, induced an irresponsible person to sign them, in order to give him some excuse for letting me go, brought out a horse from one of my friends in Nauvoo, got me on to it and told me hot to look back, for fear of exciting suspicion, until I reached a piece of timber a little distance from the town. I did as directed although it was very difficult to not look back to see if I was pursued. From the timber I made all haste to Nauvoo.

"I had been engaged with brother Wm. McCleary, the Prophet's brother-in-law, getting up a wagon with which to go west. It was well along towards completion when I was under the necessity of parting with my interest in it for a barrel of flour. I then succeeded in trading a little, one horse wagon for a light, two horse wagon. My principal dependence for a team to haul this was a pair of three-year-old, unbroke bullocks. Their chief characteristic was a wonderful ability for using their hind legs without any regard to the convenience or safety of those around them. These unmanageable beasts were put on to the tongue of the wagon and, for a time, an old pair of oxen were used ahead of them to prevent their getting away or doing damage.

"I had a small flock of sheep which I had not time to sell. These I left, together with my house and lot, the former containing my furniture and books. With my rickety old wagon, and the little it would carry, I crossed the Mississippi river and joined the camp on Sugar creek. I had an interest in a wagon shop which I left with Brother McCleary to turn over to some brother who needed assistance. My right of ownership in the horse, which was taken from me in Carthage, I assigned to lawyer Edmunds for keeping me clear of legal process, until I could cross the river out of the immediate reach of such process from Illinois.

"I thought if I could get my old wagon to a blacksmith shop and expend about twenty dollars on it, it would enable me to get to the Missouri river. In going from Nauvoo to Sugar creek, a short distance from the ferry across the river, the road passes over a hill. The top of this hill, I was aware, was the last point from which I could see the Nauvoo temple. I have no words with which to convey a proper conception of my feelings when taking a last look at this sacred monument of the living faith of the Saints, and which was associated in their minds with the heavenly and holy. After the lapse of thirty-six years I can scarcely restrain my feelings when I write of it. The rain and mud so swelled the timber and tightened the irons on my wagon, that without the aid of a blacksmith, I was able to continue my journey westward."

The first of March, 1846, the "Camp of Israel" on Sugar creek commenced its weary march for the Missouri river. It comprised nearly four hundred wagons, traveled five miles in a north-west direction and again encamped on Sugar creek. A well-known writer says: "The survivors of that journey will tell you they never suffered so much from the cold in their lives as they did on Sugar creek. And what of the Mormon women? Around them circles an almost tragic romance. Fancy may find abundant subject for graphic story of the devotion, the suffering, the matchless heroism of the `Sisters,' in the telling incident that nine children were born to them the first night they encamped on Sugar creek, February 5th, 1846. That day they wept their farewells over their beloved city, or in the sanctuary of the temple in which they had hoped to worship till the end of life, but which they left, never to see again; that night suffering nature administered to them the mixed cup of woman's supremest joy and pain."

As a fitting continuation of the above, Eliza R. Snow says: "I was informed that on the first night of the encampment, nine children were born into the world, and from that time as we journeyed onward mothers gave birth to offspring under almost every variety of circumstances imaginable, except those to which they had been accustomed; some in tents, others in wagons—in rainstorms and in snow-storms. I heard of one birth which occurred under the rude shelter of a hut, the sides of which were formed of blankets fastened to poles stuck in the ground, with a bark roof through which the rain was dripping; kind sisters stood holding dishes to catch the water as it fell, thus protecting the new-comer and its mother from a shower bath as the little innocent first entered on the stage of human life."

The following is another picture from the same pen illustrating the situation: "Many of our sisters walked all day, rain or shine, and at night prepared suppers for their families, with no sheltering tents; and then made their beds in and under wagons that contained their earthly all. How frequently, with intense sympathy and admiration, I watched the mother, when, forgetful of her own fatigue and destitution, she took unwearied pains to fix up, in the most palatable form, the allotted portion of food, and as she dealt it out was cheering the hearts of her homeless children, while, as I truly believed, her own was lifted to God in fervent prayer that their lives might be preserved."

In the midst of suffering there was comfort and consolation to these people in the thought that they were leaving their enemies. All were cheerful and happy in anticipation of finding a resting place from persecution somewhere in the solitudes of the Rocky Mountains. Welling up in every heart to stimulate to exertion, to nerve up to endurance was the hope, aye, the abiding faith that in the mountains and deserts they would find shelter from the pursuit of relentless enemies.

Exposure to the elements, excessive labor, want of proper food and comfortable clothing forced many to lay down their weary bodies in unmonumented graves, the location of which has passed from the knowledge of the living. Among these was the eldest brother of the writer, Edwin Little. He left Nauvoo with his wife and child with President Young. He was a strong man, physically, with a heart overflowing with kindness, he assisted all who needed help if possible. In this way he wore himself out, took cold and died with inflammation of the lungs, at Richardson's Point, fifty-five miles from Nauvoo. He was buried in a rough board coffin, the best that could be had under the circumstances, and an effort was made by his friends to hide his place of sepulchre for fear it might be disturbed by the enemies of the Saints.

At this time Joseph Young, president of the Seventies, was still in Nauvoo. From Richardson's Point his brother Brigham expressed his personal feelings on the situation as follows: "I feel as though Nauvoo will be filled with all manner of abominations. It is no place for the Saints, and the Spirit whispers to me that the brethren had better get away as fast as they can. * * * Do not think, Brother Joseph, that I hate to leave my house and home. No, far from that, I am so free from bondage at this time, that Nauvoo looks like a prison to me. It looks pleasant ahead, but dark to look back."

Yes, it was deliverance from bondage. Better, far, the freedom of the wilderness than the chances of suffering and death from a vindictive populace, stirred up with religious hate until they ignore the common rights of humanity.
