James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER VII.

DIFFICULTY OF OBTAINING SUPPLIES—SIXTEENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE ORGANIZATION OF THE CHURCH—O. PRATT'S REVIEW ON THE 11TH OF APRIL—MOUNT PISGAH LOCATED—SICKNESS AND DEATH AMONG THE SAINTS—SISTER Z. D. YOUNG'S NARRATIVE OF SUFFERING—P. MEEK'S NARRATIVE.

TO PROVIDE for the inhabitants of a city driven from their homes into a wilderness, exposed to the sweeping storms and bitter cold of winter, with nothing but the slender resources of the camp itself, is a task which but few men could hope to successfully accomplish. Besides the food supply for the people, it required daily large quantities of grain to sustain the animals of the camps, and these were necessities of existence, the people's means of deliverance from the perils that environed them.

The sixteenth anniversary of the organization of the Church found the camps on a branch of Shoal creek, where they remained over two weeks on account of rain and mud. The 6th of April nine or ten teams were sent to the settlements for corn. In about three days they returned, the most of them empty. There was but little strength in the old, dry grass or in the early, succulent growth, and the animals were weak.

Many reflections crowd around this sixteenth anniversary of the organization of the Church. Its situation was quite in keeping with its wonderful, eventful history. Three times in this short period had its members been forced to evacuate their homes en masse, and these sweeping exoduses were interspersed with minor drivings and plunderings. The gospel had been preached extensively in the United States, in the Canadas and in Europe. Two beautiful temples and several cities had been built, hundreds of the Saints had lost their lives, the direct and indirect results of persecution, and the inspired genius, the great prophet of the nineteenth century, who had led them in the God-like struggle to plant truth and righteousness in the earth, had been slain in the meridian of life.

After petitioning the Executive of every State in the Union for a place of rest, they were now seeking a refuge in the wilderness from the vindictiveness of Christian civilization. Let one who toiled and suffered speak of the situation and sentiments of the Saints at this time:

"April 11th. During the night the mud froze hard. To any but Saints our circumstances would have been very discouraging, for it seemed to be with the greatest difficulty that we could preserve our animals from actual starvation, and we were obliged to send off several day's journey to the Missouri settlements, on the south, to procure grain. Many of the people were nearly destitute of food, and many women and children suffered much from exposure to the inclemency of the weather and from the lack of the necessaries of life, such as they were in former times accustomed to enjoy. But in the midst of all these temporal afflictions the Saints were comforted in anticipation of better days. They looked forward to the time when these light afflictions should cease * * * They were willing to endure hardships and privations for the sake of escaping the unrelenting persecutions of Gentile Christians, from whom they had received for many years nothing but cruelty and the most heart-rending oppression.

"Their desire was to establish themselves in some lonely valley of the mountains, in some sequestered spot where they and their children could worship God and obey His voice and prepare themselves for the glory which is to be revealed at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

"With these glorious anticipations, cheerfulness and joy seemed to animate every countenance and sufferings were endured without murmuring. The Twelve and other authorities met in council and determined to leave the settlements still further to our left and launch forth upon the broad prairies of the north-west, which were for hundreds of miles uninhabited."

The 24th of April Garden Grove, on the headwaters of Grand river, was reached. There it was decided to make a way station, a place of rest for those who were unable to proceed further. It was still a seasonable time for putting in corn and other crops. The camps were organized for labor, and by the 10th of May many houses were built, wells dug, extensive farms fenced, and the place assumed the appearance of having been occupied for years. On the 11th of May, a portion of the camp resumed their journey.

Of this time P. P. Pratt, in his autobiography, says:

"We called the place `Garden Grove.' It is in Iowa, perhaps one hundred and fifty miles from Nauvoo. After assisting to fence this farm and build some log houses, I was despatched ahead by the Presidency with a small company to try to find another location. Crossing this branch of Grand river I now steered through the vast and fertile prairies and groves without a track or anything but a compass to guide me—the country was entirely wild and without inhabitants.

"Our course was west, a little north. We crossed small streams daily, which, on account of deep beds and miry banks, as well as on account of their being swollen by the rains, we had to bridge. After journeying thus for several days, and while lying encamped on a small stream which we had bridged, I took my horse and rode ahead some three miles in search of one of the main branches of Grand river which we had expected to find for some time. Riding about three or four miles through beautiful prairies, I came suddenly to some round and sloping hills, grassy, and covered with beautiful groves of timber, while alternate open groves and forests seemed blended in all the beauty and harmony of an English park, while beneath and beyond on the west rolled a main branch of Grand river, with its rich bottoms of alternate forest and prairie. As I approached this lovely scenery several deer and wolves being startled at the sight of me, abandoned the place and bounded away till lost from sight amid the groves.

"Being pleased and excited at the varied beauty before me, I cried out, this is Mount Pisgah. I returned to my camp, with the report of having found the long sought river, and we soon moved on and encamped under the shade of those beautiful groves. It was now late in May, and we halted here to await the arrival of the President and council. In a few days they arrived and formed a general encampment here, and finally formed a settlement, and surveyed and enclosed another farm of several thousand acres. This became a town and resting place for the Saints for years, and is now known on the map of Iowa as a village and post-office named `Pisgah.'"

Most of the Saints who stopped at these stations were pre-disposed to disease. The hardships they had endured, the large area of rich prairie soil newly turned up to the warm spring and summer sun, and other untoward conditions rapidly developed the germs of disease already sown.

Mrs. Zina D. Young, in her written experience at the latter place, furnishes a vivid illustration, not only of her own afflictions, but of the unrecorded sufferings of a multitude of others. She says, "We reached Mount Pisgah in May. I was now with my father, who had been appointed to preside over this temporary settlement of the Saints. But an unlooked-for event soon came. One evening Parley P. Pratt arrived, bringing the word from headquarters that the Mormon Battalion must be raised in compliance with the requisition of the government upon our people. And what did this news personally amount to, to me? That I had only my father to look after me now; for I had parted from my husband; my eldest brother, Dimick Huntington, with his family, had gone into the Battalion, and every man who could be spared was also enlisted. It was impossible for me to go on to Winter Quarters, so I tarried at Mount Pisgah with my father.

"But, alas! a still greater trial awaited me! The call for the Battalion had left many destitute. They had to live in wagons. But worse than destitution stared us in the face. Sickness came upon us, and death invaded our camp. Sickness was so prevalent and deaths so frequent that enough help could not be had to make coffins, and many of the dead were wrapped in their grave clothes and buried with split logs at the bottom of the grave and brush at the sides, that being all that could be done for them by their mourning friends. Too soon it became my turn to mourn. My father was taken sick, and in eighteen days he died. Just before he left us for his better home, he raised himself upon his elbow, and said: `Man is like the flower or the grass cut down in an hour! Father unto Thee do I commend my spirit!' This said, he sweetly went to rest with the just, a martyr for the truth; for, like my dear mother, who died in the expulsion from Missouri, he died in the expulsion from Nauvoo. Sad was my heart. I alone of all his children was there to mourn."

When the Saints were scattered from Garden Grove to Council Bluffs, under very unfortunate conditions, that memorable call was made on them by the United States for a battalion of five hundred men for the Mexican war. It drew heavily on the strength of the camps and necessarily modified both general and individual plans. Leaving them for the present on the lands of the Pottowatomie Indians, who made them welcome, we will go back and bring up our friend Elder Priddy Meeks.

He left Sugar creek with the Saints and in continuation of his narrative says: "When I arrived at the crossing of the Des Moines river, I found many wagons already there waiting to ferry over. As this would occasion considerable delay, I felt impressed to move up the river with the hope of finding some better opportunity of crossing. I traveled up it for two or three days and saw several others who had taken the same view of the situation as myself. We found an old ferry boat lying idle. This we repaired and crossed the river. Finding no road in the direction it was necessary to travel, we followed a divide; or the high ground between two streams, for several days. It rained almost incesantly, but still we made some progress each day.

"Notwithstanding our untoward circumstances, we were cheerful and happy. We ate our water gruel when we had nothing better, which was much of the time. I had a fiddle with me in the use of which I was sufficiently proficient to grind out music for evening dances. This enabled us to diversify our lives with the merry dance around our camp fires, when the weather would permit.

"After traveling several days we discovered in the distance white objects moving slowly over the prairies. Various were our conjectures as to what we were indebted for the unusual appearance. Some surmised they might be a flock of white cranes feeding, but a nearer approach developed them into wagons. It was President Young's company traveling in nearly the same direction as ourselves.

"Arriving at the wayside settlement of the Saints called Mount Pisgah, I stopped to make a temporary home and raise a crop. I assisted in fencing a field in which I planted corn and vegetables. I also built quite a comfortable cabin where I anticipated spending the winter. I farmed in connection with Brother Christian Houtz. After accomplishing considerable labor I was directed by President Young to go on to the Bluffs. I left my interest in the crops to Brother Houtz, and directed him to let some poor brother, who might arrive late in the season, have my cabin. He afterwards turned it over to Joseph W. Johnson. Soon after I arrived at Council Bluffs the Mormon Battalion was raised for the Mexican war. My son-in-law Orson B. Adams was the second man who volunteered to go and I took charge of his family and effects."
