James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER VIII.

MILLER AND EMMETT COMPANY—THE CAMP ON RUNNING WATER—THE AGED CHIEF OF THE PONCAS—BREAKING UP OF THE CAMP ON RUNNING WATER—WINTER QUARTERS LOCATED AND A TOWN BUILT—SISTER BATHSHEBA SMITH'S DESCRIPTION OF THE HOUSES—TEN THOUSAND SAINTS ON THE MOVE ACROSS IOWA.

IT HAD been contemplated, by the leaders of the Church, to send a company of pioneers to the mountains the same year. An unsuccessful effort was made. The following account of that effort is from Mr. Anson Call's Biographical Sketch in Tullidge's History of Northern Utah:

"George Miller and James Emmett, under false pretences, had deceived many of the Saints and drawn off fifty-two wagons into the western wilderness. Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball each organized a company of seventy-five wagons for the avowed purpose of traveling westward.

"They left Elk Horn river for the mountains by order of the Apostles, the 22nd of July, 1846. They traveled up the Platte river to the Pawnee missionary station on the Loupe Fork, where they found the company of Miller and Emmett.

"When encamped on the westside of the Loupe Fork, an express came from the Apostles, directing them not to travel any further west that season. The express also brought instructions for the organization of a council of twelve men, to direct the affairs of the companies, and they were named in the communication. The council was organized on the 8th of August, 1846. Bishop Geo. Miller was its president.

"The next move was to find a place where the companies could winter. For this purpose the country around the Platte river and Loupe Fork were explored without gratifying results. They counseled with two Ponca chiefs, who invited them to winter with their people on the Missouri river. They were guaranteed protection, plenty of feed for their animals, and timber with which to build houses. They accepted the invitation of these friendly Lamanites, and with nine days travel arrived at their camp. A place was selected on the west side of the mouth of the Running Water river, and one hundred and twenty-five log houses were built in fort form.

"Nucanumpa, the aged chief of the nation, was taken sick and sent for the council. He said he had told his captains not to distrust the Mormons, and they had agreed that they would not. He wished to talk all he could before he died; had killed his best dog, and after it was eaten he wanted to commence to talk.

"The Mormon leaders assisted the chiefs to eat the dog, when the talk commenced through the interpreter, Battese. The chief said much about dying and another world. He desired his Mormon friends to prepare such a stone as he had seen in St. Louis, and put it at the head of his grave with his name and title on it. The following day this noble specimen of the aboriginal American went to his departed fathers, and a stone was put at the head of his grave as he had requested.

"Rushes were plenty for cattle, but it was a hard winter and many died. The Poncas did as they agreed, but the Sioux stole some horses and cattle.

"George Miller, being in authority, seemed infatuated with the idea that he was the real head of the people, and that when spring came he could lead them into the wilderness away from the Apostles.

"The 27th of February, 1847, Apostles E. T. Benson and Erastus Snow arrived in camp with instructions from their quorum for the people to return to Winter Quarters, and replenish their teams and their stock of provisions preparatory to going to the mountains. After delivering their message they departed.

"The council of twelve was called together and with its president came James Emmett, who was not a member, but who was permitted by request of Bishop Miller, to take a part in its deliberations. The president arose and addressed the council, saying in substance that he did not consider the Twelve had any right to dictate to the people of that camp; that he was their appointed leader and it was their duty to follow him into the wilderness among the Lamanites, in fulfillment of a special mission conferred upon him by the Prophet Joseph. James Emmett followed in the same strain. It then being the privilege of each member of the council to express his views, Anson Call, who had from its organization been an active member, arose and stated his, the summary of which was that the twelve Apostles were the legitimate leaders of the Saints and that he should follow their counsel. The ten members of the council who followed him were unanimous in expressing the same views.

"Bishop Miller saw the reins slipping out of his hands and vented his rage in an impetuous speech. All the council excepting its president, decided to call the people together and lay the subject before them, that they might understandingly choose for themselves whether they would stay with Miller and Emmett, or return to Winter Quarters. This was done and preparations were at once commenced for the return journey. On the 3rd of April the camp moved out for Winter Quarters, and only five or six wagons remained with Miller and Emmett. * * * * * * * *

"The action of Bishop Miller in opposing the Apostles had opened the eyes of all who had been deceived. Thus by a far-seeing policy of the Apostles, or by a chain of special providences, were many honest people saved from temporal ruin, and brought back under their legitimate leaders, to act their part in the grand scheme of empire-founding in the Rocky Mountains. Arriving at Winter Quarters the companies were broken up."

Some of the Saints remained at the way stations of Garden Grove and Mount Pisgah. Many others settled on the Pottowatomie lands, built houses, cut hay for their animals, gathered sustenance for their families, and made every possible preparation for the coming winter. The leaders of the Church located a place on the west bank

THE FERRY.

of the Missouri river which they called Winter Quarters. The name sufficiently indicates the object. There seven hundred houses were built, suggestive that that many families located there, comprising four thousand people.

The narrative of Mrs. Bathsheba W. Smith furnishes a good illustration of the make up of the houses of this impromptu city: "Our chimneys were made of sods, cut with a spade in the form of a brick; clay was pounded in to make our fireplaces and hearths. In our travels the winds had literally blown our tents to pieces, so that we were glad to get into cabins. The most of roofs were made of timber, covered with clay. The floors were split and hewed puncheon; the doors were generally made of the same material, of cottonwood and linn. Many houses were covered with oak-shakes, fastened on with weight-poles. A few were covered with shingles. A log meeting-house was built, about twenty-four by forty feet, and the hewn floor was frequently used for dancing. A grist-mill was built and run by water-power, and in addition to this, several horse-mills and hand-mills were used to grind corn."

In the general epistle to the Saints of December 23rd, 1847, it is estimated that in the month of July, 1846, there were more than two thousand emigrating wagons between Council Bluffs on the Missouri river and Nauvoo. The number of people accompanying these wagons may be reasonably estimated at ten thousand. Probably half as many more scattered out from Nauvoo in various directions, to get away from enemies and to accumulate means to follow the main body of their people.

Winter Quarters was the third, and by far the most important way station between Nauvoo and the objective point of the "Camps of Israel," the valleys of the Rocky Mountains. There, and in the surrounding country, they were to gather up their strength and mature their plans before grappling with the difficulties of a thousand miles of desert travel. In log cabins and dugouts, hastily constructed under the pressure of necessity, must the Saints endure the rigors of winter and take the chances of life and death with bodies worn, constitutions broken from excessive toil and exposure, often half famished for want of proper food and chilled for want of comfortable shelter and clothing. To say that a city of the dead increased rapidly beside that of the living is stating the case mildly. To say that the living were decimated would not probably be an over estimate of the mortality during that season of struggling for existence.
