James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER IX.

THE REMNANT IN NAUVOO—A BRAVE DEFENCE AGAINST THE MOB—ELDER BULLOCK'S THRILLING NARRATIVE—THE HANCOCK TRAGEDY.

HAVING located the Saints who left Nauvoo in the winter and spring of 1846, we will return and record the fate of the poor and afflicted who were of necessity left until teams could be sent from the advanced camps to move them away. The vindictive spirit in the inhabitants of the surrounding country which had forced the main body of the Saints from their homes in midwinter, could not let this helpless remnant remain in peace until friends could assist them. In the fore part of September, 1846, the mob marched on Nauvoo in force. There were only about one hundred and fifty men and boys, generally poor in health and in an impoverished condition, to defend the place against an enemy several times their number. They made a desperate effort in self-defence, but were overpowered.

A competent eye witness may tell what he saw others suffer and what he endured. The writer of the following letter, Elder Thomas Bullock, was known to many thousands of the Saints. The copy of the letter, from which the writer has taken these excerpts, was without date, but the letter was doubtless written the winter after the events described in it took place. It was addressed to Elder F. D. Richards, then in England.

"WINTER QUARTERS, CAMP OF ISRAEL,

"OMAHA NATION.

"Beloved Franklin:

"In the month of August, 1846, I was taken very sick with the ague and fever, and soon after my wife and four little children were taken with the same disease. In this condition we continued until the 16th of September. On that day a friend, George Wardell, packed up my goods on two wagons and removed them to his house to be out of danger from the cannon balls, which were flying about too thick for anyone to feel anyway comfortable. He located us behind his house out of danger. As I did not see this battle, I don't write much about it. But I know for a whole week the roar of cannon and the sharp cracking of rifles kept us in awful suspense and anxiety.

"Our devoted city was defended by about one hundred and fifty poor, sickly, persecuted Saints, while it was cannonaded by from fifteen hundred to two thousand demoniacs in the shape of men, who had sworn to raze our temple to the ground, to burn the city, ravish our wives and daughters and drive the remainder of the people into the river. With what desperation our little band fought against such an overwhelming horde of desperadoes, I leave you to judge. My flesh seems to crawl on my bones at the remembrance of those scenes. On the 17th of September, two thousand men with five hundred wagons marched into the city. Such yelling and hooting I never before heard from civilized men, nor even from the wild savages. Terror and dismay surely for once overcame the sick, the poor women and children.

"While the leaders were haranguing their mob followers at the rope walk, by Hibbard's, such an awful and infuriated noise I never before heard, though I was in Warsaw street, more than a quarter of a mile from the scene. We expected an indiscriminate massacre was commencing. Myself and others who were sick were carried by friends into the tall weeds and into the woods, while all who were able to do so hid themselves. Many crossed the river leaving everything behind them. As night approached we returned to our shelter. But, O God, what a night to remember!

"The next morning at nine o'clock saw me, my wife, my four children, my sister-in-law Fanny, my blind mother-in-law, all shaking with the ague in one house, only George Wardell to do anything for us, when a band of about thirty men, armed with guns, with fixed bayonets, pistols in belt, the captain with sword in his hand, and the stars and stripes flying about, marched opposite my sheltering roof. The captain called and demanded that the owner of the two wagons be brought out. I was raised from `my bed, led out of doors, supported by my sister-in-law and the rail fence. I was then asked if those goods were mine. I replied, `They are.' The captain then stepped out to within four feet of me, pointed his sword at my throat, while four others presented their guns with bayonets within two feet of my body, and said, `If you are not off from here in twenty minutes my orders are to shoot you.' I replied, `Shoot away, for you will only send me to heaven a few hours quicker, for you may see I am not for this world many hours longer.' The captain then told me, `If you will renounce Mormonism you may stay here and we will protect you.' I replied, `This is not my house; yonder is my house,' pointing to it, `which I built and paid for with the gold that I earned in England. I never committed the least crime in Illinois, but I am a Mormon, and if I live I shall follow the Twelve.' Then said the captain, `I am sorry to see you and your sick family, but if you are not gone when I return in half an hour, my orders are to kill you and every Mormon in the place.'

"But Oh, the awful cursing and swearing these men did pour out! I tremble when I think of it. George and Edwin drove my wagons down to the ferry and were searched five times for firearms. The mob took a pistol, and though they promised to return it when I got across the river, I have not seen it to this day. While on the bank of the river I crawled to the margin to bid a sister who was going down to St. Louis good bye. While there a mobber shouted out, Look! Look! there is a skeleton bidding death good bye.' So you can imagine the poor, sickly condition of both of us.

"On Wednesday, the 23rd of September, while in my wagon on the slough opposite Nauvoo, a tremendous thunder shower passed over which drenched everything we had; not a dry thread left to us; the bed a pool of water, my wife and sister-in-law lading it out by basins full, and I in a burning fever and insensible, with all my hair shorn off to cure me of my disease. Many had not a wagon or tent to shelter them from the pitiless blast. One case I will mention. A poor woman stood among the bushes, wrapping her cloak around her three little orphan children, to shield them from the storm as well as she could through that terrible night, during which there was one continued roar of thunder and blaze of lightning while the rain descended in torrents.

"The mob seized every person in Nauvoo they could find, led them to the river and threw them in. I will mention one individual case. They seized Charles Lambert, led him to the river and in the midst of cursing and swearing one man said, `By the holy saints, I baptize you by order of the commanders of the temple,' plunged him in backwards and then said, `The commandments must be fulfilled, G—d— you, you must have another dip.' They threw him in on his face, then sent him on the flat boat across the river, with the promise that if he returned to Nauvoo they would shoot him. Such were some of the scenes that occurred when we were driven from Nauvoo." * * * * * * *

Elder Bullock wrote the above under the keen sensibility of one who suffered about all that could be endured. We might expect the picture to be overdrawn but the following from the Mississippian, a paper published at Rock Island, about seventy miles from Nauvoo, fittingly parallels Elder Bullock's letter in intensity of expression and vividness of coloring. The Mississippian heads the article,

"THE HANCOCK TRAGEDY.

"Such is our feeling, our indignation, our burning sense of shame, of disgrace, in regard to recent affairs in Hancock county that we hardly know what to say—how to begin. * * * * * * *

"The savage will relent over the infant's wail, but these infuriated men see the haggard mother with her dying infant, nerved by despair, and goaded by fear, rushing from the city, and they can laugh at her misery, taunt her as she passes, and add speed to her faltering steps by their abuse, their insults and jeers. Aye, too, many of these helpless, dying children, these more than widowed mothers, have fathers and husbands now engaged in the service of the United States, fighting for their country. * * * And such is the protection afforded to their wives and children, turned out from their only shelter, none but heaven's canopy, with no hope but in God's mercy! And to such a pass has mob law come in the state of Illinois. Men deliberately taken out and shot, denied a trial, and their last appeal for mercy meeting no response. Men surrendering themselves under the most solemn pledges and faith of the state, confined within prison walls, guarded by men under a solemn promise to protect them from all violence, basely surrendered to armed ruffians and brutally massacred while awaiting a trial under the laws of their country! Men unsafe even with their female companions, but inhumanly shot on the highway! Men resorting to the cruelest tortures to wring from their victims confessions of crime! Men with their wives and children compelled to see their houses, their substance, all destroyed before their eyes, with their sick and dying around them, and then driven out into the wilderness to become the prey of savages, or the victims of famine.

"We turn from the picture with disgust and loathing. If such is to be the state of things, we with our brethren may next become the victims of mob violence because we are immersionists and close communionists—our Methodist friends because they shout—the Presbyterians by their infant sprinkling, the Episcopalians for reading their prayers! It is time at any expense, at any cost, for every citizen, for every officer to stand forward and defend, maintain, and obey the laws."
