James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XI.

THE WILDERNESS ECHOES WITH THE SOUND OF INDUSTRY—THE PIONEERS LEAVE WINTER QUARTERS—THEIR MILITARY ORGANIZATION—THE FIRST BUFFALO HUNT—REPRESENTATIVE LADY PIONEERS—A PROPHET GENERAL WITH APOSTLES FOR LIEUTENANTS—THE PRAIRIE ON FIRE—VAST HERDS OF BUFFALO—THIEVING INDIANS.

"The time of winter now is o'er, There's verdure on the plain; We leave our sheltering roofs once more And to our tents again."—E. R. S.

WITH several hundred Saints wintering with the Indians on Running Water river, one hundred and fifty miles above Winter Quarters; with a large portion of the people on the Pottowatomie lands on the east side of the Missouri; with several thousands, including the indigent and helpless, the families of men in the Battalion who needed direct attention from the authorities; with the general supervision of large herds of animals, the preservation of which from marauding Indians was a necessity of existence, imposed very heavy responsibilities on Brigham Young and his fellow Apostles.

The Saints bore their afflictions with the fortitude characteristic of them. The long winter gave their leaders ample time to perfect their plans for the important operations of the ensuing season. As the spring of 1847 opened, this wilderness, so lately occupied by only a few Indians, resounded with the sounds of intelligent, well directed labor. There was energetic purpose in every stroke of an ax, every turn of a wagon wheel or of a plow. Those who had been selected to make up the company of pioneers and those who expected to follow them that season "to the west," were busy preparing for their advent into the wilderness. Those expecting to remain, with equally decided purpose, were fencing fields, breaking up the virgin soil and preparing to raise food for themselves and for those who might take their places when they departed for the place which all expected would be found for them in the desert.

The 7th of April, 1847, the pioneers began to move out of Winter Quarters for their place of gathering on the Elk Horn river. After organizing they started on their long-contemplated journey the 14th of April. The company consisted of seventy-three wagons and carriages, one hundred and forty-three men, three women and two children, in all, one hundred and forty-eight souls. With one exception the animals of the camp were horses and mules; that exception was a milch cow belonging to Lorenzo D. Young. Doubtless previous training had fitted this cow for the proper performance of her part as a pioneer, for she daily followed the camp without trouble to anyone. Mrs. Harriet Young was the pioneer butter-maker of the Mormon camps on the plains, for she had thoughtfully taken along a small churn, so that her husband and sometimes friends enjoyed the luxury of a taste of butter as well as milk for their tea and coffee.

It was a matter of serious consideration on the part of President Young on account of emergencies that might arise, whether any woman should accompany the pioneers. The following considerations might well decide in their favor. So far the wives and daughters of the Elders had bravely shared dangers and sacrifices with them. They were not likely to encounter any more hardships and risks than had already characterized much of their lives. When the subject was fairly considered their past record evidently entitled them to a representation in "The camps of Israel," and why should that of the pioneers be an exception? The representative ladies were Mrs. Clara Young, wife of Brigham Young, Mrs. Ellen Kimball wife of H. C. Kimball and Mrs. Harriet Young wife of Lorenzo D. Young.

This company was made up of a choice selection of Elders whose previous experiences and known abilities gave an assurance that the organization was well adapted to meet any probable emergencies that might arise. Those intending to follow them the same season, were advised to wait several weeks until the weather should become warmer, and the grass have time to grow.

The pioneers were efficiently organized as a military body of which Brigham Young was the chosen leader. A prophet-general, leading the van of his shattered people into the wilderness with Apostles for lieutenants marking out the road for the thousands who were to follow, and selecting a location abounding in profusion with elements of comfort and wealth, where they could recruit their energies and increase in numbers until able to combat the antagonisms which they must meet in the fulfillment of their mission.

They were pioneers in the strictest sense, for there was no beaten track for them to follow. They struck out on the north side of the beautiful Platte which for five hundred miles wound its serpentine way through a magnificent country, with scarcely a mark of civilization. They crossed several small streams before arriving at the Loupe Fork of the Platte. This they found the most dangerous stream to ford on the whole route, having an ever changing bottom of quicksand.

It was necessary for the men to wade the stream in crossing their wagons. The water was up to their waists and as the weather was yet cool, this made them very uncomfortable. From the ford they followed a dividing ridge to the head of Grand Island, where they first came in sight of buffalo. This was something new in their varied experiences. The sight made a sensation for in it was a spice of romance. A buffalo hunt was at once inaugurated. Several men mounted their horses with the view of attacking a band in sight, but a considerable distance away. Coming up with them they gave chase in splendid style along the side of a ridge in full view of the camp. The hunters mingled with the noble game and all were soon enveloped in a cloud of dust. Occasionally a straggling animal was singled out and became a victim. The sport was continued until the party had killed and secured eleven bulls, cows and calves. When these were brought to camp, it presented the appearance of a lively meat market. All were busy drying their meat over smoking fires in the sun to preserve what could not be used immediately. Now fairly launched out on to the plains into the midst of wild animals

THE BUFFALO HUNT.

and roving bands of Indians, each day brought not only its legitimate labors, but its imaginary or real dangers, its novelties in animal and vegetable life and its new and ever varying scenery.

The teams being weak for want of sufficient food, on the 3rd of May the company concluded to rest for the day. Many of the men repaired wagons, harness, etc., and a company of hunters were sent out and returned with two buffalo calves and one antelope.

The morning of the 4th of May, a report having reached camp that a scouting party a few miles ahead had seen a large body of Indians, the company was directed to travel two wagons abreast, as this compact form was better suited for defence. As soon as the wagons were well out on the prairie President Young called out, "Attention, the camps of Israel. First company forward." Then the others in succession took their places until the desired formation was attained. This was a unique style of command for modern times.

During the day a Frenchman came over from the south side of the Platte. He was one of a company of nine men, with three teams, on their way from Fort Laramie to the States. By him fifty or sixty letters were sent to the families of pioneers at Winter Quarters. He remained with the pioneers about an hour, and three of their number returned with him. The Indians had been burning the dry grass which gave the country a blackened appearance, occasionally relieved by a spot of green grass mingled with the dry of the previous year's growth. These spots, which had escaped the fire, often afforded but a scanty supply of provender for the animals.

In the afternoon of the following day the camp traveled about six miles. The hunters killed a buffalo cow and five calves. A good sized calf was also captured alive with the intention of making a camp pet of it. About 4 p. m. the company came to a column of fire which crossed their path, extending from the river as far as the eye could see to the north. They wisely concluded that it was safest to encamp on the burnt prairie. Some small patches of grass which the fire had spared, afforded a scanty supply of food for animals.

About 4 o'clock on the morning of the 6th there was a timely shower of rain, and the company passed safely to the west side of the line of fire and smoke. The country abounded in buffalo, antelope, elk and wolves. During the day immense herds of buffalo were in sight on both sides of the Platte river. Many hundreds were feeding within a short distance of the road, but manifested no alarm at the approach of the company. Professor O. Pratt in his journal says:

"During the time of our halts we had to watch our teams to keep them from mingling with the buffalo. I think I may safely say that I have seen ten thousand buffalo during the day. Some few antelope, which came near our wagons, we killed for food, their meat being very excellent, but we did not allow ourselves to kill any game only as we wanted for food. * * * Young buffalo calves frequently came in our way and we had to carry them away from the camp to prevent their following us."

About this time, between the buffalo and the prairie fires, the animals of the camp were nearly famished. The buffalo became very numerous. It was impracticable to give an approximate estimate of their numbers, say one hundred thousand or more. They were poor in flesh and no more were killed than the necessities of the camp required. At one time a herd of several miles in extent was seen. "The prairie was literally a dense, black mass of moving animals." Mr. Thomas Bullock says: "Our camp had to stop two or three times while the droves went around us. As soon as they had passed many would stop and look at us, as if amazed at such a sight. We caught several calves alive. Remember, catching a buffalo calf and a domesticated one, are two different things. A swift horse is sometimes pushed to catch up with him. They are as swift as horses, and although the old animals are the ugliest racers of any brutes, they get over the ground very fast, and an inexperienced rider is soon left to admire their beauty in the distance." The bones and carcasses of buffalo were more or less abundant on the prairie, after the company passed the Loupe Fork. Among them were frequently found human bones, probably those of Indians. Several human skulls were found in a state of good preservation.

A considerable distance along the Platte, for want of better fuel, the pioneers often made their fires of the excrement of the buffalo. The emigration who have followed them for two hundred miles along the Platte, have been compelled to use the same material. It burns something like dry turf, and makes quite a good fire when dry, but is useless when wet.

Of May 10th, Apostle O. Pratt says in his journal: "Before we left this morning we wrote a letter addressed to the officers of our next camp, which will follow our track, in about six or eight weeks. The letter was carefully secured from the weather by sawing five or six inches into a board parallel to its surface. The board was about six inches wide and eighteen long. The letter was deposited in the track made by the saw and three cletes were respectively nailed upon the top and two sides, and after writing on the board necessary directions, it was nailed to the end of a pole, four to five inches in diameter and about fifteen feet in length. This pole was firmly set about five feet in the ground near our road." While traveling a bay horse made its appearance. It seemed quite wild. Some of the company gave chase with the hope of capturing it but without success. Feed for the teams continued scarce on account of having been eaten out by the buffalo.

Mr. William Clayton, clerk of the company, and others began to discuss the subject of attaching some machinery to a wagon to indicate the number of miles traveled each day. President Young requested Mr. Pratt to give the matter some attention. In a day or two, by the assistance of Mr. Harmon, a mechanic, a machine was made and attached to a wagon wheel which automatically measured the distance traveled whenever the wagon moved.

The 11th of May a human skull was found. The teeth were perfectly sound and well set in the jaw. Perhaps it had belonged to an Indian warrior who had fallen in one of the late battles between the Pawnees and Sioux, in which the latter were victorious. Some small scars on the bone indicated that the scalp had been removed. About this time there were indications that large parties of Indians had lately been in the vicinity. Also buffalo were scarce, evidently having been driven from the locality. The company encamped near a clear stream of water, about fifteen feet wide, in which a number of small fish called dace, were caught with a hook. Feed was scarce, Indian horses and the buffalo having left but little grass. From the Elk Horn until the South Pass was reached, a distance of seven hundred miles, it might be said every mile of travel increased the altitude and proportionately with that increase the air became cooler and more rarefied. This will account for the fact that on the morning of the 14th of May the animals suffered considerably with the cold.

Approaching Laramie the country became more broken, and, from hills near the road, the prospect was often very extensive and beautiful. Here and there small herds of buffalo were grazing upon the hills and in the valleys. It was a new experience, even in the

A PRAIRIE DOG VILLAGE.

wonderfully varied lives of the pioneers. There was a wild, weird romance about the country, like some dream, some imaginary scene materialized. During the evenings the sound of music in different parts of the camp seemed strangely harmonious with the almost death-like solitude of these uninhabited regions.

There were indications that Indians had discovered the camp and were lurking around for the purpose of stealing horses. During the night one was seen by the guard creeping towards the camp on his hands and knees. He was fired upon and immediately rose to his feet and ran away. During the following day fresh tracks of these nomadic robbers were seen in the sand. They would sometimes follow emigrants hundreds of miles, keeping secreted during the day and watching for opportunities to steal at night. The pioneers corraled their wagons in a circle, with the tongues outside, and the forward wheel of one wagon locked into the hind wheel of another. In the interior of this temporary fortification the animals were secured, while the whole camp was strongly guarded. When the animals were grazing during the day, about fourteen men usually encircled them on all sides to prevent them from straying, or being suddenly frightened away by a dash from Indians, accompanied with horrid yells for the purpose of scattering the animals of emigrants out of their reach. If the Indians succeeded they could hunt up the animals at leisure after the owners had gone on. Sometimes if small parties of two or three men ventured in search of their lost animals, they were robbed of their clothing, and of their horses; if so fortunate as to have any. If permitted to escape with their lives they returned to camp in a destitute, forlorn condition. At this time game was plentiful. Out of the abundance of buffalo, deer, antelope, geese and ducks, the hunters were able to supply the camp with what meat they required. No fuel for several days except floodwood and buffalo excrement. The 16th of May, the camp rested in the afternoon and the people met for public worship. Two days after they crossed a rapid stream which they named Rattlesnake creek, from the circumstance of finding a rattlesnake near it.
