James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XII.

ASH HOLLOW AND ITS REMINISCENCES—RATTLESNAKES—VISIT OF INDIANS—CHIMNEY ROCK—ROMANTIC SCENERY—A LUNAR RAINBOW—THE BLACK HILLS—FORT LARAMIE—CALIFORNIA EMIGRATION—LARAMIE PEAK—MAKING ROADS—FERRY ACROSS THE PLATTE.

THE 20th of May Ash Hollow on the south side of the Platte was passed. It was so named from some ash timber growing there. It afterwards became a noted way mark in traveling up the Platte. Rumor located many a deadly fight here between hostile bands of Indians, and also between them and white men. Near here was a lone cedar tree in which had been deposited the remains of an Indian child with the necessary accompaniments, according to their traditions, for its future enjoyment and welfare. The following day there was found on the prairie a large petrified bone, once a part of the frame-work of an animal of enormous size. It was a leg bone from the knee downwards, was seventeen and one-half inches in length, eleven inches wide, six inches thick, and its weight twenty-seven pounds. It was a curious specimen of ancient zoology. Towards evening the camp was visited by two or three Indians. They appeared friendly and gave the men to understand that a large number of their people were encamped near by.

May 22nd, the company crossed a stream which they called Crab creek. With glasses Chimney Rock was seen forty-two miles distant. The following day was Sunday. As was the general custom on that day the teams rested. By a barometrical measurement of Professor Pratt's, the height of a neighboring peak was 235 feet above the Platte river, and 3,590 feet above sea level. Rattlesnakes were numerous. Nathaniel Fair banks was bitten by a large yellow one. Although remedies were applied he suffered considerably during the day. The people assembled for worship and were addressed by Brigham Young and others.

About 7 o'clock p. m. the wind blew a violent gale from the north, with rain and hail from a cold quarter. This made people and animals very uncomfortable. The morning of the 24th a few flakes of snow fell. From a real or fancied resemblance of the surrounding hills and rocks to ruined cities and towers, this region was named Bluff Ruins. At the noon halt the camp was visited by two Indians. By signs they made the company understand that their tribe was a short distance on the south side of the Platte. Food was given them and they returned to their camp, fording the river on foot. They notified their people of the approach of the pioneers, and, in the evening, thirty-five of their number, including squaws and boys, come to camp on horseback. They were much better dressed than the Indians on the Missouri river. Many of them had broadcloth clothes, blankets and fur caps, adorned with abundance of beads and other finery. They were armed with bows, steel-pointed arrows and a few firearms. They were of the Dacotah tribe, which interpreted means "cut throat," but generally known to the whites as Sioux. Their chief's name was Owastate-cha. Soon after dark he sent his men away to encamp, but he requested the privilege of remaining with the pioneers over night. This, doubtless, was a precautionary measure on his part, as his people would disturb nothing belonging to the camp while their chief was enjoying its hospitality. A tent was spread for his accommodation. In the morning there was a hard frost. To a supper for the Indians the previous evening the pioneers added a breakfast.

The 26th of May the pioneers passed Chimney Rock, but about three miles north of it. At this point the valley of the Platte was about 3,790 feet above sea level. Prickly pears continued to grow more numerous. This indicated that they were getting into a country of not much rainfall during summer. They were still on that section of the route where there was no timber on the north side of the Platte and, consequently, no fuel for camp use except flood wood, which was very scarce, and "buffalo chips." The latter diminished in quantity as the company traveled west. No buffalo had been seen for several days, but antelopes were plentiful.

May 27th, the company passed the meridian of the highest peak of Scott's Bluffs, which was near the river on the south side. With indications of a shower in the afternoon the company encamped for the night. The showers along the Platte had been accompanied with high winds, rushing in fitful, violent gusts, but of short duration. The burned prairies were now mantled with the beautiful verdure of spring, and the river bottoms, refreshingly green, afforded luxurious herbage for the camp animals.

"The bluffs on the opposite side of the river exhibited a great variety of forms, presenting scenes remarkably picturesque and interesting in their appearance. There can be seen towers of various forms and heights. Perpendicular walls, some of whose outlines are circular, others rectilineal. Deep notches, both semi-circular and rectangular, seemed to be excavated in their summits. Many of these scenes closely resemble the artificial works of man thrown partially into disorder and confusion by some great convulsion of nature."

May 30th, being Sunday, was another day of rest for the teams. It was appointed a day for fasting and prayer. A prayer meeting in the morning was followed by preaching and exhortation in the afternoon. Towards evening there was a thunder shower, and later, another light one from the east. "The moon shone brightly in the east, being about half an hour above the horizon. By refraction of its mild rays through the falling drops it produced a beautiful lunar rainbow in the west, but little inferior in brightness to a solar one. Chimney Rock, though forty miles distant, can be seen from the bluffs, while the lowering peaks of the Black Hills, west of Laramie, present themselves like blue clouds stationary in the horizon."

The 1st of June the pioneers encamped near Fort Laramie, situated on the left bank of Laramie Fork, about one and a half miles from its confluence with the North Fork. Its walls were of adobe and about fifteen feet high. Ranges of houses were built in the interior adjoining the walls, leaving a central yard of about one hundred feet square. It belonged to the American Fur Company, was in charge of a Mr. Boudeau and was occupied by about eighteen men and their families.

In the evening the camp was visited by some Saints, Mr. Crow and family, who left the southern states the season before under the counsel of elders from the headquarters of the Church, who had advised them of the contemplated move of the Saints to the Rocky Mountains and approved of the idea of attempting to intersect their trail up the Platte river. This party of fourteen persons had wintered at Pueblo with a detachment of the Mormon Battalion and a considerable company of Saints from the south, and had reached Laramie a few days in advance.

The 2nd of June a party of the pioneers crossed

FORT LARAMIE.

the river in a boat of sole-leather. It had been the property of Mr. Ira Eldredge, and it carried his family outfit across the Mississippi and Missouri rivers; was utilized by the pioneers and had been brought by them from Winter Quarters as a wagon box. The party crossed the river and walked up to Fort Laramie. They were kindly received and seated in a neat, comfortable apartment. After a sociable, cheerful chat with Mr. Boudeau and others, they walked down to see his flatboat. This was engaged at the reasonable figure of fifteen dollars to ferry the company across the North Fork, as further travel up its left bank would be attended with considerable difficulty. Indian aggressions and the severe droughts to which the country was subject, had caused agriculture to be entirely neglected. The whites, like the Indians, depended on the flesh of wild animals for their principal food. Whatever they had of the products of the earth and other luxuries were hauled from the Missouri river, a distance of five hundred miles, on wagons.

Early in the morning of the 3rd of June, the pioneers commenced ferrying across the North Fork of the Platte, averaging about four wagons per hour. The afternoon of the previous day they saw with their glasses three or four white men coming in on horseback on the opposite side of the Platte. While ferrying they learned these men were from the states and had made the journey in seventeen days. They reported having passed about two thousand wagons in detached companies on their way to Oregon. One small company was expected to arrive at Laramie on the 4th, a larger one the following day, and a still larger one on the 6th. These emigrants were principally from Missouri, Illinois and Iowa. Emigration to the Pacific slope seemed to be greatly on the increase.

The pioneers having safely crossed the North Fork, resumed their journey about noon of the 4th. They followed the Oregon road near that stream. It was a great change from the long levels of the Platte bottoms to a broken, mountain road. From Laramie to Salt Lake there was no lack of fuel for camp purposes, pine and cedar on the hills, cottonwood and box elder along the streams, with sagebrush abundant almost everywhere, sometimes growing ten feet high.

The 7th of June three companies of Oregon emigrants came up with the pioneers. Under this date Mr. Pratt says in his journal: "This forenoon gained in elevation very fast. Laramie Peak, twelve or fifteen miles to the south-west, shows from this position to good advantage. Its top is whitened with snow that acts as a condenser upon the vapor of the atmosphere which comes within its vicinity, generating clouds, which are precipitated in showers upon the surrounding country. This peak has been visible to our camp for eight or ten days, and I believe that almost every afternoon since, we have been visited with thunder showers which seem to originate in the vicinity of the peak."

The night of the 7th of June the pioneers encamped on Horse Shoe creek. Next day they saw a solitary buffalo, the first one seen for upwards of two hundred miles. They traveled fifteen miles and encamped on Big Timber creek. About a mile from them were encamped a few wagons from Fort Bridger, on the west side of the mountains, loaded with furs and peltries, on their way to Fort Laramie.

The 9th of June the company crossed a stream about twenty feet wide which they called Little Timber. The banks being rather steep they were much improved by the use of spades and picks. It was a daily labor to repair the roads and leave them in a passable condition for the companies that were expected to follow. There was a daily detail of ten or twelve men who went in advance of the company, with the necessary tools to work the road. Distances were also measured with the machine before mentioned and boards set up every ten miles, conveying the intelligence to the traveler of the distance he was west of Laramie. The pioneers encamped on a stream called "A La Parele." Just above camp it ran through a mountain forming a natural bridge over the stream. Three men with fifteen horses, most of them carrying packs, passed the company. They were from Santa Fe, New Mexico, and on their way to San Francisco, in upper California, via the Great Salt Lake.

The evening of June 11th, a short distance above their camp were two small companies of emigrants which had passed them a few days before. The previous day their teams took fright from the running of a horse. Two wagons were upset and one woman and two children considerably injured, but no bones were broken. The following day the pioneers made the point where the Oregon road crossed the Platte river, one hundred and twenty-four miles from Laramie. They found the channel about one hundred feet wide and the water fifteen feet deep. Here they overtook one of the foremost companies of the Oregon emigrants. Three days previous to their arrival the pioneers had sent a small detachment in advance to this place, where they arrived about four hours ahead of any emigrants, with the boat of sole leather before mentioned. As this would carry fifteen or eighteen hundred pounds of freight, they were employed by the emigrants to ferry them over. Goods were crossed in the skiff and the empty wagons floated. In the operation the latter were frequently hurled several times over by the force of the current.

A few miles from this place the hunters of the company killed a few buffalo and three or four grizzly bears, the latter being quite numerous on the Black Hills. June 14th the pioneers commenced crossing the Platte. Some of the wagons were crossed on light rafts made of pine poles lashed together, others were floated, but the current was found too rapid to do this without injuring them, so they resorted wholly to the slow process of rafting. Twenty-four wagons were crossed during the day. They remained at this place until the morning of the 19th. In this time two large canoes were constructed of cottonwood timber. These were placed parallel to each other, a few feet apart, and firmly fastened together with cross timbers well pinned on; across these slabs were fastened, running lengthwise of the canoes. With a little iron work, rudder and oars were attached, and they had a boat of sufficient strength to carry over a loaded wagon of the emigrants. Captain Groves and nine men were left in charge of this rude boat, and with it a considerable business was done in crossing the Oregon emigrants daily arriving in small companies and very anxious to be crossed over without delay. Those in charge of the ferry were instructed to come on with the next company, who were expected to arrive there in a month or six weeks. They were urged to take every precautionary measure to protect themselves from Indians.
