James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XIII.

LEAVING THE PLATTE—SALERATUS LAKE—DEVIL'S GATE—VALLEY OF THE SWEETWATER—WINTER AND SUMMER MINGLED TOGETHER—THE SOUTH PASS—INTERESTING INTERVIEWS WITH MAJOR HARRIS AND COLONEL BRIDGER—ARRIVAL OF SAMUEL BRANNAN FROM THE BAY OF SAN FRANCISCO—THE PUEBLO DETACHMENT OF THE MORMON BATTALION—MOUNTAIN FEVER.

AT THIS point the pioneers left the North Fork of the Platte for the Sweetwater river, distant twenty-seven and a half miles. Twenty miles of the distance they traveled on the 21st of June. During the forenoon drive of the 22nd they passed the noted saleratus lake. They found large quantities of this useful article in the family economy. The Mormon emigration afterwards hauled yearly supplies of this into the valley to use instead of the better, but far more expensive commercial article, on account of heavy freight charges across the plains. Several bushels were gathered and taken along by the pioneers. The morning drive of seven and a half miles brought them to the right bank of the Sweetwater, about one mile below Independence Rock, and within one-fourth of a mile of the upper end of the Devil's Gate.

Early in the morning of the 22nd of June, Professor Pratt ascended to the top of Devil's Gate rock. By barometrical measurement he found the perpendicular wall four hundred feet above the river which here runs through a chasm nine hundred or one thousand feet in length, and one hundred and thirty feet in breadth. In this chasm the water tumbles and foams with the noise of a cataract over massive fragments of rock which have fallen from above. They found the valley of the Sweetwater from five to ten miles in breadth, bounded on the north and south by mountain ridges, isolated hills and rugged summits of massive granite, varying from twelve hundred to two thousand feet in height. In the afternoon the first glimpse was caught of the Wind River mountains north of the road, but the air was too smoky to discover more than a faint, blue outline. They crossed two or three small streams and, after making twenty and

INDEPENDENCE ROCK.

three-fourth miles over a sandy road, encamped on the Sweetwater with good grass and wild sage for fuel. Two companies of emigrants encamped a short distance above the pioneers. We let Professor Pratt describe this strange country where in the latter part of June, winter mingled with summer. "The Wind River chain of mountains, in the distance, exhibit their towering peaks whitened by perpetual snow, which glittering in the sun-beams, resemble white, fleecy clouds.

"June 24th: Traveled seventeen and three-fourth miles and again encamped on the Sweetwater. We passed in the forenoon Sulphur Springs, sometimes called Ice Springs. We took a spade and dug down about one foot and found the ground frozen and large quantities of ice. A few yards west of this we saw two or three small lakes or ponds. The water in them was very salt and of a bitterish taste. The soil is covered in many places with saline efflorescences of a considerable depth."

June, 25th: Traveled twenty and one-fourth miles and encamped upon a tributary of the Sweetwater, the water clear and cold. Frequent banks of snow were upon the hills in their vicinity. Just below was quite a large and beautiful grove of aspen or poplar. The evening was cold rendering overcoats quite a necessary appendage. The perpetual snows which completely covered the Wind River chain gives the scenery a cold, wintry aspect.

June 26th: The grass was whitened with frost, and the sudden change from the high temperature of the sandy valleys below was most severely felt by man and beast. Resumed the journey during the forenoon and traveled eleven miles, crossing the main branches of the Sweetwater which were quite high, the result of the melting snows accumulated upon its banks, and in the mountains. At the largest and last of the main branches of the Sweetwater, the company halted for noon. Only in high altitudes was such a scene possible, abundance of good grass mingled with various plants and flowers upon the bottoms of the stream and a few yards distant, large banks of snow several feet in depth. We quote again from Professor Pratt. "This is eight miles east of the South Pass. Myself and several others came on in advance of the camp, and it was with great difficulty that we could determine the dividing point of land which separates the waters flowing into the Atlantic from those flowing into the Pacific. This country called the South Pass, for some fifteen or twenty miles in length and breadth is a gently undulating plain or prairie, thickly covered with wild sage from one to two feet in height. On the highest part of this plain, over which our road passes, and which separates the waters of the two oceans, is a small dry basin of fifteen or twenty acres, destitute of wild sage but containing good grass. From this basin about half a mile both to the east and to the west, the road gently rises about forty or fifty feet, either of which elevations may be considered as the highest on our road in the Pass."

On the western elevation the barmometer gave the altitude above the sea 7,085 feet. The distance of this Pass from Fort Laramie, as measured by our mile machine, is two hundred and seventy-five and a half miles. Four miles west of the Pass, at Pacific or Muddy Spring were encamped a small company of men from Oregon on their way to the states. They were performing the journey on horseback and had left the settlements in Oregon on the 5th of May. Major Harris, a trapper and hunter, had resided in different parts of the country twenty or twenty-five years. He had acquired an extensive and intimate knowledge of it in all its main features. The pioneers obtained much information from him in relation to the interior basin of the Salt Lake, the country of their destination. His report, like that of Colonel Fremont's, was rather unfavorable to the founding of a colony in this basin, principally on account of the scarcity of timber. He said he had traveled the whole circumference of the lake and there was no outlet to it.

On the 28th of June the pioneers came to the forks of the Oregon road and took the southern one. They halted at noon at the ford of Little Sandy. In the afternoon they met Col. James Bridger who encamped with them that evening. He was going on business to Laramie with a small company. Being a man extensively acquainted with the country, many inquiries were also made of him in relation to the Great Basin, and the country south. His information was rather more favorable for colonizing than that of Major Harris. While partaking of breakfast with Mr. Young, Col. Bridger remarked, "There is more bread on the table than I have before seen for years." "But, Mr. Bridger, how do you live?" inquired Mr. Young. He replied, "We live entirely on meat. We dry our deer and buffalo to eat, and also cook fresh when we can obtain it. We usually have our coffee, for that is easily obtained."

June 30th, the company arrived at the crossing of Green river. The water was very high, from twelve to fifteen feet deep and one hundred and eighty yards wide, with a very rapid current. Two rafts were made and each was rigged with a rudder and oars. The wagons were safely crossed without taking out any of their contents. The animals were made to swim over.

Towards sundown Mr. Samuel Brannan arrived in camp from the bay of San Francisco. As before stated he had been appointed to take charge of a company of two hundred and fourteen Saints who sailed out of New York harbor on the ship Brooklyn, on the 6th of Feb., 1846, for the Pacific coast. The 31st of July, the same year, the vessel entered the bay of San Francisco. The colony were located on the San Joaquin river. Mr. Brannan had left the bay of San Francisco on the 4th of April, 1847, ten days earlier than the pioneers left their place of rendezvous on the Elk Horn river, expressly to meet the latter on their long anticipated journey to the Rocky Mountains. He was accompanied by two men, having left one at Fort Hall. He left California at a season of the year when it was considered unsafe to attempt to cross the Sierra Nevada mountains, on account of deep snows. He had not only braved this danger, but as well that from the savage bands of Indians that roamed over the desert regions through which he traveled.

He also, in crossing the Sierra Nevada mountains, passed directly over the camping ground where forty or fifty California emigrants had perished and been eaten up by their fellow-sufferers, only a few days before. Their skulls and carcasses lay strewn in every direction. He also met the last of these unfortunates making his way into the settlements. He was a German, and had lived upon human flesh for several weeks. The following letter of Mr. Brannan's to a friend, L. N. Scovil, gives further insight into the character of this hazardous trip:

"FORT HALL, June 18th, 1847.

"Brother Newell:

* * "I left Captain Sutter's post in California on the 26th of April last, and arrived here on the 9th inst. I am on my way to meet our emigration. I am now one thousand miles on my road, and I think I shall meet them in a couple of weeks. I shall start on my journey again in the morning with two of my men and part of my animals, and leave one man here and the rest of the horses to recruit until my return, and then it is my intention to reach California in twenty days from this post.

"We crossed the snowy mountains of California, a distance of forty miles with eleven head of horses and mules in one day and two hours; a thing that has never been done before in less than three days. We traveled on foot and drove our animals before us, the snow from twenty to one hundred feet deep. When we arrived through, it was difficult for any of us to stand on our feet. The people of California told us we could not cross there under two months, there being more snow on the mountains than had ever been known before, but God knows best and was kind enough to prepare the way before us. About a week before we entered the mountains, the weather was extremely warm. This caused the snow to settle more firmly together. The weather then turned cold and there fell about eighteen inches more of light snow. This kept the old snow from melting during the heat of the day, and made the traveling for our horses much better.

"During our journey we have endured many hardships and much fatigue in swimming rivers and climbing mountains, not being able to travel the regular route owing to the high waters. * * * * We passed the cabins of those people who perished in the mountains which by this time you have heard of. It was a heart-rending picture." * * * * *

The evening of the 3rd of July the people were called together. There were men in the company who expected their families to follow them in the companies that would leave Winter Quarters some time in June, and which were supposed to be four or five hundred miles on the road. They were given the privilege of returning to meet them. Five men volunteered on this errand. They started on the morning of the 4th, taking with them instructions to the Saints whom they expected to meet, also a short synopsis from the records of the camp containing distances from one notable point to another good camping place, etc. Should they meet the detachment of the Mormon Battalion under Captain Brown, if desired to do so, one was counseled to remain with it as a guide.

The anniversary of the declaration of American Independence coming on Sunday, the camp met for public worship under the presidency of the Bishops, some of the Twelve having started back for the ferry on the Platte, with the brethren who returned to meet their families. In the afternoon thirteen soldiers all belonging to the Church came into the camp, accompanied by those who went back to the ferry. These thirteen men had been detached by Captain Brown to go in advance of the main body to regain possession of horses that had been stolen from them at Pueblo. They had learned that the thieves were at Bridger's trading post, on Muddy Fork, a few miles south-west of the camp. These brethren were greeted with three hearty cheers. They were the first representatives of the Battalion in the pioneer camp.

The following day the company traveled along the right bank of Green river, three and a half miles then made a short halt to water their animals. Leaving the river they gradually ascended the bluff skirting the river bottoms, and traveled over a gently undulating sandy plain, destitute of grass and water, for sixteen and a half miles, then descended to the left bank of Black's Fork and encamped for the night. For a few days some persons in camp had been slightly afflicted with fever. Several causes tended to produce this. There was a great and somewhat sudden change in climatic conditions. In fact the general environment of the people was changed. In traveling they were often enveloped in clouds of suffocating dust which injuriously affected the lungs and head. The changes of temperature were sudden and extreme. The summer sun made the day extremely warm, and the snowy mountains surrounding the company on all sides, rendered the air cold and uncomfortable in its absence. A number of salmon trout were caught in the streams west of the South pass, but this fine species of fish was not found east of the dividing ridge.
