James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XIV.

DESCRIPTION OF FORT BRIDGER—START FOR SALT LAKE—AS EXPECTED, MANY DIFFICULTIES WERE ENCOUNTERED—RED MINERAL SPRING, TAR AND SULPHUR SPRINGS—SICKNESS OF PRESIDENT YOUNG—O. PRATT WITH A DETACHMENT, PIONEERS THE ROAD—FROSTY NIGHTS—BEARS ON WEBER'S FORK—EAST CANYON CREEK—THE LABORS OF CAMP HUNTERS—FIRST VIEW OF GREAT SALT LAKE VALLEY—THE ADVANCE CAMP IN EMIGRATION CANYON.

JULY 7th the pioneers encamped on the right bank of Black's Fork, in the vicinity of Fort Bridger. Within a few rods were nine Indian lodges, occupied by families of white trappers and hunters who had taken wives from surrounding tribes of Indians. Half-breed children were playing about these lodges. Bridger's trading post was a half mile west of the camp on an island, with no other road to it than a footpath. Black's Fork is here broken up into a number of rapid streams, forming several islands containing in all seven or eight hundred acres of excellent grass with considerable timber.

The fort consisted of two adjoining log houses with dirt roofs and a small fort enclosed with log pickets set in the ground, and about eight feet high. These houses and lodges were the home of fifty or sixty men, women and half-breed children. The altitude of the place was ascertained to be 6,665 feet, 420 feet lower than the South Pass from which it was distant 109 1/2 miles by road measurement. Notwithstanding the cold nights mosquitoes were numerous and troublesome.

The morning of the 8th of July the thermometer stood at 66 °. Ice had formed during the night, but it soon disappeared under the warmth of the rising sun. A brisk wind was blowing from the south-west. Several fine speckled trout were caught with the hook. It was a busy day with the blacksmiths, setting wagon tires, shoeing horses and making general preparations for a rough mountain road in a south-west direction towards Salt Lake.

With a two days' rest for the teams in this paradise for mountaineers and a general preparation for rough roads, travel was resumed on the 9th of July. Mr. S. Brannan, with a few others, returned towards the South Pass to meet the main detachment of the Battalion. The pioneers took Mr. Hastings' new route to the bay of San Francisco. The trail was scarcely discernible, as only a few wagons passed over it the previous year. They traveled thirteen miles in close proximity to some snow banks, and camped on a branch of Muddy Fork.

July 10th they passed a small spring which they named "Red Mineral spring," from the redness of the soil out of which it issued. The water had a very disagreeable taste and was supposed to contain alum in solution, also a large per cent. of copperas, which would make it poisonous. Five miles from this spring the company attained the summit of a ridge between two branches of Muddy Fork, the barometrical height of which was 7,315 feet, 230 feet higher than the South Pass. Nine miles further they reached the summit of the dividing ridge between the waters which flow into the Gulf of California and those that flow into the Great Salt Lake, or the branches of Muddy Fork on the east and of Bear river on the west. Where the road passed over, the altitude was 7,700 feet, or 615 feet higher than the South Pass. This was the highest point over which the trail of the pioneers passed between the Missouri river and Great Salt Lake valley. The company traveled eighteen miles and encamped five miles from the summit of this high ridge. Professor Pratt, wandering in the hills, discovered smoke about two miles distant. When he returned to camp some horsemen rode over to it. They found it came from the fire of a small party from the bay of San Francisco on their way to the states.

The morning of July 11th was clear, calm and pleasant, although considerable ice had formed during the night. One and a half miles south of camp a mineral tar spring was discovered, and a few rods north-east some sulphur springs. At this point the road forked. A few wagon tracks bore to the south, and a few others took down a small stream, on which the company were encamped. The next morning the company took the right hand road down the creek. One and three-fourth miles brought them to the ford of Bear river. Barometrical measurement indicated this ford to be 6,836 feet in height. There the road again forked, and the right hand track, bearing a few degrees south of west, was taken. Antelope, which had been rather scarce, began to appear again in great numbers. Ten or twelve were brought in by the hunters during the day. The road was very difficult to find, except in places where the storms had not defaced nor the grass obscured it.

At the midday halt Mr. Young, being sick, concluded to stop a few hours and rest. Several wagons remained with him; by request the remainder of the company moved on. In the evening they encamped near a cave. It was explored about thirty feet, when the passage becoming quite small no one seemed disposed to go further. It was called Reddin's Cave, as that was the name of one of the first of the company who explored it. Mr. Young, being still behind, on the morning of the 13th of July two messengers were sent back to meet him. Unwilling to move on without their leader, the camp waited. The messengers returned, accompanied by Mr. H. C. Kimball. They reported that Mr. Young was getting better but did not think of moving that day. The Twelve, who were present, directed Professor Pratt to take twenty-three wagons and forty-two men, proceed on the journey and endeavor to find Mr. Reid's route across the mountains, as the company had been informed it would be impracticable to pass through the canyon on account of the depth and rapidity of the water. Mr. Pratt's detachment started at three o'clock p.m. and traveled down Red Fork eight and three-fourth miles and encamped. Altitude 6,070 feet.

The 14th of July Mr. Pratt's company traveled thirteen miles to the junction of Red and Weber Forks. He says in his journal: "Our journey down Red Fork has truly been very interesting and exceedingly picturesque. We have been shut up in a narrow valley from ten to twenty rods wide, while on each side the hills rise very abruptly from eight to twelve hundred feet. The most of the distance we have been walled in by vertical and overhanging precipices of red pudding stone. These rocks are worked into curious shapes, probably by rains."

On the 15th two parties went in search of Mr. Reid's trail across the mountains to the south-eastern shore of Salt Lake. It was soon discovered, although so dimly seen it could only occasionally be found. The grass had grown up leaving scarcely a trace of the few wagons that had passed there the previous year. Messrs. Pratt and Brown followed this track about six miles up a ravine to where it reached a dividing ridge leading down in a southerly direction to another, and returned to camp. Cottonwood trees and thick clusters of willows fringed the banks of Weber's Fork making very close thickets for bears. The many tracks seen, and the large holes they had made in digging roots, indicated that they were very numerous. For several days showers had been frequent, and one occurred that morning, but too light to lay the dust.

Mr. Rockwell was sent back to report to those of the company in the rear, that the new route had been discovered. The journey was resumed up a small stream on Reid's route. A detachment of ten or twelve men was sent in advance of the wagons with necessary tools to make the road passable. This required considerable labor. The detachment traveled about six miles, and crossing the ridge began to descend another ravine. They descended two and a half miles in about four hours and encamped for the night. Mr. Newman and Professor Pratt walked down the ravine to examine the road. They found Mr. Reid's company had spent several hours in labor and then concluded to take a more available route up the ravine at the mouth of which the pioneers had encamped, going a circuitous course over the hills. They had evidently crossed the Weber without mentioning it.

July 17th we copy from O. Pratt's journal:

"A severe frost during the night. Early this morn-I started out alone, and on foot, to examine the country back, to see if there was not a more practicable route for the companies in the rear than the one we had come. I was soon satisfied we had taken the best and only practicable route. I returned to camp and counseled the company not to go any further until they had spent several hours' labor on the road we passed over yesterday afternoon. All who were able to work labored about two-thirds of the day upon it. Leaving orders for the camp to move on towards night, Mr. Brown and myself rode forward to explore. About three and a half miles brought us down upon the right bank of a creek with a swift current and supposed to be about twenty feet wide. This creek (East Canyon creek) passes through a canyon about forty rods below, where, for a few rods it is shut up by perpendicular and overhanging walls, being a break in the mountains which rises several hundred feet upon each side. The creek plunges underneath a large rock which lies in its bed near the foot of the canyon, blockading the same and making it wholly impassable for wagons or teams. We followed the dimly traced wagon tracks, up this stream for miles, crossing the same thirteen times.

"The bottoms along the creek are thickly covered with willows from five to fifteen rods wide, making an immense labor in cutting a road through for the California emigrants last season. We still found the road almost impassable and requiring much labor. The mountains on each side rise abruptly from six hundred to three thousand feet above the bed of the stream. Leaving our horses we ascended to the summit of one which appeared about two thousand feet high. We had a prospect, limited in most directions by still higher peaks. The country exhibited a broken succession of hills piled on hills, and mountains on mountains in every direction. We returned and met our camp about four and three-quarter miles from where they were encamped in the morning. They were about two miles above the canyon on the left bank of Canyon creek. At this place is a small rivulet which runs down from the mountains, the water clear and cold."

The pioneers were now fairly among the deep gorges and towering peaks of the Wasatch mountains east of Great Salt Lake valley. It was on Canyon creek that the following circumstance occurred, illustrating the excessive toil endured by the camp hunters in providing

GLEN IN THE WASATCH.

food. There was no meat in camp and Joseph Hancock left it early one morning to make an effort to supply the want. He felt impressed that on the top of a high ridge which loomed up in the distance, in the clear mountain air, he would be successful. Arriving there, for the first time he saw a portion of Salt Lake valley, and realized his anticipations of the morning by killing a large elk. Making it lighter by leaving the offal he got the carcass

THE SLEEPING HUNTER

on his back and started in the direction of the camp. He traveled well into the night without finding it. Attempting to cross a creek on a beaver dam, he broke through and found himself astride a large log with his extremities in the water below. He was relieved of his burden as it lay on the log at his back. Excessively weary he felt content to rest. Unconsciously his head dropped back on to the elk and he was sleeping as only the weary can sleep. The first sound that greeted his senses was the crowing of a cock. This was assurance that he was not far from friends, and a little reflection showed him that he had been thus detained by a kindly Providence, instead of making fruitless exertions in the darkness to find the object of his toil. As day was breaking he dragged the elk across the dam and again resumed his burden. By this time he was discovered by some of the men who were stirring early in the camp.

July 18th was Sunday. The morning was cold and the ground whitened with frost. The men remained in camp and attended meeting in the forenoon. The morning of the 19th was also cold and frosty. There was a great change in the temperature from night to mid-day when the air was warmed by the summer sun. Messrs. Pratt and Brown started, soon after sunrise, to examine the road and country ahead. They continued along the road they had traveled over the day before, and ascertained that it left Canyon creek near where they had turned back, and run along in a ravine to the west. They ascended this ravine four miles and found themselves on the top of a dividing ridge. There they secured their horses and ascended a mountain on their right, several hundred feet. From the ridge where the road crossed, and from this mountain peak, they could see over a great extent of country. On the south-west they discovered an extensive, level prairie, a few miles distant which they thought must be near the lake. This was their first view of any part of Great Salt Lake valley.

They returned to their horses and rode on down the south-west side of the ridge. This has since been known as the "Big Mountain" to distinguish it from the one just west of it, over which the road crosses, known as the "Little Mountain." At first the descent was very rapid. Several miles down, the small stream they were traveling along passed through a very high mountain, and it appeared impossible for wagons to pass in that direction. Looking around they found that the wagon trail ascended quite abruptly about a mile and a half, passed over a mountain and down into another narrow valley. This is Little Mountain before mentioned, and the narrow valley has since been known as Emigration canyon. Satisfied with their explorations, they returned on their trail and met the company six and one-fourth miles from their encampment the evening before. The men had performed a great amount of labor. Mr. Rockwell had returned bringing word that most of the pioneer wagons in the rear were within a few miles of the advance camp. The fresh track of a buffalo was discovered in the ravine. He had left some hair on the brush in his path, and was, evidently, a lonely wanderer and probably the only one of his kind within hundreds of miles.

July 20th Professor Pratt's detachment moved six miles and did much labor to improve the road. The altitude of the Big Mountain was 7,245 feet, one hundred and sixty feet higher than the South Pass. In the morning of July 21st there was no frost but a heavy dew. The leading division of the pioneers passed over the Little Mountain and halted for noon in the head of Emigration canyon. They called the swift running creek on which they halted "Last creek."
