James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XV.

THE ADVANCE OF THE PIONEERS ENTERS GREAT SALT LAKE VALLEY—DESCRIPTION OF THIS RESTING PLACE FOR THE PILGRIMS—ARRIVAL OF PRESIDENT YOUNG—THE CRICKETS AND CRICKET EATERS OF THE DESERT—THIEVING PROPENSITIES OF THE INDIANS ILLUSTRATED.

ELDER ERASTUS SNOW came from the wagons in the rear and reported them only a few miles back. He went with Professor Pratt in advance of the wagons down Last creek, four and one-half miles, to where it issues into the broad, open valley below. To avoid a narrow gorge near this point, the wagons traveling the route the season before passed over an exceedingly steep and dangerous hill. Destined to be the first of their people to arrive at the object of their long and tedious journey, these two men ascended this hill from the top of which a broad, open valley, twenty or thirty miles long lay stretched out before them. To the north-west the waters of the Great Salt Lake glimmered in the bright, noonday sunbeams, and from them rose high mountainous islands twenty to thirty miles in extent. Before them was a vast wilderness in which the genius of solitude reigned. That profound silence was the assurance of room and rest for the wanderers who were about to take possession of this unoccupied desert.

Professor Pratt says: "After issuing from the mountains among which we had been shut up for many days and beholding, in a moment, such an extensive scenery open before us, we could not refrain from a shout of joy, which almost involuntarily escaped from our lips, the moment the grand and lovely scenery was within our view. We immediately very gradually descended into the lower parts of the valley, and although we had but one horse between us, yet we traveled a circuit of about twelve miles before we left the valley to return to our camp, which we found one and a half miles up the ravine from the valley, and three miles in advance of the noon halt. It was about nine o'clock in the evening when we arrived. The main body of the pioneers were encamped about a mile and a half above the advance while the sick were still farther in the rear."

With what exhilaration of spirits, with what nerve and energy this advance camp of the pioneers must have arisen on the morning of the 22nd of July! The life's blood must have flowed with increased velocity through their veins in anticipation of that day, realizing the object of their toils and hopes. Apostles O. Pratt and George A. Smith, accompanied by seven others, rode into the valley to explore. They left the camp to follow on and work the road which here required considerable labor to make it passable. They discovered that by cutting out the thick timber and under brush, and by some digging, a much better road could be made through the canyon than the old route over the steep hill before mentioned. They left a written notice to that effect and passed on.

We will let Professor Pratt describe this day's explorations of Great Salt Lake valley:

"After going down into the valley about five miles, we turned our course to the north down towards the Salt Lake. For three or four miles we found the soil of most excellent quality. Streams from the mountains and springs were very abundant, the waters excellent and generally with gravel bottoms. A great variety of green grass, and very luxuriant, covered the bottoms for miles where the soil was sufficiently damp, but in other places although the soil was good, yet the grass had nearly dried up for want of moisture. We found the drier places swarming with very large crickets, about the size of a man's thumb.

"This valley is surrounded with mountains, except on the north, the tops of some of the highest being covered with snow. Every one or two miles the streams were emptying into it from the mountains on the east, many of which were sufficiently large to carry mills and other machinery. As we proceeded towards the Salt Lake the soil began to assume a more sterile appearance being, probably, at some seasons of the year overflowed with water. We found, as we proceeded on, great numbers of hot springs issuing from near the base of the mountains. These springs were highly impregnated with salt and sulphur. The temperature of some was nearly raised to the boiling point. We traveled about fifteen miles down after coming into the valley. The latter part of the distance the soil being unfit for agricultural purposes. We returned and found our wagons encamped in the valley five and one-fourth miles from where they left the canyon.

"The morning of the 23rd of July, two messengers were sent to President Young, and those who were with him, informing them of the discoveries and explorations of the advance party. The camp removed its position two miles to the north and encamped near the bank of a beautiful creek of pure, cold water. This stream is sufficiently large for mills and other machinery. Here we called the camp together and it fell to my lot to offer prayer and thanksgiving in behalf of our company, all of whom had been preserved from the Missouri river to this point, and, after dedicating ourselves and the land unto the Lord, and imploring His blessing upon our labors, we appointed various committees to attend to different branches of business, preparatory to putting in crops. In about two hours after our arrival we began to plow, and the same afternoon built a dam to irrigate the soil, which at the place where we were plowing was exceedingly dry. * * * * * * *

"Our two messengers returned bringing us word that the remainder of the wagons were only a few miles distant and would arrive the next day. At three o'clock the thermometer stood at 96 °."

The 24th of July has been celebrated as the anniversary of the arrival of the pioneers in the valley of the Great Salt Lake from the circumstance that on that day, 1847, Brigham Young, who had been detained by sickness, and those who had remained with him, first emerged from the defile in the Wasatch mountains and followed the track of the main body who preceded them. It was the culmination of a long series of efforts to find a place of rest, where the Saints could enjoy immunity from the pursuit of enemies.

There is a slight elevation of table land a short distance in front of Emigration canyon. This hides the valley from the traveler until the top of it is reached. From this point Brigham Young and those who were with him, among whom were his brother L. D. Young, Apostles Wilford Woodruff and Heber C. Kimball, had their first view of the object of their toils, the valley of the Great Salt Lake. It requires no stretch of the imagination to comprehend that a feeling of joy, of exhilaration and thanksgiving filled to overflowing the hearts of these weary pilgrims. The faith that had sustained them through years of suffering and hope enabled them to discern in the near future the attainment of the object of their sacrifices. They experienced the same impulse to shout for joy of those who had preceded them.

President Young, still feeble from the effects of his

THE FIRST VIEW OF THE VALLEY.

late illness, was riding under the cover of Elder Woodruff's carriage. As the teams halted he came to the front, took a general view of the country before him, then uncovered his head, swung his hat and shouted with all the energy his feeble condition permitted, "Hurrah! Hurrah!! Hurrah!!!" Then turning to Heber C. Kimball who was near, he exclaimed, "Brother Heber, this is the place." The circumstances emphasized the expression with a world of meaning. "This is the place" that has been prophesied of from the days of Kirtland, where the Saints are to be gathered from the nations of the earth and acquire strength to further contend for the right. Here is the place where we will build temples to the Lord our God and make greater preparations than we have been able to do, surrounded by enemies, for the redemption of our race.

President Young's party found the main body encamped by some cottonwood trees on the bank of a branch of City Creek, about six miles from the mouth of Emigration canyon. They had had their first sight of the waters of the lake shimmering in the brilliant sunshine of an almost cloudless sky, also of Black Rock, which has since become a familiar landmark to many thousands of people. Not a cloud floated above them, and the heavens had that peculiar blue seldom seen except in a very rarefied atmosphere. Dark spots, indicating forests, were visible in the distant, inaccessible mountain tops, but the timber to be utilized by the colony was mostly hidden from sight in the deep gorges which debouched into the valley. The foothills which skirted the valley afforded no timber except scattering scrub cedar and pines. There were a few cottonwoods and a clump or two of willows along City Creek. The valley afforded no cooling forest shade, no green savannahs relieved the monotony of desolation. The most prominent varieties of vegetation were wild sunflowers with large, yellow blossoms and a species of dwarf thistle peculiar to the uplands. These grew thick on the dry benches, contending with the wild sage for the scanty nourishment afforded by the arid soil.

These plants were loaded with hideous crickets, their black and brown bodies forming anything but a pleasing contrast with the yellow tint of the sunflower blossoms. As these ugly, ogling-eyed insects fed and fattened on the juice of these plants, they were in a withered condition. Being the prominent vegetation on the bench lands at that season of the year, the appearance of the landscape begat an indescribable feeling of desolation. The air was almost painfully clear and the ground dry and parched. There was none of the haziness of lower altitudes to modify the sun's rays, and there was no shelter from them except under tents and wagon covers; still the heat was not so exhausting as in lower regions.

The most prominent animals of this desert were the howling and almost ever present wolf, the jack rabbit, or American hare, and an occasional mountain lion. The scattered specimens of humanity that wandered about in this region were almost on a level with the sneaking, thieving wolf. They were not only root diggers but cricket eaters. These ill-starred insects may be very palatable to the cultivated tastes of the Indian in the days when his existence depended on anything that would sustain life, but the writer believes that the sight of them would tend at least to modify the appetite of a starving white man.

The Indian bands of these valleys at that time utilized these crickets for food, in large quantities. The cricket harvest commenced soon after the arrival of the pioneers. It was after they had attained their full growth, were in fine condition, and when their live weight was about one ounce each. At such times they were very clumsy and easily handled. The squaws and pappooses would inclose a small piece of ground with stalks of sunflowers, leaving an opening on one side for the admittance of the game. They then surrounded a piece of ground, drove the crickets on it together, and forced them into the pen, in much the same manner that a flock of sheep are corraled. In this pen they would often be several inches thick. The entrance was closed, the fence fired, while some one in the pen frightened the crickets into the blaze. It would scorch their wings and legs and generally kill them. They were gathered up, usually dried in the sun on skins and if these were not available the ground was utilized for that purpose. When properly prepared they were packed in skin sacks and usually cached or buried in the ground for winter food. The process completed, the wings and legs, the only part considered offal, would be pretty well cleaned off. The fact that they were a staple article of food, evidences they were quite palatable and nourishing to the cultivated taste of the Indian.

The following circumstance, illustrating the thieving propensities of these aboriginal Americans indicates that the Saints did not much improve their Indian associations in changing their location from the vicinity of the thieving Pawnees and Omahas to the midst of the cricket eaters of the desert. Towards evening after the arrival of President Young, the Indian chief, Wanship, to whose people the surrounding country belonged, came into camp. He was soon followed by twelve or fifteen braves. Probably few of them had before seen a white man, except mountaineers who more or less assimilated with the barbarian in their habits. They had a human curiosity to gratify, and a natural right to know something of their new neighbors. A few ideas were exchanged by signs and a little bread was distributed by the pioneers. While engaged in these friendly preliminaries to a better acquaintance one of Wanship's sons went out of camp to where the visiting Indians had left their horses. Suddenly he gave a tremendous yell. This appeared to have a peculiar significance, for every Indian in camp sprang to his feet.

As was afterwards ascertained, Little Chief, brother of Wanship, at that time lived with his band at the foot of Utah Lake, and his sons were on a visit to their uncle Wanship and their cousins. All went to the pioneer camp together. While Wanship's boys were gratifying their curiosity in the camp their three cousins mounted two of their horses, two on one and one on the other, and rode off. When young Wanship discovered the theft the yell he gave signified to his friends that something was wrong. The band was soon mounted and in hot pursuit, the fastest horses leading out at full speed. In about an hour they returned to camp with one of their stolen ponies. They overtook and killed the two Indians on one horse, three or four miles from camp going south. The other thief was pursued but escaped. These incidents gave the pioneers some comprehension of the character of their new neighbors.

The 25th of July Lorenzo D. Young went up City Creek to a scrubby oak tree, near where the bridge now crosses the creek at the north-east corner of the temple block. It seemed a more desirable camp ground than the one then occupied. He returned to camp and, by permission, moved his wagons on to the ground. President Young and others soon after came along, and being also pleased with the spot, directed the company to move on to it. The season was far advanced, and those having seeds lost no time in putting them into the ground.

The pioneers, from the first, did not expect to raise a crop that season, but took seeds with them to plant that they might learn, as soon as possible, something of the character of the soil and climate of their new location. It would be great satisfaction to know that food plants would grow. There was also a chance of producing some germs of plants for the ensuing year. Men, well acquainted with the country, had spoken discouragingly of the chances for successful colonization. Col. James Bridger had expressed doubts whether the food plants used by man in temperate climates would grow at all. This will explain the anxiety of the pioneers to experiment in that direction.
