James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XVI.

THE INITIAL POINT FOR THE SURVEY OF THE COUNTRY—FIRST LESSONS IN IRRIGATION—ARRIVAL OF THE PUEBLO DETACHMENT OF THE MORMON BATTALION ACCOMPANIED BY A COMPANY OF SAINTS FROM THE SOUTHERN STATES—HOW THESE COMPANIES CAME TO CONNECT WITH THE PIONEERS—NARRATIVE OF ELDER THOMAS BULLOCK—SALT LAKE VALLEY MEXICAN DOMAIN—PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENCE AND SHELTER—BRIGHAM YOUNG RETURNS TO WINTER QUARTERS TO ORGANIZE THE GATHERING—WHAT THE PIONEERS ACCOMPLISHED IN ONE MONTH.

A THOROUGH examination of the country was necessary for the colonists to fit themselves into their new environment to advantage. Its features and characteristics were strange and novel. If it contained the elements of wealth it also required different methods of developing that wealth to those they had been accustomed to on the rich bottom lands and rolling prairies of Illinois and Iowa.

In the forepart of the day, July 25th, Brigham Young and others walked to the top of Ensign Peak, now north of Salt Lake City. From there they had an excellent view of the country west and south. Its apparent facilities were freely discussed from that standpoint. They then descended to camp where a team was brought into service, driven by L. D. Young. With this they visited various other points to obtain a more extended idea of their surroundings. Then on foot they more particularly examined the ground now known as the temple block. At the south-east corner of this piece of ground President Young made a mark with his cane and said, "We will make this the initial point for the survey of the country."

They were in the desert to found a state. Their being there was the result of circumstances forced upon them and the outgrowth of an all-absorbing religious faith. The ruling idea was manifest in partitioning the soil. Ten acres of land were first appropriated to sacred purposes, the erection of buildings for religious worship, and eventually a magnificent temple in which the higher ordinances of their religion could be observed.

While the pioneers were engaged in plowing the new soil, putting in seeds, taking their first lessons in irrigation, and examining their surroundings, on the 27th of July, three days after their arrival, the detachment of the Mormon Battalion, under Captain James Brown, accompanied by a company of Saints from the Southern States, entered the valley. Following so closely on the heels of the company from Winter Quarters they might, very appropriately, be considered the rear division of the first pioneers to the great basin.

To understand how a part of the Mormon Battalion and a considerable company of Saints came to follow the first pioneers so closely, it will be necessary to go back to the march of the Battalion to the Pacific coast. The previous year, when that notable body of men arrived at the town of Santa Fe, New Mexico, on the 15th of October, their commander, Colonel Cooke, ordered the men unfit for active service and the women with the Battalion back to Pueblo on the Arkansas river to winter. He considerately detailed the husbands of the women as a guard to the invalids and women. This detachment left Santa Fe on the 18th of October. Owing to the feeble condition of many of the men and the weakness of teams, there was much suffering on this march.

The 17th of November, 1846, the detachment arrived at Pueblo. There they found a company of Saints from the state of Mississippi who were expecting to find the Church on its way to the mountains, for thus had they been advised by Elders who had ministered among them before leaving their homes; huts were built and considering the circumstances, the winter was spent quite comfortably.

The 18th of May, 1847, the detachment received orders to march via Salt Lake to California. The 24th of May it commenced its march by crossing the Arkansas river. Owing to high water and other difficulties the journey was a very fatiguing one. The 5th of June it crossed the south fork of the Platte river. There it was met by a party from the pioneers, who were only a few days ahead of the detachment, on their way to Great Salt Lake Valley. The pioneers had received information of the detachment, and of the Saints accompanying it, from a Mr. Crow whom they found at Laramie on their arrival there, as we have before stated. There seems a special providence that the general government should have ordered these Mormon soldiers in the right direction to so easily gather with their people. Apostle Amasa Lyman, one of the party sent by President Young, remained with the detachment. On the 16th of June it encamped near Laramie. The pioneers had left there about twelve days before. As these soldiers were now on the trail of their migrating people, the long march from Great Salt Lake valley to California, for the purpose of being discharged, appeared no longer necessary. They were at the crossing of Green river the day their term of service expired. Thus by a chain of singular providences this detachment, and the company of Saints from Mississippi, became early pioneers of Utah. The military were disbanded by Captain Brown and at once commenced their labors to make a home in the desert.

The following extract from a letter written by President B. Young, dated January 6th, 1848, and addressed to Elders Hyde, Pratt and Taylor in Europe, explains how the detachment of the Battalion and the Saints who wintered with them became fully posted as to the intended movements of the Church in the spring of 1847, and thus prepared to intercept the pioneers on their journey to the mountains. President Young states in this letter that on or about the 19th of October, 1846, John D. Lee, Howard Egan and Lieutenant Pace left the Battalion at Santa Fe to return to Winter Quarters. "On the route Brother Lee met Elders Brown and Crosby of Mississippi, on their return from the Arkansas river where they had been with the camp this season, and not finding us, as they had anticipated, had located their company on that river for the winter, and were on their return for a reinforcement to join them in the spring, hoping to fall in with us and pass over the mountains together. They had a joyful meeting and we have written them how and when to unite their camps with ours at the foot of the mountains next spring."

As John D. Lee and party left Santa Fe about the same time as did the detachment for Pueblo, there is no doubt he informed Messrs. Brown and Crosby of their march for that place.

The Twelve, and several others went out on the road to meet the men of the Battalion, numbering about one hundred and fifty, and the emigrants from the state of Mississippi. About the time the two parties met there was a thunder shower, with sufficient rain to raise the mountain streams very rapidly. After their arrival, the camp on City Creek numbered between three and four hundred souls.

The following extract from a letter of Mr. Thomas Bullock will give a still better understanding of the impressions made on the pioneers by their new surroundings:

"After passing Fort Bridger, a delightful camping place, you can camp almost anywhere. The grass will sustain your animals anytime in the year. When the muskeet grass is dry it answers for corn, hay and grass at the same time. Between Fort Bridger and the valley the mountains are very high. The road winds through the valleys, some of which are narrow, not more than ten rods wide, while the rocks in places overhang the road. The dividing ridge that we have to go over is about 7,300 feet above the level of the sea. From this ridge you will see the Twin Peaks covered with eternal snow. Those peaks run into the valley and when you see them you will sing out, `I shall soon be at home now.'

"There is no fear of your traveling far out of the way, for you are hemmed in by mountains on each side. After crossing a small creek twenty-one times in five miles, and between mountains a mile high, on making a sudden bend in the road, you come into full view of the Great Salt Lake and of a valley about twenty by thirty miles. Although there is very little timber to be seen, you will be sure to say, `Thank God I am home at last.' On this spot I am now talking to you about, the pioneers arrived on the 24th of July last, at 5 p. m. The next morning they removed to the spot where the city will be built; at noon consecrated and dedicated the place to the Lord. The same afternoon four plows were turning up the ground. Next day the brethren had planted five acres of potatoes, and irrigated all the land at night.

"The following Sunday was a day of rest, a day of rejoicing before the Lord. His spirit was poured out, and peace dwelt in the valleys of the mountains. The first Sabbath in the valley where a city is to be built unto the Lord, by a holy people, will be long remembered by that little band of pioneers who cried, Hosanna to the Lamb of God!"

The following stanzas from a poem by W. W. Phelps, chime in beautifully with the sentiment of the above:

A life in the desert plains, A home in the mountain's breast, Where the Indian rudely reigns And the hell is farther west; Where the storm king sorely rides, In his flying, cloudy car, With his nimble windy guides, O'cr the snow-capped mountains far. Behold, how the valley smiles! The sky like a mirror's seen; And the spotted mountain wilds Are a world of evergreen, Where the hairy nations leap, And the feathered gentry soar, In the clear, blue upper deep As the rushing waters roar.

* * * * * * *

When the pioneers arrived in Great Salt Lake valley it was Mexican domain, held by right of conquest, awaiting the fortunes of a war then pending between the United States and Mexico. At the close of the war a large tract of country, including what is now Utah Territory, was ceded to the former. The Mormon Battalion assisted in its conquest, and the Mormon people were the first to colonize it.

There seemed no limit to the difficulties to be overcome by these colonizers of the desert. Circumstances were constantly changing and unavoidable issues as constantly arising. To successfully grapple with them, required experience and an enlightened judgment in the leaders of the people, and in the people themselves, an abiding faith in their God and those leaders.

The Saints were locating among the wild tribes of the desert, a thousand miles from a civilization that cast them out, and from which they could expect neither sympathy nor assistance in emergencies. They must organize from the surrounding elements the means of subsistence or perish. With policy or force, or both, they must defend themselves from the aggressions of the wild tribes by which they were surrounded or suffer extinction at their hands. Wisdom dictated that they should assume the best possible position for defence. For this purpose ten acres of ground were surveyed one mile south-west of the temple block, on which to build their houses in fort form. This was inclosed with an adobe wall eight feet high and three feet thick at the bottom, slanting gradually to the top. Inside of this wall the houses were built, the fort wall forming one side of the rooms. Rapid progress was made by these pioneers in preparing shelter for their families. They had been so much under tents and wagon covers, that any house that would protect them from the elements was a luxury. Besides, winter was approaching and bitter experience had taught them the wisdom of making the best possible preparation for it.

Under the great pressure of the season's operations, one short month was all the time President Young could spare to personally direct the infant colony. The much desired haven of rest had been found and a beginning made, but the great mass of the Saints expelled from Illinois, were in a scattered condition at Winter Quarters and east of the Missouri river. The gathering which had now been inaugurated was yet to be thoroughly systematized.

The order and rapidity with which this grand exodus had so far been conducted, and with which it was completed, has historically marked the great executive abilities of the quorum of Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young as a central directing power. The 25th of August, 1847, accompanied by H. C. Kimball and forty others, among whom was Elder Thomas Bullock, he left Salt Lake valley, for Winter Quarters.

The following statements from a letter written by Mr. Thomas Bullock to his friend, F. D. Richards, gives us a general description of what the pioneers accomplished in one month. They plowed and planted eighty-four acres with corn, beans, potatoes, buckwheat, turnips and a variety of garden vegetables. They irrigated all the land, surveyed and laid out a city, with streets running east and west, north and south, into blocks of ten acres, subdivided into eight lots of one and a quarter acres each. The streets eight rods wide designed for a walk on each side twenty feet wide, to be ornamented with shade trees. All the houses to be built twenty feet back from the street fence, with flower gardens in front. One block was reserved for a temple and three for public grounds; the latter designed for promenades, with fountains of the purest water, and each square, ornamented with everything delightful. * * * * * * * They also built twenty-seven log houses, laid off a ten acre lot for a fort, where one hundred and sixty families could winter until they built on their own inheritances. They manufactured one hundred and twenty-five bushels of beautiful salt. We continue the description in `Elder Bullock's words.

"The water is so strong that I can walk in it without touching bottom, I can float on it, yet in fresh water I cannot swim a yard. It is most delightful to bathe in, as is also the warm spring, a mile and a half north of the city. Every person, who was sick, that bathed in this spring recovered. My fingers rooted out the stones, and a couple of brethren afterwards assisted me with spades to dig out a place about sixteen feet square to bathe in. Seven or eight persons often bathe in it at a time. Those who once go there want to go again. The water is 109 ° Fahr. with strong sulphur and salt taste. Two miles further north is a hot spring with water heated to 126 °. The water rushes out of a large rock, and I could not hold my fingers in it while I could count eleven. * * * There are altogether about fifty springs in three miles. * * * * These springs, like the Pool of Siloam, heal all who bathe, no matter what their complaints. The air is very salubrious and with these warm springs I can truly say, we have found a healthy country."

The pioneers seemed early to comprehend many of the advantages of their new location; immunity from the oppression of mobs, air in which there was no ague and fever, abundance of good land and water in the valley, and of timber in the mountains, the latter out of their way but available when needed, an inland sea affording delightful bathing, an abundance of fine salt with but little labor to obtain it, and a "Pool of Siloam" in which they could wash and be clean from diseases engendered in the miasmatical atmosphere of Illinois and Iowa; all free as the invigorating air they breathed, was, indeed a marvelous change of conditions.
