James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XVII

THE IMMIGRATION OF 1847—ORGANIZATION AND METHOD OF TRAVEL—SUBLINE FAITH OF THESE SAINTS—MAIL FACILITIES—FIRST LESSON IN STAMPEDES—WRITING ON A BUFFALO SKULL—STAMPEDE AND LOSS OF TWENTY YOKE OF OXEN—P. H. YOUNG BRINGS NEWS FROM THE PIONEERS—SICKNESS AND DEATH—THE ALKALI LANDS—MEET RETURNING SOLDIERS AND PIONEERS—EXCITING STAMPEDE—DEATH OF SISTER GRANT—ARRIVAL IN THE VALLEY.

WE WILL now leave the pioneers; those in the valley to pursue their urgent labors, and those returning to Winter Quarters to continue their wearisome journey under difficulties, and go back and bring up the emigration who were expected in a short time, to follow the trail of the pioneers. The wagons to make up these companies began to gather on the west side of the Elk Horn river about the 12th of June, 1847. On the 15th about three hundred wagons having collected, a meeting was called around a liberty pole erected to designate a place for public gathering. Orson Spencer's company was the first organized. It moved off the ground on the 18th of June. The 19th, Captain J. M. Grant's hundred traveled fifteen miles and encamped in sight of Captain Spencer's. The order of encampment was for the wagons to form a circle with their front ends outside. At one point a sufficient space was left between two wagons to drive the cattle in and out. This space was partially closed by passing chains to the wagons on either side of the passage. In this way a convenient corral was formed in which to secure the cattle at night. Experience proved this method to be better adapted to companies in which all the wagons were built for heavy loads of freight, strong and heavy enough to resist the pressure of the cattle in the rush of a stampede. In time other expedients were adopted in which there was not so much danger to wagons and their occupants.

The writer has not been able to obtain very satisfactory returns of the organization of this emigration, but the five hundred and sixty or five hundred and sixtysix wagons appeared to have been organized into five hundreds, respectively, under the direction of Orson Spencer, J. M. Grant, A. O. Smoot, John Taylor and P. P. Pratt. The following from the autobiography of Parley P. Pratt furnishes some information not found elsewhere. He says:

"Arriving at Elk Horn river with a small company we made a ferry of a raft of dry cottonwood timber and rafted over our own company of about fifty wagons. We then organized for herding and grazing purposes, and continued to aid others in crossing and organizing until five hundred and sixty-six wagons were finally crossed and organized ready for a march. In the final organization of this vast company Father Isaac Morley and Bishop Whitney assisted, or rather took the oversight—being a committee appointed for that purpose by the Presidency before they left. As Brother Taylor and myself were present, we were appointed and invited to take a general superintendency of this emigration.

"The organization consisted of companies of tens, fifties and hundreds, with a captain over each, and the whole presided over by a president and two counselors, a marshal, etc. President John Young was called to preside, having been nominated by the Presidency before their departure. John Van Cott was appointed marshal.

"Thus organized, this large company moved on up the Platte about the 4th of July. * * * Arriving at the north fork of the Platte river, we continued up it quite a distance above the trail the pioneers had made, as we could not ford the river in their track. We at length found a ford, and, with some difficulty on account of quicksand, forded the river, and made our way over to the main Platte, re-entering the pioneer trail. As we passed up the Platte on this trail the companies in front had frequently to halt and build bridges, etc. * * * * After journeying for several hundred miles up the Platte, we at length met two messengers from the pioneers under President Young, from Salt Lake valley. These were O. P. Rockwell and E. T. Benson, who had been sent out to find us and report our progress and circumstances. Having visited all the camps, they returned to the valley, or rather to where they met the President and pioneers on their way back to Winter Quarters on the Missouri. I accompanied them back nearly one day's ride on the way, and then bade them God speed and returned to my own camp. Soon after this our fifty met the President and company of pioneers and camped with them one day."

Having given Parley P. Pratt's outlining of a part of the journey, we will go back and fill it up with other interesting items, many of them from Miss E. R. Snow's journal.

On the 23rd the companies traveled two wagons abreast. That night four organizations of hundreds, respectively, under the command of captains John Taylor, P. P. Pratt, J. M. Grant and A. O. Smoot camped on the road within a distance of six miles. All who expected to follow the pioneers this season were now fairly on the way.

In this move was one of the grandest exhibitions on record of the faith of a people in the divine inspiration of their leaders. When ancient Israel followed their Moses out of Egypt it was with doubts and complaints. A more fitting parallel to the case of these Latter-day Saints is found in that of the Jaredites. With no other assurance of their safety than the assertion of their leaders, that the Lord would guide them across "the great waters" to the goodly land which they and their children should inherit, they embarked on vessels without sails, compass or rudder to float out on, to them a limitless ocean at the mercy of winds and ocean currents. Their faith in God and their leaders was evidently boundless.

These two thousand Saints set their faces towards the setting sun, with their wives and their little ones with no other guide in the vast and almost unexplored wilderness than the trail left by their leaders, who at the time of their starting, had been gone over two months and were then buried in the profound silence of the desert, without the slightest intimation of their fate, of their success or failure. They expected to find their leaders somewhere in the great expanse of desert, plain, and mountain peaks and valleys, lying between the Missouri river and the Pacific Ocean, two thousand miles distant. In 1846, they planted a colony on the western ocean; about the same time in 1847, they planted another in the heart of the continent. From the first colonizing of the Atlantic coast the western frontier had been an imaginary line, constantly moving westward, with the log cabins of the white man, until it reached the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. With the march of the emigrating Saints in 1847 the "Western Frontier" vanished and became historical.

When the emigrating camps were getting under way the pioneers were along by Independence Rock and Devil's Gate. The wagons of the emigrating companies were generally drawn by from four to eight oxen each, and the rate of travel was from ten to fifteen miles per day. The animals were sustained, solely by the grass the country produced. On the 1st of July, they crossed Loupe Fork of the Platte. "They sometimes traveled two, sometimes four, and sometimes six wagons abreast, on roads and without roads. A Mr. Russell found a bucket which he recognized as one he had given to H. C. Kimball. The 5th of July the companies camped on Grand Island where a board was found on which the pioneers had written comforting words, marked the distance two hundred and seventeen miles from Winter Quarters." These way tokens indicating the welfare of their leaders, and the great anxiety of those leaders for their people who were to follow, were very cheering to these emigrating camps.

In the morning of the 14th of July the camps received their first lesson in stampedes on the plains. They learned the terrible pressure of a mass of frightened cattle upon the wagons of a corral which encloses them. The account of it is from the journal of Miss E. R. Snow.

"This morning a fearful circumstance occurred. Some one was shaking a buffalo robe at the back of a wagon from which some of the cattle in the corral took fright and started on the run; those frightened others; they commenced bellowing; and all in a huddle, ran for the gateway of the enclosure, which being altogether too narrow for the egress of the rushing multitude that thronged into the passage, they piled one on top of another until the top ones were above the tops of the adjacent wagons, moving them from their stations while the inmates at this early hour, being so suddenly and unceremoniously aroused from their morning sleep, and not knowing the cause of this terrible uproar and confusion, were some of them almost paralyzed with fear. At length those that could, broke from the enclosure, the bellowing subsided and quiet was restored; but the sad effect of the fright caused much suffering to some whose nerves were not sufficient for the trying scene. In the encounter two wagon wheels were crushed, Captain K's only cow was killed, and several oxen had horns knocked off."

Captain Grant brought a buffalo skull into camp on which the pioneers had written, "All well—feed bad—are only three hundred miles from Winter Quarters," etc. The writing was dated May 9th. Up to that point the pioneers had made three hundred miles in twenty-six days, and the emigrating companies had not done much better. A large bear was killed and divided among J. M. Grant's hundred. The cattle of Captain Smoot's division broke out of the corral and in the morning twenty yoke were gone. This was a serious loss and on the 21st, after much deliberation, several hunters were sent after the lost cattle.

July 23rd the cannon was fired in the first company. The occasion was a visit from one hundred Sioux Indians. The following day those sent in search of the lost cattle returned with only four head.

The 25th of July Phineas H. Young and nine others of the pioneers met the companies. A meeting was called and a letter read from President Young, and one from Willard Richards. This interesting circumstance took place the 25th of July, the day after the pioneers arrived in the valley.

As before stated, after the pioneers had crossed Green river, five men were sent back on their trail on the 4th of July to meet the advancing companies of Saints and assist them as guides through the Black Hills. Those selected were Phineas H. Young, Aaron Farr, Rodney Badger, William Walker and Jonathan Pugmire. At the old Platte ferry, one hundred and twenty miles west of Laramie, they were joined by five more of the pioneers. They expected to meet the companies near the Black Hills but, instead, found them about three hundred miles west of Winter Quarters. This unexpectedly long distance to travel, with the increase of numbers at the ferry, nearly caused the starvation of the whole company of guides. They had plenty of food to Laramie, from there until they met the companies they were almost destitute and suffered greatly. For five days and nights, they had but two prairie dogs and a skunk to divide among ten men.

They found no game. Of the armies of buffalo met by the pioneers not one was to be seen, for the Indians had driven them off and they had gone into the hills.

It was not only a great relief to the guides when they met the companies opposite Ash Hollow but, as well, of the emigrating camps who were following cautiously in the track of the pioneer band. The news brought of the successful journey of the pioneers as far as Green river; the certainty that they had already reached the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, with the presence of the guides sent to pilot the companies through the Black Hills, gave great comfort and assurance to the emigrating Saints, who could not but feel some anxiety as to the result of the season's operations.

The 26th of July many Indians passed the companies with tents and baggage fastened to mules and horses, and on drays formed of tent poles drawn by horses, mules and dogs. Covers for little ones were made by fastening skins over bows which were attached to the upper side of the drays.

On the morning of August 4th the people were cheered by the arrival of fourteen Mormon soldiers of the Battalion, who were an escort to General Kearney on his way to Fort Leavenworth. There they expected to get their discharge. They were husbands and sons of women in the companies. To them more especially it was a joyful meeting.

"Death," says Sister Snow, "made occasional inroads among us. Nursing the sick in tents and wagons was a laborious service; but the patient faithfulness with which it was performed is, no doubt, registered in the archives above, as an unfailing memento of brotherly and sisterly love. The burial of the dead by the wayside was a sad office. For husbands, wives and children to consign the cherished remains of loved ones to a lone, desert grave, was enough to try the firmest heart-strings. Today a Sister Ewing who had passed away after a sickness of two weeks, was buried. The burial was attended with all the propriety the circumstances would permit. After the customary dressing the body was wrapped in a quilt and consigned to its narrow house. It truly seemed sad and we sorrowed deeply as we turned from the lonely grave." The 9th of August the companies were fairly in the Black Hills. On the 12th, Mrs. Mary Noble gave birth to a daughter in her wagon. The same day charcoal was burned for the camp blacksmiths, and five gallons of tar was made by one of the companies.

On the 19th a Sister Love was run over by a wagon loaded with sixteen hundred pounds. One wheel ran over her breast. She was administered to and was around again in a day or two.

August 25th. This was the day the pioneers left the valley for Winter Quarters. The emigrating camps passed the board marked one hundred and twenty miles from Fort Laramie. When the herd was brought in on the 28th, half the animals were missing. Those who had their teams went on. Three horsemen and three footmen went back on the road for the lost cattle. However they had taken the other direction, and were found by the teams that had gone on. The party returning them were met by boys sent in that direction from the wagons that remained in camp.

August 30th the companies passed the ferryboat, used by the pioneers in crossing the Sweetwater below Independence Rock. The road along here passes through the alkali lands. As this was the first experience of our emigration passing through this district, so fatal to cattle, the losses were heavy. Their carcasses were numerous along the wayside. The second fifty was almost disabled.

These misfortunes developed the communistic character of the Saints. The 1st of September a meeting was called to take into consideration the best means of modifying the difficulties of the situation. An effort was made to equalize the strength of the companies. "It was motioned that the captains be authorized to act for the companies and yoke whatever in their judgment was proper to be put to service, cows, heifers, calves, etc. Some thought this motion oppressive, but it was carried by a majority."

Of the meeting of soldiers and pioneers from the valley Miss Snow writes, September 2nd: "Last eve we had the pleasure of hearing from the valley and of tasting salt from the Great Salt Lake by a small party of soldiers and pioneers with three wagons, and on the 3rd met a larger party with perhaps eighteen wagons. On the 4th of September J. C. Little, a returning pioneer, took tea with us with mutual satisfaction. The pioneers call our present encampment three hundred miles from the valley.

"September 7th: Yesterday, we passed the two hundred and forty mile board—snow-storm last night and it continued to fall at intervals today. September 8th: This morning as we were starting, Harvey Pierce, and others, came up and informed us that the pioneers were only eighteen miles distant, and would soon be with us. It was decided to go two miles further to a good camping place. The road went over a slough, the bridge over which was so much out of repair that it was thought impossible for wagons to cross, and a halt was called to repair the crossing. The slough was at the foot of a long gentle slope, and the teams two and three abreast, were standing from the top nearly down to the place where the men were commencing to fix the bridge.

"At this time when many of the teamsters were lounging at ease, two of our young men, riding at full speed with blankets flying and whips in hand, rode up, and in passing the teams in the rear, so frightened them that they started down the hill, and as they went they started others until almost in a moment nearly all were in motion, increasing their rapidity until the scene was fearfully alarming. Many of them crossed the slough in different directions, and where the best of teamsters would not dare to drive, not one team crossing on the bridge. Many lives were exposed, but through the great blessing of our Heavenly Father no one was much hurt.

"The writer of this sketch happened to be sitting on the back seat of a two-seated carriage, holding a pair of high strung horses with all the strength I could exert. I prayed with all the fervency of my spirit. I knew full well that if they once started nothing could stop them. Sister Pierce and her daughter, with whom I was traveling, after making ineffectual efforts to stop one of their teams, came to the horses I was holding and took them by the bits. So frightened were they, that although they made no attempt to move, their flesh shook with a tremor from head to foot. My arms were lame for several days. We arrived at our encampment and spent the day with the pioneers. President Young, H. C. Kimball and A. Lyman took supper with us."

Of this joyful occasion Elder John Taylor writes in a letter to the Saints in England, dated Great Salt Lake City, December 7th, 1847. "Four hundred miles from this place we received by express from the pioneers, the pleasing intelligence of their arrival at this place which they had selected for the Saints. On our arrival at the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains, the hundred that I was with met the pioneers on the return to Winter Quarters, in company with a number of the Battalion who had been engaged in the service of the United States. We felt as though it was a time to rejoice. Our hearts were gladdened and we prepared a feast for them, and spread a table in the wilderness, on the tops of the mountains, at which one hundred and thirty of them sat down to partake. We mutually felt edified and rejoiced. We praised the Lord and blessed one another, and in the morning we separated; they to pursue their weary course and we to come to our present location."

The people of Captain Grant's company and the pioneers were so delighted with the visit, and there was such a sense of security, that the stock were left unguarded; as a result, forty horses and mules were stolen. On the 9th an armed company was sent on their trail. Late in the evening one of the party returned with two horses. In the evening there was preaching by the pioneers and the pioneer song was sung. The 10th of September the company sent in pursuit of the stolen animals returned with only three horses.

The pioneers and Captain Grant's company parted, each going their ways with pleasant reminiscences of the interview. President Young had advised the leaders of the companies to keep them together until they arrived at Green river. From there they might be permitted to brake up into tens, as in this shape they could travel better through the gorges and defiles of the Wasatch mountains. On the 14th Captain Grant's company was given leave to so break up. About this time Capt. Grant's wife died. She had been failing sometime. Sister Snow writes; "I was with her much, previous to her death, which occurred so near Salt Lake valley, that by forced drives night and day, her remains were brought through for interment. Not so, however, with her beautiful babe of eight or ten months, whose death preceded her's about two weeks; it was buried in the desert."

The 29th of September Sister Snow first saw the part of the valley visible from the Big mountain. For the incidents of the last two days of the ten with which she traveled, we copy from her journal. As the companies were traveling in tens it will give a fair idea of the experience of others:

"October 1st. This day we traveled through brush and timber, but what was still worse, through black dust with which we all were so densely covered that our identities might me questioned. When up the mount to Bellow's Peak we met Brother John Taylor, who, having reached the valley, was returning to meet that portion of his company now in the rear. Riding on horseback, through the interminable dust, his face was covered with a black mask, and in his happy, jocular way, lest I should compliment him, he hastened to ask me if I had lately seen my face. Our appearance was truly ludicrous. It mattered little to us as we went slash, mash, down the mount, over stumps, trees, roots, ruts, etc., where no one dared to ride who could walk.

"October 2nd. Captain Pierce and most of his ten arrived in the valley a little after ourselves. The general order of travel having been discontinued for a few days past as we neared the valley, small detachments arrived according to circumstances. Many were in before us, and perhaps as many after."

In the following from the letter of John Taylor of the 7th of December before referred to, he doubtless refers to the arrival of all the emigrating Saints:

"We arrived here on the 5th of October, generally enjoying good health. I have never in all my experience known so little sickness and so few deaths among so many people in the same space of time. There have been from six to seven deaths. Two or three were infants and the remainder were mostly, if not all, severely indisposed before they started."

The first few days of October closed the season's operations on the plains. The moving of families and their effects one thousand miles under surrounding conditions was a great experiment, but it was as eminently successful as it first appeared venturesome.
