James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XVIII.

ADVANTAGES OF THE NEW GATHERING PLACE—ORGANIZATION OF A FIRST PRESIDENCY—THE FIRST GENERAL EPISTLE TO THE SAINTS ORGANIZING THE GATHERING.

PRESIDENT YOUNG and company duly reached Winter Quarters. Owing to the heavy loss of animals the men performed much of the journey on foot, while they subsisted on the flesh of wild animals which they killed by the way.

Of necessity, the Nauvoo exodus suspended the work of gathering until a new location could be found. Considering the world as the field from which the wheat was to be gathered, Great Salt Lake valley was much more a central point than any before occupied by the Saints. About one thousand miles of desert, land travel intervened between it and the Pacific Ocean, and between it and the large navigable rivers flowing into the Gulf of Mexico. The point was about equally protected on all sides from the incursion of outside enemies, until the colony should have time to grow and be better able to struggle with antagonisms.

On the return of President Young to Winter Quarters the Apostles appear to have at once taken up the labor of organizing the First Presidency, and of systematizing the gathering. The better location of the Saints made this practicable on a more comprehensive scale than ever before. Their labors culminated in a general epistle to the Saints throughout the earth, dated Winter Quarters, December 23rd, 1847. This contained general instructions to meet the conditions of the Saints everywhere. It may be considered the great trumpet call to the hosts of Israel throughout the world to gather together to the place the Lord had appointed.

The epistle opens with a review of the condition of the Church, the necessity of united effort under general counsel, and a few items connected with the movement from Nauvoo; the difficulties encountered in crossing Iowa, a distance of about three hundred miles, at a very inclement season of the year; the arrival of many of the Saints near Council Bluffs; their locating on the lands of the Pottowatomie Indians, afterwards vacated in favor of the United States; the raising of the Mormon Battalion and consequent weakening of the strength of the "camps of Israel" and then says:

"When the strength of our camps had taken its departure in the Battalion the aged, the infirm, the widow and the fatherless that remained, full of hope and buoyant with faith, determined to prosecute their journey, a small portion of which went as far west as the Pawnee Mission, where, finding it too late to pass the mountains, they turned aside to winter on the banks of the Missouri, at the mouth of Running Water, about two hundred and fifty miles north-west of the Missouri settlements; while the far more extensive and feeble numbers located at this place, called by us Winter Quarters, where upwards of seven hundred houses were built in the short time of about three months, while the great majority located on Pottowatomie lands." * * * *

Mention is made of the journey of the pioneers to Great Salt Lake valley. A general description is given of the country, which from that time was looked upon as a haven of rest and peace by the Saints.

"After tarrying four or five weeks, many of the pioneers commenced their return, nearly destitute of provisions, accompanied by a part of the Battalion, who were quite destitute except a very small quantity of beef, which was soon exhausted. The company had to depend for their subsistence on wild beasts, such as buffalo, deer, antelope, etc., which most of the way were very scarce and many obtained were exceedingly poor and unwholesome. Between the Green and Sweetwater rivers we met five hundred and sixty-six wagons of the emigrating Saints on their way to the valley, at our last encampment with whom we had fifty horses and mules stolen by the Indians, and a few days after we were attacked by a large body of Sioux who drove off many of our horses, but most of these were recovered.

"Our route was by Fort Bridger, the South Pass, Fort John (Laramie), and from thence on the north bank of the Platte to Winter Quarters, where we arrived on the 31st of October, all well, having performed the long and tedious journey with ox as well as horse teams, and with little food except wild flesh, without losing a single man, although many were sick when they left in the spring, insomuch that they were unable to walk until we had traveled more than one-half of the outward distance.

"On the 11th inst. (December) fifteen of the Battalion arrived from California with a pilot from the valley, having suffered much on their return from cold and hunger, with no provisions part of their way but a little horse flesh of the worst kind."

This company of Battalion men left a party of about thirty men of the Battalion on the Sweetwater searching for buffalo. They arrived at Winter Quarters on the 18th of December in a very destitute condition. They also had suffered much from cold and hunger, having subsisted on their worn-out horses and mules.

The following expresses the universal desire of the Saints to find shelter from their enemies and the demon of persecution: "The Saints in this vicinity are bearing their privations in meekness and patience, and making all their exertions tend to their removal westward. Their hearts and all their labors are toward the setting sun, for they desire to be so far removed from those who have been their oppressors that there shall be an everlasting barrier between them and future persecution. * * *

"In compliance with the wishes of the sub-agents we expect to vacate the Omaha lands in the spring.

"Thus, brethren, we have given you a brief idea of what has transpired among us since we left Nauvoo, the present situation of the Saints in this vicinity, and of our feelings and views in general, as preparatory to the reply which we are about to give to the cry, What shall we do?"

The answer to this all-absorbing question to the watching, expectant Saints throughout the world we only give so far as it is applicable to those scattered in the United States and the Canadas.

"Gather yourselves together speedily near to this place, on the east side of the Missouri river, and, if possible, be ready to start from hence by the 1st of May next, or as soon as grass is sufficiently grown, and go to the Great Salt Lake City, with bread sufficient to sustain you until you can raise grain the following season.

"Let the Saints who have been driven and scattered from Nauvoo, and all others in the western states, gather immediately to the east bank of the river, bringing with them all the young stock of various kinds they possibly can; and let all the Saints in the United States and Canada gather to the same place by the first spring navigation, or as soon as they can, bringing their money, goods and effects with them; and so far as they can consistently, gather young stock by the way which is much needed here and will be ready sale; and when here let all who can, go directly over the mountains, and those who cannot, let them go immediately to work at making improvements, raising grain and stock on the lands recently vacated by the Pottowatomie Indians and owned by the United States, and by industry they can soon gather sufficient means to prosecute their journey. In a year or two their young cattle will grow into teams; by interchange of labor they can raise their own grain and provisions, and build their own wagons, and by sale of their improvements to citizens who will gladly come and occupy, they can replenish their clothing, and thus speedily and comfortably procure an outfit. All Saints who are coming on this route will do well to furnish themselves with woollen or winter, instead of summer clothing, generally, as they will be exposed to many chilling blasts before they pass the mountain heights.

"We have before named the Pottowatomie lands as the best place for the brethren to assemble on the route, because the journey is so very long that they must have a stopping place, and this is the nearest point to their final destination which makes it not only desirable but necessary; and as it is a wilderness country, it will not infringe on the rights and privileges of any one; and yet it is so near western Missouri that a few days travel will give them an opportunity of trade, if necessity requires, and this is the best general rendezvous that now presents without intruding on the rights of others.

"The brethren must recollect that from this point they pass through a savage country, and their safety depends on good firearms and plenty of ammunition, and then they may have their teams run off in open daylight, as we have had, unless they shall watch closely and continuously.

"The Saints in western California, who choose are at liberty to remain; and all who may hereafter arrive on the western coast, may exercise their privilege of tarrying in the vicinity or of coming to head quarters."

Apostle Orson Hyde was left in charge of affairs on the Missouri during the absence of the pioneers in 1847. At a feast and grand council held at his house on the 5th of December, 1847, a First Presidency was chosen by the Apostles. It consisted of Brigham Young as chief and H. C. Kimball and Willard Richards as his counselors. The choice of the Apostles was accepted by the people at a conference in the log tabernacle in Kanesville, the 24th of December. Orson Hyde was installed, as President of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. From that time until the culmination of the Nauvoo Exodus, he held the important position of general manager of affairs at the eastern end of the Mormon emigration route to the mountains. The Church was now fully organized according to the pattern given by the Prophet Joseph, and during the winter of 1847-8 plans were well matured for the important operations of the coming season.
