James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XIX.

THE MORMON BATTALION AFTER THEIR DISCHARGE AT LOS ANGELES—INCIDENTS OF THEIR TRAVEL TO SALT LAKE VALLEY—ABOUT FIFTY OF THEM CONTINUE THEIR TRAVELS TO WINTER QUARTERS—A WONDERFUL MARCH OF FOUR THOUSAND MILES UNDER DIFFICULTIES IN SEVENTEEN MONTHS.

A FITTING close of this season's operations is a sketch of the travels of a part of the Mormon Battalion after their discharge, which took place at Los Angeles, California, on the 16th of July, 1847. So isolated had these men been in the wilds of the Rocky Mountains and in an enemy's country, that they had received no news from their families, or of the movements of their people since the arrival in their camp at Santa Fe of John D. Lee and Howard Egan, in October, the previous year.

When discharged the men had very indefinite ideas of the country along the Pacific coast, and the sources of reliable information were very limited. The idea was prevalent among them that their people would emigrate to the neighborhood of Bear Lake. They had some conception of its location and it was the objective point of their intended travels. The officers of the Battalion met together and leaders were appointed to take companies by different routes. Lieutenant Lorenzo Clark was to take a company via Cajon Pass and the Muddy; Captain Jefferson Hunt one up the coast; other leaders in other directions. Owing to dissatisfactions these arrangments were not carried out, and all took their way according to chance or inclination. Captain Hunt took a party up the coast. Lieutenant L. Clark, from whom we have obtained the following incidents of its travels, was one of this party. With this company of fifteen or twenty men were also Philemon C. Merrill and James Ferguson, respectively lieutenant and adjutant of the Battalion.

The law in California at that time permitted a traveler to kill beef for food, but required him to take the brand with him, either cut out of the hide or its form on a piece of paper. If overtaken by the owner with evidence of ownership by being in possession of the same brand, he was expected to pay the customary value of the animal. This party killed four beeves, for two of which they paid four dollars each. To this staple article of food was added some bread as there were opportunities to buy, and also fruit obtained at Spanish missions along the route.

Many of the Battalion men not having means for travel, scattered through the country for employment. Near San Francisco was a hotel kept by a Mr. Skinner. There the company rested three or four days. At the same time a party of marines from a vessel lying in the bay of San Francisco were there on a pleasure excursion. They had heard much of the Mormon Battalion and seemed pleased to make the acquaintance of men who had belonged to it. The officers invited them to dinner aboard their vessel. The invitation was declined, as its acceptance would cause too much delay. Means were too limited to purchase more in San Francisco than a small supply of provisions. This party continued on to Sutter's Fort, near where the city of Sacramento now stands. There they connected with a party led by Captain Andrew Lytle, who had traveled a route near the western base of the Rocky Mountains. From Los Angeles to Salt Lake valley, Elisha Averett, ex-musician of the Battalion, led a company of ten men as pioneers. As such they pioneered the way of Captain Lytle's company to Sutter's Fort, and from there took the lead of the much larger company that continued their journey to Salt Lake valley.

Most of the following incidents in the journey of Captain Lytle's command from Los Angeles to Winter Quarters are from the History of the Mormon Battalion.

On the 20th of July, 1847, the majority of those who did not re-enlist were organized for traveling with Andrew Lytle and James Pace captains of hundreds; Wm. Hyde, Daniel Tyler and Redick N. Allred captains of fifties; Elisha Averett captain of ten pioneers.

On the 21st the pioneers advanced not knowing whither they went, only they had been informed that by traveling northward under the base of the mountains, Sutter's Fort might be reached in about 600 miles.

The second day's travel was over a high rugged mountain, where two pack-animals lost their footing and rolled down twenty or thirty feet before they could regain it. They reached Francisco's ranch and remained there four days awaiting the arrival of the other two fifties who had tarried behind to complete their outfit. If the fifties were full the entire company numbered one hundred and sixty men, but Mr. Tyler who accompanied the party furnishes no definite statement of the number.

At Francisco's ranch beef cattle were purchased for all of the men who intended to return to their families that year. The 27th, the rear companies joined the advance. The company experienced some loss and trouble from Californians, who sold them stolen animals, probably with the connivance of the owners, who would afterwards replevy them.

A portion of the next three days of travel was over very high, rugged mountains, in which they lost fifteen of their beef cattle. They then concluded to rest, butcher their beeves and dry the meat. The first of August they encamped in a beautiful valley where they found cut in the bark of a tree the name of Peter Lebeck, who was killed by a grizzly bear on the 17th of October, 1837. The bones of the bear, which was killed by Lebeck's comrade, were lying on the ground near by.

A ride of fifteen miles the following day brought them to Tulare river. They traveled up this stream some twenty-three miles to find a ford, and finally crossed a part of their goods on a raft while some of the men forded it with their baggage on their heads. The night of the 5th they were all night watering their animals out of a few holes dug in damp places. The 9th of August they found a large stream of water in a beautiful valley, over which they rafted themselves and baggage and swam their animals. On the 11th they crossed a dry plain. In the afternoon the weather was excessively warm, there was but little air stirring, and that little was hot and suffocating. Two men gave out and others made little progress. For a time it almost seemed that all would perish. Those first in camp drank, filled their canteens and hurried back to relieve their thirsting comrades. All finally reached camp. The party agreed it was the hottest day they ever experienced in any country.

The 12th and 13th the pioneers made an effort to find Walker's Pass over the mountains to the east. The effort was fruitless, and the company soon after decided to follow, as near as practicable, Fremont's trail to Sutter's Fort, then a lone military post in the wilderness. The 15th of August they encamped on what was supposed to be the San Joaquin river. On the 20th they arrived at the Sacramento river, where were several small farms cultivated by Indians. On the 22nd they crossed a beautiful valley and encamped on a fine mountain stream. From there three men were sent ahead to Sutter's Fort to engage a supply of provisions. The following day they passed some Indian wigwams. The men being absent the women and children fled and hid in the brush. A few of the males visited the camp at night.

On the 24th of July the company were overjoyed to find a colony of Americans, the first they had seen since leaving Fort Leavenworth the previous year. The best of all was news brought by a man named Smith, who said he had accompanied Samuel Brannan on his trip to meet the pioneers. He informed them that the Saints were settling in Great Salt Lake valley, and that five hundred wagons were on their way there. This was the first intelligence received by the Battalion of the movements of the Church since the news brought by J. D. Lee and party the previous October. Their objective point was now well defined. The following day was one of rest with a meeting in the evening. Some men having a poor outfit wished to remain until spring, as wages were good. The fact that there was a settlement of Saints who had sailed from New York in the ship Brooklyn within a few miles made the situation seem less isolated.

At Sutter's Fort there appears to have been a fusion of the men of the different companies who wished to travel on to Great Salt Lake. Tender-footed animals were shod and unbolted flour, the kind manufactured at that time in California, bought for the journey. The 27th of August Captain Averett with his pioneers and about thirty other men started out, while the main body remained to complete preparations. About eighteen miles from Sutter's Fort the route changed from a northern to an eastern course.

On the 28th the company arrived at Captain Johnson's mill on Bear Creek. It was said he was one of Fremont's battalion, and his wife one of the survivors of the ill-fated company who were snowed in at the foot of the Sierras. Her mother, Mrs. Murray, was among the number who perished. The company crossed the plains in the summer of 1846. They passed through Great Salt Lake valley around the south end of the lake. They split up into factions, each party taking its own course. The few who remained with the persevering Captain Hastings pushed through to California; the others were caught in the snows of the Sierra Nevada Mountains. Mrs. Murray was with the party immediately in the rear of the captain, and consequently nearest the source of relief. After several had died with hunger and others were subsisting upon their flesh, a few of them, one of whom was Mrs. Murray's eldest daughter, afterwards Mrs. Johnson, resolved to attempt to cross the mountains for relief. Fitting themselves out with snow-shoes they proceeded some distance and were met by Captain Hastings and a relief party from Sacramento valley with provisions.

At the camp the relief party found Mrs. Murray dead and others ravenous from hunger. Children were crying for the flesh of their parents while it was being cooked. There were suspicions that Mrs. Murray had been foully dealt with, as she was in good health when her daughter left her and not likely to have perished from hunger during the brief period of her absence.

Leaving Johnson's mill the company followed General Kearney's trail. He had preceded them for the states with an escort of Battalion men. In Bear valley were three wagons and a blacksmith's forge, abandoned by the unfortunate emigrants. There the company had a fine treat of huckleberries. The 3rd of September they passed other wagons where General Kearney's party had buried the remains of some of the emigrants. At night they reached the spot where the rear wagons of the unfortunate Hastings' company were blocked by the snow. There a terrible scene was presented. A skull still covered with hair lay here, a mangled arm or leg yonder, with bones broken to obtain the marrow they

A SCENE OF HORROR.

contained. A whole body covered with a blanket occupied another place, and portions of other bodies were scattered around. It had evidently been a scene of intense human suffering and of some of the most fiendish acts that man, frantic with the cravings of hunger, could perpetrate.

Leaving this scene of horrors on the morning of the 6th of September, in a short time the company met Samuel Brannan returning from his trip to meet the Saints. He informed them that the pioneers had reached Salt Lake valley in safety, but his description of the facilities of the place were not favorable for colonization. He considered it no place for an agricultural people, and expressed his confidence that the Saints would emigrate to California the next spring. On being asked if he had given his views to President Brigham Young, he answered that he had. On further inquiry as to how his views were received, he said, in substance, that he laughed and made some rather insignificant remark; "but," said Brannan, "when he has fairly tried it, he will find that I was right and he was wrong, and will come to California."

The company camped with Mr. Brannan. After he left the following morning Captain James Brown of the Pueblo detachment arrived from Salt Lake valley. Nearly every soldier received one or more letters from family and friends. Some received cheering news, others were saddened with the loss of a parent, wife or child. Captain Brown also brought an epistle from the Twelve Apostles counseling those who had not the means of subsistence to remain, labor in California and bring their earnings with them in the spring. One half or more of the company returned to California in accordance with this counsel.

There, also, the advance of the company was overtaken by those left at Sutter's Fort, and by a few others who had traveled slowly with Brother Henry Hoyt who was sick. He had gradually failed but to his death, which occurred on the 3rd of September, 1847, he manifested a stern resolution to go on. Just before his death he was asked if he did not wish to stop and rest; his answer "No; go on," were the last words he spoke. He was buried as well as circumstances permitted. In the absence of tools with which to dig his grave it was rather shallow, but timbers and brush were piled upon it to protect his remains from the wolves.

The 16th of October the company arrived in Salt Lake valley, overjoyed to meet friends and relatives. Many of the men were very destitute of clothing. Their necessities were partially relieved by some of the influential brethren, among whom were Apostle John Taylor and Bishop Edward Hunter, taking up a collection among the settlers of such articles of clothing as they could spare for the benefit of the "Battalion boys." The men in some instances presented almost a ludicrous appearance after donning the additions to their wardrobes, but with them comfort was a first consideration, and they were thankful to get anything that would promote it. The Battalion men benefitted the colony by bringing in a variety of garden and fruit tree seeds, also seed grain, of which there were scanty supplies. Captain J. Hunt packed through two bushels of seed wheat. James Pace introduced the club-head wheat and Daniel Tyler the California pea, now the general field pea of Utah. We may as well add here the soldiers who wintered at Pueblo brought with them the taos wheat now so common in Utah.

A few of the Battalion found their families in the valley and had no farther to go; others were so worn down with fatigue and sickness that they were unable to go farther at that time; and still others preferred to remain until the following spring and endeavor to prepare a home for their families. Thirty-two of the number, however, determined to make an effort to spend the winter with their wives and children in Winter Quarters, and nerved with this hope were prepared to take the chances of the cold and storms of approaching winter in the mountains and on the plains.
