James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XX.

CAPTAIN P. C. MERRILL'S COMPANY LEAVES SALT LAKE FOR WINTER QUARTERS—EXCESSIVE COLD—DIFFICULTIES IN CROSSING LOUPE FORK—SUFFERING FOR FOOD—MISFORTUNE OF ALPHEUS HAWS—HORSE BEEF—PAWNEE INDIANS—DIVIDING FOOD UNDER DIFFICULTIES—A TURKEY FOR SUPPER—PROVIDENTIAL SUPPLY OF FOOD—ARRIVAL IN WINTER QUARTERS—CAPT. LYTLE'S COMPANY LIVE MOSTLY ON WILD MEAT—DIFFICULTIES AT LOUPE FORK—SUPPER ON A DONKEY'S BRAINS—ANOTHER ON THE CONTENTS OF A MULE'S HEAD—A FEAST ON RAWHIDE SADDLE BAGS—MULE BEEF FOR TEN DAYS—ARRIVAL AT WINTER QUARTERS.

SOON after the arrival of the Battalion men in Salt Lake City a company of fifteen men started for Winter Quarters, led by P. C. Merrill who was accompanied by a nephew. In addition the company was made up as follows: Lorenzo Clark, who has furnished the items of this sketch, John Thompson, Wm. Hyde, Philander Colton and son, Wm. Robinson, Geo. P. Dykes, Alpheus P. Haws, Luther T. Tuttle, Samuel Clark, Geo. W. Oman, Sterling Davis, and Ira Miles acting as guide, but not a Battalion man.

From the understanding these men had obtained of the route, they expected to cross the plains in about thirty days, whereas, they were sixty. An extension of time which greatly increased difficulties and prolonged suffering. In places Indians had burned the grass. This weakened animals and compelled slow traveling. The weather became very cold. They encamped at Fort Bridger over night where Captain Lytle's company overtook them. This circumstance would indicate that Captain Merrill's company may have left Salt Lake the day before Captain Lytle's. Captain Merrill's company went ahead in the morning and saw no more of the other until its arrival in Winter Quarters.

The weather was very cold to Laramie, with occasional snow. The company crossed the Platte on the ice, then for seventy miles had no other fuel than "buffalo chips" found under about a foot of snow. There being but little grass they were obliged to hunt feed for the animals on islands in the river. So severe was the cold one night, that the mules' ears were frozen half way down to the head and afterwards dropped off. The weather moderated some a few days before reaching Laramie. They had killed buffalo along as needed, and one day decided to lay by the following day and kill and dry a supply of meat, but when the morrow came they found themselves suddenly off the buffalo range. This neglect or miscalculation caused much suffering for food afterwards.

Arriving at the Loupe Fork they found ice running in the current, but solid some distance from each bank. The quicksand bottom changed so rapidly that when they had crossed an animal or two in one place they were obliged to hunt up another. In making these changes and contending with difficulties, they traveled eight miles up the river and were eight days in getting across. The last day Alpheus Haws lost the last animal of five with which he left California, and with it a part of his outfit. He involuntarily left his only shoes in the quicksand and, standing on the ice barefooted, saw about all he had rolling down stream in the turbulent waters.

A poor, sore-backed horse mired in the quicksand standing up. The ensuing night the ice froze firmly

CROSSING LOUPE FORK UNDER DIFFICULTIES.

around him. In the morning he was cut out, dragged ashore, dressed and the meat jerked for future use They might have fared worse without the horse beef. It helped to keep soul and body together.

The day after these events the company arrived at what was known as the "Pawnee Station," where they found an old cornfield. The pioneers had gleaned it, but these starving men gleaned it a little closer; found a few nubbins from which they ate the corn raw and pronounced it delicious. Continuing their journey, the next day they were met by about 200 Pawnee Indians. At first they appeared hostile. As Sterling Davis was leading his mule an Indian seized it by the bit. He raised a stick he carried in his hand to strike the Indian, but Captain Merrill perceived the motion in time to check it, telling him it would be the signal for the massacre of the company, as the Indians had surrounded them with bows drawn. Mr. Haws had sufficient knowledge of their language to make them understand. He informed them who the company were. The men had on white blankets tied around their necks and bodies the same as they were often worn by Indians, and the Pawnees claimed they thought them a band of Sioux who had come to prevent them from killing buffalo. When told some of them recollected the circumstance of the Battalion being mustered at Council Point the previous year. As the Indians became satisfied with the identity of the men, they at once began to manifest a friendly disposition. They invited Mr. Haws and three or four others to their camp, unsaddled their animals, gave the men food, principally dried beaver and venison, and by them sent food to last the party a day or more. When that was exhausted the company halted a day to rest animals and hunt for food. Wm. Robinson killed a small deer in the forenoon and brought it to the camp where it was eaten for dinner.

The company had agreed in the morning that a part should take care of the animals and share with the hunters in the anticipated food supply. Mr. D. wished to hunt. He went out an hour or two returned to camp where he lay around for the rest of the day. The sun about half an hour high Mr. Lorenzo Clark killed a doe. It was the custom in camp, when food was scarce, to divide as equally as possible a parcel to each man. Then one of the company stood with his back to the parcels while another man touched each parcel in succession asking, "Who shall have this?" When it was handed to the one named. That evening Mr. D. was left out as he would neither "fish nor cut bait." It was believed he went sufficiently hungry to feast on a deer skin that he had used under his saddle.

The following day the party traveled without food except a little some may have saved by shortening their supper. Towards evening a single turkey was killed and divided as was customary. The entrails fell to the lot of Mr. Lorenzo Clark. He threw them on to the coals as he received them and, when sufficiently roasted, devoured them for supper.

At this camp a council was called. The guide had made some error, and thought the company was further from their destination than events afterwards proved. It was proposed that a man take the best animal in the company, go ahead and have some provisions sent out; but Wm. Hyde suggested that they were soldiers and thought they had better remain together, trust in God and not send in. After traveling a short distance the following morning, the men were much surprised to find the Liberty pole which had been erected on the bank of the Platte river. They had been informed in Salt Lake that this was only twelve miles from the crossing of the Elk Horn river. There was a shout of joy at the sight of this waymark, that gave them the assurance they were near their destination. The snow was about a foot deep, and it continued to fall during the day. That evening their camp fire near the crossing of the Elk Horn, was hardly kindled, before a drove of turkeys came along from which five were killed. These made supper and breakfast and a little to take along. The next day, nerved up with the expectation of reaching home, they traveled the thirty miles to Winter Quarters with daylight. There they found what they sadly needed friends, food and rest.

The Salt Lake colony, with a reasonable prospect of semi-starvation before them, could not furnish flour to the Battalion men, but they were informed that flour was for sale at Fort Bridger, one hundred and fifteen miles on their journey. With this expectation the largest party of the Battalion men, about thirty, left Salt Lake valley the 18th of October, 1847, probably the day after that under Captain Merrill. They arrived at Fort Bridger in the first severe snow-storm of the season, and there learned that the flour on sale had all been disposed of to Oregon and California emigrants. Captain Bridger thought they would find what they wanted at Laramie on reasonable terms. They left Salt Lake with ten pounds of flour per man and were not yet entirely without. A little beef was purchased to last them until they could find game and they pushed on.

At the upper crossing of the Platte river, one hundred miles west of Laramie, they baked their last cake, the ten pounds of flour per man having been eked out for sixteen days. Between Bridger and Laramie they killed two buffalo bulls, an elk and some small game. In fact, the Battalion men in their travels from Sutter's Fort to Winter Quarters depended principally on their guns for subsistence. They reached Fort Laramic about the 10th of November and were again disappointed in getting flour. Captain Andrew Lytle bought one pound of crackers for 25 cents, the only breadstuff purchased. There was a little dried buffalo meat for sale, and those who had money purchased what meat they could afford and divided with the company. Twelve miles below Laramic a few men crossed to the south side of the Platte river and purchased of a trader one hundred pounds of flour for $25. There being about three pounds per man and five hundred miles to travel without any hope of a further supply, it was decided to use it only for making gravy or thickening soup.

The trader warned them that if they killed buffalo they might have trouble with the Indians. Sixty or seventy miles below Laramie their supply of meat was exhausted and around them were a few scattering buffalo. The gnawings of hunger will force men to run some risks to obtain food. They killed a bull and calf. While dressing them a smoke and some Indians were discovered on the south side of the river. The hunters with their buffalo beef reached camp sometime after dark unmolested. Awaking one morning about one hundred and fifty miles below Laramie the men found themselves under about a foot of snow. From there to Winter Quarters, three hundred and fifty miles, they broke their trail through snow from one to two feet in depth.

Just before crossing the Loupe Fork the company lost a few animals, supposed to have been stolen by the Pawnee Indians. Near the crossing of this stream was found the head of a donkey which Captain Merrill's company had killed for beef. Captain Allred opened the skull and with his messmates made a supper of the brains. About the same time Martin Ewell opened the skull of a mule killed for food the day before by Captain Pace's company and feasted on the contents. The day of their arrival at Loupe Fork the company divided and ate the last of their food, which consisted chiefly of rawhide "saddle bags," which had been used from California for carrying provisions. This feast was partaken of during a cold storm which lasted several days. The next food was a young mule of Captain Lytle's, which was too much exhausted to go further. This was the first domestic animal killed for food by this company since leaving California. The company had many times looked wistfully upon a small female dog belonging to Mr. Joseph Thorne, who with his wife and children had accompanied it from Bridger. The temptation was soon removed by Mr. Thorne trading the canine to the Pawnee Indians for a small piece of dried buffalo meat.

Owing to floating ice they were unable to cross the Loupe Fork for five days. During this time they traveled a few miles down the river and found Captain Pace's company just in time to save them from the danger of being robbed by Pawnee Indians. The two parties afterwards traveled together. Captain Pace and seven other men got in a hurry soon after passing Laramie and pushed on. The event proved they had overrated their ability to travel faster than the main company. They were overtaken near the Loupe Fork and soon after concluded to remain with their former companions.

On the opposite side of the river was an Indian farm. With the hope of obtaining a little corn a few men ventured to ford the stream. The field had been twice gleaned before by other travelers, and these gleaners were rewarded with only a few decaying ears. It was probably the same field gleaned by the pioneers in the spring and a few days before by P. C. Merrill's company. Captain Pace and William Maxwell visited an Indian camp to purchase food, but failed to get any as the Indians had none to spare. They, however, remained over night, were furnished a good supper and breakfast, and otherwise treated kindly.

The night of the fifth day after their arrival on its banks the cold was intense and the river froze over, so that on the morning of the sixth day the company began to cross on the ice, which bent and cracked. Holes were made in it, but with perseverance everything was safely deposited on the other bank. As the rising sun warmed the atmosphere, thus weakening the ice, the last few trips were extremely dangerous. Soon after the ice broke up and the stream was covered with floating fragments. Truly a kindly providence had favored them. From the killing of Captain Lytle's mule to their arrival in Winter Quarters, about ten days' travel, this company subsisted on mule meat alone, without salt.

On the Elk Horn river, thirty miles from Winter Quarters, they found a ferry boat with ropes stretched across the stream, ready to step into and pull over. The company understood this boat was built by the pioneers and first used by them. It served the companies who followed their trail, then the pioneers, then Captain Merrill's company on their return to Winter Quarters, and Captain Lytle's company were fortunate to find it available to them. They crossed the stream the 17th of December, 1847. Hoping the next day to end their excessive toils and sufferings, the men arose early in the morning and were soon on the march for the goal that they had been long struggling for.

The foremost men arrived in Winter Quarters about sundown, those in the rear a little after dark. The company was just two months journeying from Salt Lake to the Missouri river. We may in part imagine the joy of families and friends, but to sense the fruition of long-cherished hopes and the pleasing satisfaction of these men, one would need to pass through a similar bitter experience. No doubt, however, the joys of some were tinged with sadness as they found vacant places never to be filled in this life in their circle of loved ones. All the soldiers, although generally highly respectable, were unavoidably dirty and ragged, but they found only warm hearts to receive them, from President Young to the least child who knew what the words "Mormon Battalion" meant. They knew that that valiant corps had been offered a living sacrifice for the Church and the nation.
