James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXI.

CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE ON THE SHORES OF THE GREAT SALT LAKE—GREAT SCARCITY OF FOOD—THE SITUATION AS SHOWN BY L. D. YOUNG'S NARRATIVE.

BEFORE commencing the history of the emigrating Saints in 1848, it will be interesting to look in upon the colony in the wilderness and see how they were faring for food—the one essential to existence. When man has the opportunity and skill to construct shelter and to gather from the elements food to sustain him, his preservation is reasonably sure. While the Saints in the valley lacked no inherent qualifications for making homes in the desert, from unavoidable conditions there was often a serious want of food.

The Saints who crossed the plains in 1847, designed to take breadstuff to sustain them until they could harvest the ensuing year, but they were not prepared for emergencies that might arise from unforseen circumstances. Probably about two hundred Battalion men were in the valley during the winter of 1847-48. They were men who had been forced by circumstances into many very straitened conditions. Their energies and endurance had been taxed to the utmost for two years. These fiery trials developed in them the noblest attributes of manhood—faith in God and a sublime fortitude. Only a community of interest and feeling saved many of these men, and others, from death by starvation during the first year after the arrival of the pioneers on the shore of the Great Salt Lake. By way of illustration let Lorenzo D. Young who sacrificed and suffered tell the story of his experience; he says:

"Oliver G. Workman, a Battalion man, without family, came to Salt Lake with others from California in the autumn of 1847, and there he met his brother Jacob and family and assisted in providing food. The following spring, flour became so scarce that it was very difficult for the needy to obtain even a moiety. Mr. Workman came to me twice and stated that he had tried to get a little and could not. I told him I had none to sell at any price, but I let him have a few pounds each time.

"In a few days he came to me the third time and stated that he had tried to get a little flour until he was discouraged. He expressed his regret at being under the necessity of coming again but, said he, `What can I do? My brother's wife is famishing!' I remarked that I had only a little flour left and I stepped into another room where Mrs. Young lay on the bed sick. I stated the case to her and asked, `What shall we do?' The question was quite as important to us as to Mr. Workman; but she replied, `We cannot see anyone starve. Divide to the last pound.' I weighed what I thought we might spare. It was seven pounds. As I handed the sack containing it to Mr. Workman he put his hand into his pocket, and, without counting handed out a handful of gold. I again told him I had no flour to sell; that I would not exchange him a pound of flour for a pound of gold. He returned the gold to his pocket, and, as he turned to go away he was overpowered by his feelings and shed tears.

"Soon after this occurrence myself and family were entirely out of food. It had been necessary to work my oxen very hard through the winter, and all my cattle were too poor for food. I heard of a man on Mill Creek who had a three-year-old steer which he was keeping for beef, with the design of going to California in the spring. I succeeded in trading him a pair of large oxen by agreeing to give him one quarter of the animal after it was dressed. I drove the steer home, butchered it and hung the hide on the fence with the flesh side out. This furnished a feast for the magpies as they picked off what little meat remained on it. My share of the beef, with what little food could be gathered from other sources, kept us along for several weeks. During that time I made every possible exertion to obtain more food, but without success.

"Circumstances again seemed desperate. I took the hide off the fence and put it to soak in City creek. When it became soft and pliable I cut it into strips for convenience in handling. I labored on it about two days, scraping the flesh side clean and getting the hair off the other. After I became satisfied with its condition, I turned it over to Mrs. Young. To prepare a meal, a piece of raw-hide was boiled until it became a glue soap, when salt was added to season. This being a native product was abundant while other condiments were as scarce as the food they were intended to season.

"From the wreck of affairs in Nauvoo Mrs. Young saved a favorite set of china. I never knew more need of an inviting looking table than in those days of glue soup. Mrs. Young decked it out in the most inviting manner possible; the center piece, a pan of glue soup, with a ladle for dipping and conveying it to our plates. The Lord was always asked to bless the scanty fare. We satisfied our appetites as best we could, with a thankful feeling that we had that much to sustain life. Mrs. Young's health was generally poor, and on that diet she daily grew weaker. I felt that something must be done or she would die for want of nourishment. I went to a man that I understood had considerable flour and offered him a horse for a few pounds. He was one of a few Saints who had but little faith that we could remain in the country, and he designed going to California when spring was sufficiently advanced. His fears that he might be short prevented him from letting me have any flour. I met Bishop E. Hunter and made known my situation. Said he, `I have but little flour, but Sister Young must not die for want of some.' He let me have seven pounds. Mrs. Young ever after believed that the kindness of Brother Hunter saved her life. On her dying bed, and about an hour and a half before she expired, she spoke of the circumstance and blessed him.

"On the bottom lands along the river Jordan, thistles grew in abundance. The roots of these afforded considerable nourishment. As the large, dry top usually remained attached to the root until a new growth in the spring, they could be found and dug in the winter. They were a great help to the Saints in times of scarcity. In the spring of 1848 many acres of bottom land had been dug over. I, at times, as well as others, was compelled to avail myself of this means of sustaining life. As vegetation grew in the spring, other roots and herbs were used for food. Segoes for a time were in considerable demand, but several persons were poisoned by eating the wrong variety. Three persons died in as many weeks from this cause. After the sad occurrence they were not much used as edibles.

"One morning I met Brother Welcome Chapman with a basket of cowslips. As I had been accustomed to these for early spring greens in my youth, to me at that time they seemed a great luxury. That they grew in this mountain region surprised me. Only those who have longed for something palatable and refreshing can appreciate the feelings that caused me to exclaim with considerable enthusiasm, `Brother Chapman, where on earth did you get them?' He replied, `I have found a little spot up the canyon where they grow, and I go and get a basket of them in the morning to last us during the day.' I asked him if the supply was sufficient to let me have some. He thought so, and gave me what he then had. When cooked we enjoyed them very much. They were a change, a variety. Brother Chapman continued to furnish a few greens, from which we realized much benefit. In those times faith was an important factor in our lives. The prayer that the Lord would bless our food that it might strengthen us, was made up of no idle words. It came from the heart, and in return the blessing was often realized. With the meager fare I was able to accomplish considerable labor."

Elder Young's experience, with some variation, was that of hundreds of the early colonizers of Salt Lake valley. Strangers who now visit the country cannot properly sense its primitive barrenness, and the privations endured from being a thousand miles from outside resources. The youth born in the country can never realize, without a similar experience, the toil and privation with which was laid the foundation for the comfort and luxury they enjoy.
