James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXII.

THE EMIGRATION OF 1848—ORGANIZATION OF THE COMPANIES GOING WITH PRESIDENT YOUNG—GOOD NEWS FROM THE VALLEY—THE LAST COMPANIES UNDER ELDERS RICHARDS AND LYMAN—SPECIAL EPISTLE FROM PRESIDENT YOUNG; HIS ARRIVAL IN THE VALLEY—ARRIVAL OF THE LAST COMPANIES—REMARKABLE PROPHECY—LETTER OF P. P. PRATT, A REIGN OF PEACE—WHAT OTHERS THOUGHT OF THE MORMONS IN GREAT SALT LAKE VALLEY.

THE LAST day of May 1848, President B. Young commenced organizing the people into hundreds, fifties and tens, and appointing the officers necessary for managing so large a body of people. We are indebted to Elder Thos. Bullock for the census of the companies organized under his suspervision. Wagons, 623; souls, 1891; horses, 131; mules, 44; oxen, 2012; cows, 983; loose cattle, 334; sheep, 654; pigs, 237; chickens, 904; cats, 54; dogs, 134; goats, 3; geese, 10; beehives, 5; doves, 11; squirrels, 1; ducks, 5.

"On the 1st of June, Lorenze Snow's company moved off the ground to the Liberty Pole on the Platte, to make room for other waggons that came pouring in from Winter Quarters. * * * * *

"The 2nd of June Zera Pulsipher's camp followed on the trail, and we received a visit from Elders Hyde, Woodruff, Benson and others, by whom we learned that the Pawnee and Otoe Indians had a fight in rear of Winter Quarters, in which several were killed."

The third of June W. G. Perkin's company left the place of rendezvous, and President Young's company on the 5th. Lucy, wife of Elisha H. Grove's was run over by her wagon which broke her leg. The company traveled twelve miles. June 6th, after a travel of thirteen and a quarter miles, the company encamped on the Platte river. The organization of the camp was perfected, and a night and day guard arranged. The 29th of June the company first came in sight of buffalo. The 12th of July, it was on Crab creek, a little over four hundred and nine miles from Winter Quarters. It rested ten days, travelled twenty-seven days, averaging fifteen miles per day.

Between ten and eleven o'clock in the evening of the 12th of July, John Y. Green, Isaac Dunham, Joseph W. Young and Rufus Allen, arrived from the valley bringing news up to the 18th of May, the day of starting. Soon after another mail arrived with a few letters with dates up to the 9th of June. News from the valley was of deep interest to these traveling camps. Prosperity there meant future sustenance and comfort to them. Thos. Bullock the clerk of the camps, summed up the news as follows:

The health of the people was good. A large amount of spring crops had been put in. They were planting until within a few days of the starting of the mail, when the crickets had done considerable damage to the wheat and corn, but the gulls came and swept away the plague. From the arrival of the pioneers to the departure of this mail, there had been but fifteen interments. To balance these deaths, in one row of eight houses adjoining each other, in one week there were seven births, and it was thought there had been one hundred and twenty births during the residence of the people in the valley. Several saw and grist-mills were in operation, and in process of erection. Twelve miles of fence inclosing a large field for farming purposes, was nearly complete.

With President Young and company well on their way to the valley, we will return to Winter Quarters. About the 25th of June, Elders Willard Richards and Amasa Lyman left the Elk Horn with about three hundred wagons, making a little more than nine hundred, comprising the season's emigration. As was intended, Winter Quarters was evacuated. The first companies averaged about three persons to the wagon. At this rate about two thousand eight hundred people went from the Missouri river to the Mountains in 1848.

The first general epistle of the Presidency of the Church, from Great Salt Lake valley, furnishes some further information concerning the emigration of this year. During the winter and spring of 1848, efforts were made for the removal of the Church from Winter Quarters to Salt Lake valley. The effort was finally facilitated by a loan of teams, by the brethren on the Pottowatomie lands and friends in an about camp. Young and Kimball left Winter Quarters in May and Brother Richards in July. * * * At the Elk Horn a portion of Brother Kimball's camp was fired on by a band of Otoes and Omahas. Three men were wounded of which two were maimed for life." No other serious losses of lives and property are reported of this season's emigration.

A special epistle signed by Brigham Young, dated Great Salt Salt Lake City, October 9th, 1848, and addressed to the presiding authorities and Saints in Pottowatomie county and adjacent regions, explains under what circumstances the teams loaned the emigration, by their friends on the Missouri river, were returned, and also contains other items of interest.

The document opens with warm expressions of gratitude for deliverance from enemies, their arrival at the haven of rest for the Saints, and says, "On the 28th of August last, we wrote you an epistle from the Sweet-water, from which place we returned those wagons and teams that the brethren in Iowa had kindly loaned us to assist us on our journey, considering it wisdom that they should have an early start, make the best of their way while the weather and feed were in tolerable condition, so that they may reach their destination before the severity of the weather would be likely to set in upon them—while we remained at Sweetwater with our goods and families on the ground, exposed to the keen, frosty nights and storms that are so prevalent in that country. On the 30th of August we were glad to meet with a number of brethren from the valley, with forty-seven wagons and one hundred and twenty-four yoke of oxen, being three yoke of cattle over and above replacing the wagons and teams that we had previously sent back to the Saints in Iowa, towards filling the vacancy of the great number of cattle that had unfortunately died on our hands, and been left by the wayside. * * * *

CLIFFS OF THE WASATCH.

"Our hearts fainted not; but, relying on the arm of Jehovah, we reloaded our wagons and continued our journey. On the 1st of September, we went through the South Pass to the waters that flow into the Pacific, and had a miserable evening's journey of it. The next day we had a mizzling rain, and only removed about a mile in order to find feed to sustain our cattle. At night a snowstorm passed over us and on Sunday, the 3rd of September, the entire Wind river chain of mountains was covered with snow. The weather was then severe, but afterwards cleared up with pleasant days and frosty nights, which continued with us nearly the whole of our journey, with the exception of showers which were of frequent occurrence, but never so heavy as in the states, and we considered ourselves the highly favored of the Lord. We were under the necessity of traveling from this place in small companies on account of the many narrow canyons, crossings of creeks and scanty feed, so as to expedite our journey."

President Young arrived in the valley on Saturday, the 20th of September. He was escorted into the city by Bishop Edward Hunter and others, who guided them through the grain fields to the west side of the fort. President Kimball arrived in the afternoon of Sunday the 21st. The usual Sabbath meeting was adjourned two hours to give him, and company, an opportunity of being present. Many of the people went out to welcome him into the valley. At the meeting in the Bowery, a beautiful hymn of welcome, composed by Miss Eliza R. Snow, was sung by the choir.

On the arrival of the Presidency in the valley, they found the people living in four forts, composed mostly of houses. These inclosed about forty.seven acres of land. The companies of Willard Richards and Amasa Lyman arrived in the valley the 18th and 20th of October. With the season's emigration of 1848, the people on the shores of Salt Lake numbered about five thousand souls. Considering the recent losses of the Saints by persecution, the distance of the colony from the Missouri river and the great difficulties encountered on the route, this was an immense immigration within eighteen months after the pioneers left Winter Quarters. This was the year in which the growing crops of the people on the shores of Salt Lake were saved from destruction by crickets by immense flocks of white gulls. Mr. Alma Eldredge, then a mere youth, thus speaks of this kindly providence:

"The crickets, in immense swarms, appeared to be sweeping away all hopes of bread for the coming year. As the people were in a state of semi-starvation, their anxiety to save their growing crops was intense. They had fought the crickets on a warm summer day until weary and discouraged and had started for their homes to rest, but before arriving there they saw immense flocks of gulls settling down on their fields. It was a query whether they were friends or enemies, but they were left undisturbed. In the morning a committee was sent to the field to see what the birds had done. To their great joy they found the crickets mostly destroyed and their crops saved."

Although the Saints had to contend with many difficulties incident to settling a new and desert country, among the most prominent of which were frosts, crickets and drought, yet sufficient was accomplished to give them an assurance of future success. On the return of a portion of the Mormon Battalion, through the northern part of western California, they discovered an extensive gold mine which enabled them, by a few days delay, to bring sufficient of the dust to make money plentiful for all ordinary purposes in Salt Lake valley. In exchange, the dust was deposited with the Presidency who issued bills or a paper currency, and the "Kirtland Safety Fund" bills re-signed was on a par with gold. It was significant of great changes that the obsolete bills of the Kirtland bank should find a circulation on the shores of Salt Lake.

It was after the arrival of this season's emigration in the valley that Heber C. Kimball, in view of the great destitution of his people for clothing and many other necessaries of life, declared to them, that States goods would be sold in the streets of Salt Lake City as cheap as in New York, and the people be abundantly provided with clothing. Nothing in the changing routine of human life could have appeared to that isolated people more improbable. After the spirit of prophecy had left him, his remarks to his friends indicated that he, himself, had but little faith in its fulfillment.

The reader will recollect that Parley P. Pratt entered the valley with the companies that followed the pioneers in 1847. After residing there nearly a year he wrote a letter, expressing his sentiments and views to his brother, O. Pratt and the Saints in England. It is a beautiful pen picture of the reign of peace in the valley, and a witness that the Saints had found the haven of rest they had been seeking.

"September 5th, 1848.

"DEAR BROTHER ORSON:— * * * * "I have now resided almost a year in this lone retreat, where civilized man has not made his home for the last thousand years, and where the ripening harvest has not been enjoyed for ages until the present season. During all this period the sound of war, the rise and fall of empires, the revolution of States and kingdoms—the news of any kind has scarcely reached my ears.

"It is but a few days since we heard of the revolutions and convulsions which are agitating Europe. No elections, no police reports, no murders, no wars, in our little world. How quiet, how still, how peaceful, how happy. How lonesome, how free from excitement we live. The legislation of our High Council, the decision of some judge or court of the Church, a meeting, a dance, a visit or exploring tour, an arrival of a party of trappers and traders, a Mexican caravan, a party arrived from the Pacific, from the States, from Fort Hall or Fort Bridger, a visit of Indians or perhaps a mail from the distant world once or twice a year is all that breaks upon the monotony of our peaceful and busy life.

"Our old firelocks have not been brushed up, or our swords unsheathed because of any alarm. No policemen or watchmen, of any kind, have been on duty to guard us from external or internal danger. The drum has beat to be sure, but it was mingled with merry-making, or its martial sound was rather to remind us that war had once been known among the nations, than to arouse us to tread the martial and measured step of those who muster for war, or march to the battle field. Oh what a life we live! It is the dream of the poets actually fulfilled in real life. Here we can cultivate the mind, renew the spirits, invigorate the body, cheer the heart, and ennoble the soul of man. Here we can cultivate every science and every art calculated to enlarge the the mind, accommodate the body, or polish and advance our race. And here we can receive and extend that pure intelligence which is unmingled with the jargon of mystic Babylon, and which will fit a man after a long life of health and usefulness, to enjoy the mansions of bliss and the society of those who are purified in the blood of the Lamb."

"How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth glad tidings," is beautifully in harmony with the sentiments and spirit of the foregoing.

About this time the following excerpts appeared in eastern papers. This wonderful move of a religious body of people whose singular and powerful doctrines and organization had, in the short space of sixteen years, greatly weakened the orthodox religion of the highest civilization of the continent, was already attracting marked attention. When its enemies supposed it in the very throes of dissolution it suddenly developed wonderful vitality and power.

"THE MORMON SETTLEMENTS IN THE GREAT SALT LAKE VALLEY.

"We wish to call the readers attention to the new and most extraordinary condition of the Mormons. Several thousands of them have found a resting place in the most remarkable spot on the North American continent. Since the children of Israel wandered through the wilderness, or the crusaders rushed on Palestine, there has been nothing so historically singular, as the emigration and recent settlement of the Mormons. Thousands of them came from the Manchesters and Sheffields of England, to join other thousands congregated from Western New York and New York and New England—boasted descendants of the pilgrim fathers—together to follow after a New Jerusalem in the west.

"Having a temple amid the churches and schools of Lake County, Ohio, and driven from it by popular opinion, they built the Nauvoo of Illinois. It becomes a great town. Twenty thousand people flock to it. They are again assaulted by popular persecution, their prophet murdered, their town depopulated, and finally their temple burned! Does all this persecution to which they have been subjected, destroy them? Not at all. Seven thousand are now settled, in flourishing circumstances, on the plateau summit of the North American continent. Thousands more are about to join them from Iowa, and thousands more are coming from Wales. The spectacle is most singular and this is one of the singular episodes of the great drama of the age. The spot on which the Mormons are now settled is, geographically, one of the most interesting in the western world."—Cincinnati Atlas.

"The Mormon Saints after enduring all the sufferings of persecution in Missouri and Illinois, many of their leaders and Apostles having been slain, and the whole body of the survivors having been hunted from place to place, have at last, found a New Jerusalem, or holy land, in the Great Salt Lake valley, situated between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada which belongs to the Territory of California, and may be called Eastern California. This is one of the most remarkable regions on the globe, * * * They are an industrious race, and are well qualified to develop the resources of the rich region in which they have located themselves. This is, indeed, probably their New Jerusalem, where they will be able to build up a city with pillars of gold, slated with silver and paved with rubies and emeralds. Who knows? According to the observations of that region made by Fremont and Abert, and Kearney and others, some portions of that great country are really wonderful. It seems to be a sort of Holy Land on a large scale. It has the Salt Sea in it, much larger than that of Palestine; and it has also a Jordan, a Mount Horeb, and almost all the great features of the ancient Holy Land, but on a tremendously large scale.

"Brigham Young seems to be the Moses of the whole concern. This expedition of the Mormons has some analogy to that of the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt. Illinois and Missouri and Iowa have been to the Mormons the land of bondage from which they have escaped, and in which their leaders and Saints were shot down in the way that we shot down the mob in Massacre place up town. Now they promise to become a free, powerful and prosperous people." * * * —New York Herald.
