James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXIII.

CONDITION OF THE SALT LAKE COLONY IN THE WINTER OF 1848-49—THE FRONTIER GUARDIAN—A LOCAL GOVERNMENT ORGANIZED—REVIEW—PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH TRANSFERRED TO SALT LAKE—APOSTLES AND ELDERS ON THE MISSOURI RIVER—THE EMIGRATION OF 1849—SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS—ANXIETY AS TO THE FATE OF THE SALT LAKE COLONY.

THE winter of 1848-49 was severe. The 5th of February the mercury fell to 33 ° below the freezing point. The surrounding mountains were difficult of access on account of deep snow. This, with the poor condition of the working animals, from the scarcity of feed and extreme cold, made it difficult at times to obtain sufficient fuel for the comfort of the people. In the forepart of February the Bishops took an inventory of the bread stuff in the valley. They reported a little more than three-fourths of a pound per day for each person until the 9th of the following July. Since harvest the previous year, corn had been two dollars per bushel, while some had sold for three. Wheat had ranged from four to five dollars per bushel.

The first number of the Frontier Guardian was published at Kanesville, Iowa, the 7th of February, 1849. It was the first paper published by the Saints after their evacuation of Nauvoo. The principal object of its publication was to spread information among the Saints and defend their interests. With regard to education, the editor says:

"It affords unmeasured pleasure to see the favorable results of some limited exertions, not long since made, in favor of education. Two flourishing schools in our little town, of about eighty scholars each, conducted by a principal and an assistant to each one, with many others in various parts of the county that have sprung into being, may be continued with increased zeal and numbers, by giving to the subject of education that attention which we trust it may be in our power to bestow."

The paper was a semi-weekly and declared its purposes in a prospectus as follows:

"The Guardian is not intended to enter the field of political strife and contention. Still it will reserve the right and privilege of recommending such men to the suffrages of the people as the editor may think will prove true and faithful guardians of the national peace and honor, and of the persons and property of her citizens. It will be devoted to the news of the day; to the signs of the times; to religion and prophecy, both ancient and modern; to literature and poetry; to the arts and sciences, together with all and singular whatever the spirit of the times may dictate. It will strongly advocate the establishing of common schools along the frontier, and also in various settlements in the interior, and will try, by all lawful and honorable means, to accomplish so desirable an object."

The unredeemed character of the country is well illustrated by the results of a winter's hunt, of two rival parties of one hundred men each. There were killed about seven hundred wolves and foxes, two wolverines, twenty minks and pole cats, five hundred hawks, owls and magpies and one thousand ravens in Salt Lake valley and vicinity.

The following, from the first general epistle of the First Presidency of the Church sent east from Salt Lake City, indicates the necessity of organizing a local government, and also gives assurance that, in the hearts of these persecuted colonizers of the desert, there was no lack of patriotism; that they had no conception of becoming independent of the general government.

"In consequence of Indian depredations on our horses, cattle and other property, and the wicked conduct of a few base fellows who have come among the Saints, the inhabitants of this valley, as is common in new countries generally, have organized a temporary government, to exist during its necessity, or until we can obtain a charter for a Territorial government, a petition for which is already in progress."

This petition was perfected and sent to Washington, D. C., per Dr. J. M. Bernhisel, agent for the people of Great Salt Lake valley. The following from the biographical sketch of Alma Eldredge in Tullidge's History of Northern and Eastern Utah, gives some idea of the suffering for food in the summer of 1849:

"The summer of 1849 told hard on the masses of the people. The land for miles around the settlements was literally dug over by persons in search of segoes and thistles, articles which were used for food to assist in keeping soul and body together. Weeds of various kinds were used in like manner, and all sorts of economy were practiced, to the fullest extent, to alleviate the pangs of hunger and modify the suffering condition of the wanderers. Finally harvest came and the exiles began to prosper. I saw mothers with infants at the breast which were nursing their life's blood, as it were, on account of the reduced condition which privation and hunger had brought them to. Their strength was so far exhausted that they would reel and tremble when attempting to walk, and often could proceed only by artificial means."

The Presidency of the Church was now transferred from the Missouri river to Great Salt Lake valley. Between it and the people, still scattered in the United States, were the vast plains along the Platte river, and a wilderness of mountains with towering peaks and rugged defiles. The denizens of this wilderness of plains and mountains were wild beasts and the little less wild and savage Indian. The latter bore the white man but little good will, and was by heritage a wandering robber. The most rapid means of communication across this forbiding country was with horses and mules. To take along feed for animals was to overburden them and neutralize its benefits. They must subsist, as best they could, on the grasses that grew on the route. Under these conditions it was practicably impossible to make the journey between these points, with the same animals, in less than thirty days, and it usually required more than this time.

There was no government postal service, no telegraph line for rapid communication across the plains, hence the great necessity of that care and efficiency in fitting out the emigration which can only result from good, executive ability combined with experience.

Under these natural disadvantages great care was necessary on the part of the Presidency of the Church to select competent agents to carry out their general instructions in detail. The President of the Apostles, O. Hyde, was selected as the presiding genius at the east end of the emigration route. There was a large corps of experienced and capable elders to assist him when he needed. To aid him in the emigration of 1849 he had with him Apostles George A. Smith and E. T. Benson.

These leaders of a gathering dispensation, issued their instructions for the march of their people to the west, with that clearness and precision of detail which, in all important operations, is a token of success. They were published in the Frontier Guardian February 21st, 1849. The spirit of them foreshadows the general instructions from the valley the following spring.

"SALT LAKE EMIGRANTS.

"It is intended for companies to start from this point, to emigrate to the great valley of Salt Lake, so soon as grass is sufficiently grown to sustain cattle and teams. Whenever a company of fifty wagons have assembled at the camping ground, on this side of the river near this place, (the precise place will be designated in due time,) they will forthwith be organized and start on their journey. This number can travel with much more ease, comfort and speed than any greater number. Our experience has proven this to us. The men and boys that will naturally go with fifty wagons, will be quite sufficient to protect themselves on the journey against the Indians. Every man and boy capable of using a rifle or musket should, by all means have one and a good one. If any are deficient in this respect, we will furnish every company with what they may lack, provided the captain and principal men of each company will become responsible for the arms, and deliver them safely to the High Council in the valley, as there are quite a lot of arms here that belong there, and we wish to forward them on.

"The organization of companies will be strictly military, and every one should be amply provided with arms and ammunition adequate to any and every exigence. Our experience last year on the Elk Horn river with the Omaha Indians, abundantly shows the importance of a rigid observance of the above. The bill of particulars, embracing provisions, and other articles to be taken, will appear in the Guardian in due time.

"Every wagon, before starting, will be examined to see if it contains the requisite amount of provisions, utensils and means of defense. If they are delinquent in these they will not be allowed to cross the river to proceed with our companies. The severity of the winter here, awakens some fears that they have had a severe winter in the valley, and it will be, most likely, thought better to take a greater amount of provisions than was at first anticipated. A few extra barrels of flour will do no harm."

The following editorial appeared in the Frontier Guardian of May 16th, 1849:

"The valley of the Salt Lake is in north latitude 40° 30', and in longitude west from London 112°. The altitude of that place is 4,300 feet above the level of the sea. From the unfavorable accounts given from the regions west and south of the Salt Lake valley, the severely cold weather and very deep snows, we fear somewhat for the safety of our friends in the valley. * * * * We have received no mail from them, as yet, but are in daily expectation of one. We are very anxious to hear from that quarter, yet are almost afraid to hear lest the very severe winter has seriously affected that infant settlement. Yet we hope for the best."

This indicates the great anxiety of the Saints on the Missouri river to learn the situation of their friends in the valley. The long, tedious winter and almost the entire spring had passed without any news from the infant colony environed in the mountain snows, with no other resource, in case of misfortune, than the God in whom they trusted and their own exertions and powers of endurance.

Isolated among bands of savages, with a scanty supply of food, it is no wonder that to the anxious hearts of friends in the United States, vague rumors of disaster seemed to float around in the elements fore-shadowing evil. With great expectancy the spring mail was waited for to give assurance of safety and peace.

The general epistle sent out in the spring arrived in Kanesville in time for publication, May 30, 1849, and it would seem none to soon for the guidance of those preparing to cross the plains that season. The council it contained concerning the emigration was almost entirely based on their present and prospective food supply in the valley. There was evident necessity for those already there making great efforts to raise food for those who were coming. President Young left the direction of affairs on the Missouri river entirely to his capable agents.

"For the future, it is not wisdom for the Saints to leave the states or California, for this place, unless they have teams and means sufficient to come through without any assistance from the valley, and that they should bring breadstuffs sufficient to last them a few months after their arrival, for the harvest will not be gathered nor the grain ready for grinding. The inhabitants of the valley will be altogether dependent on the crop of this season for their support, and will have no time to leave their tillage with their teams to bring in emigrating camps as they have hitherto done."

To meet the counsel given in the epistle the following instructions to the Saints appeared in the Frontier Guardian of May 13, 1849:

"Emigrants will eat about one pound of breadstuff per day on the road to Salt Lake besides, milk, butter, beans, dried fruit, bacon and various other little comforts if they can get them; say one hundred pounds of breadstuff for one person, old and young, on the road, and two hundred pounds to a person after he gets there to last six months, in all three hundred pounds of best breadstuff to start from here with, besides all the cows he can take, and as many little necessaries and comforts as he can procure and haul."
