James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXIV.

GREAT RUSH OF PEOPLE TO CALIFORNIA—SICKNESS AND DEATH ALONG THE PLATTE RIVER—CAPTAIN EGAN'S COMPANY—GREAT WASTE OF PROPERTY—THE LAST TRAIN—PEACE AND PROSPERITY ON THE SHORES OF SALT LAKE—KEY NOTE OF THE GATHERING FOR 1850—THIRTY THOUSAND DOLLARS TO HELP THE POOR—NEWS FROM THE CAMPS OF ISRAEL.

IN THE year 1849, there was a great rush of people to California. The gold fever was evidently increasing in intensity. These people mostly traveled on the south side of the Platte river. A few of the Saints, also, unfortunately took that road. Many deaths occurred principally from cholera but some from other causes. While there was sickness on the pioneer route north of the Platte, the mortality was quite limited compared with that on the south side of the river. Captain Howard Egan took the latter route, with a company of Saints, about the middle of May. It consisted of 57 souls, 22 wagons, 46 yoke of oxen, 21 cows, 6 horses, 5 mules, 3 head of young cattle, 21 fowls, 6 dogs and 1 cat. This return indicates that this third year of the emigration, there was not quite as extensive a supply of domestic animals taken as at first.

In a letter of June 19, 1849, to the Frontier Guardian, Captain Egan gives some interesting facts concerning the California emigration.

"May 21st., the company met three wagons on their way back to Missouri. They reported having lost a number of their company by measles. An old man stated that one of his sons was then very sick in his wagon. They had left their company sixty-five miles west of the Missouri river. The same day Captain Egan passed a company from Missouri with five cases of cholera.

"May 27th. Ten miles west of the Pawnee village, we heard that a company from Pittsburg had quarreled and killed one man. They were heaving out sugar, coffee, tools of all kinds and breaking up into small companies.

"May 29th. Passed a company from Missouri who had lost a man with the measles. Yesterday met a lieutenant from Fort Kearney. He reports that many belonging to companies from Missouri had had the cholera, and that sixty had died between Independence and Grand Island.

"May 31st. Eight miles east of the head of Grand Island passed where the St. Joseph and Independence road intersects this road. There is one continual string of wagons as far as the eye can extend, before and behind us. All seem to be moving on peaceably and quiet. They reported a great deal of sickness in the companies for the first two or three weeks, but now mostly enjoying good health. In the evening there were twenty-nine camps in sight, numbering from fifteen to forty wagons each.

June 1st. Arrived at Fort Kearney. Ascertained that up to the last of May, 4, 131 wagons had passed, headed for the west, and there are probably 2,000 behind us. It is reported there are 2,000 wagons at the crossing of the South Fork of the Platte, waiting, as the river is too high to cross. Some of the companies are selling their wagons and packing from this place. Wagons which cost one hundred and twenty-five dollars in the states sold for from ten to twenty dollars. Bacon has been sold for one cent per pound, flour from one to two dollars per hundred; other articles in proportion. It seems impossible for all the wagons which are on the road to get over the mountains this season."

The third season's effort to get off to the mountains the victims of the Nauvoo persecutions, closed by the departure of the last company about the middle of July. The Frontier Guardian, of July 25, notices the event as follows:

"THE LAST TRAIN.

"On Saturday, the 14th, about noon, the last wagons left Winter Quarters and began to bend their way westward over the boundless plains that lie between us and the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Slowly and majestically they moved along, displaying a column of upwards of three hundred wagons, cattle, sheep, hogs, horses, mules, chickens, turkeys, geese, doves, goats, etc., etc., besides lots of men, women and children.

"In this company was the Yankee with his machinery, the Southerner with his colored attendant, the Englishman with all kinds of mechanic's tools, the farmer, the merchant, the doctor, the minister, and almost everything necessary for a settlement in a new country, provisioned for nine months from the time of starting. They were led by Messrs. George A. Smith and E. T. Benson. They have our best wishes for their prosperity and safety on their journey, and we hope they may be able to make for themselves comfortable homes in the distant and secluded valleys of our American Piedmont."

A short but lively picture of scenes in Salt Lake valley in the summer of 1849, is found in a letter of P. P. Pratt to his brother Orson, who was then in England. It is dated Great Salt Lake City, July 8th.

"Scores or hundreds of people now arrive here daily, and all stop to rest and refit. After crossing the great prairie wilderness for a thousand miles, where nothing is seen like civilization or cultivation, this spot suddenly bursts upon their astonished vision like a paradise in the midst of the desert. So great is the effect that many of them burst forth in an ecstacy of admiration on emerging from the canyon, and gaining a first view of our town and its fields and gardens. Some shed tears, some shout, some dance and skip for joy, and all, doubtless, feel the spirit of the place resting upon them, with its joyous and heavenly influence, bearing witness that here live the industrious, the free, the intelligent and the good.

"In truth our town presents a plateau of several square miles, dotted with houses, and every foot of it except the broad and pleasant streets, enclosed and under cultivation. Fields of yellow wheat are waving in the breeze; corn, oats, flax and garden vegetables fill the vacuum and extend every way as far as the eye can distinguish objects."

The following excerpt from an epistle of the First Presidency to the authorities of the Church in Pottowatomic county, Iowa, shows that the gathering of the poor of their people, who were still on the Missouri river, was a leading purpose in the minds of Brigham Young and his co-workers. It was a prelude to the great effort made the ensuing conference for the attainment of this object, which resulted in sending to the Missouri river Bishop Edward Hunter, as agent for gathering the poor, backed with the leverage of $30,000 in gold. This epistle was the keynote of the gathering in 1850.

"GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,

"July 20th, 1849.

"* * * * * The brethren in Pottowatomie county. Iowa, in Missouri, Nauvoo and vicinities must remember, pause and reflect that we came to this valley when there was no house, nor fence, and no corn nor wheat, save what we brought with us; and that our every nerve and all our energies will be exerted to sustain ourselves, to build houses, fences, and raise grain, which from all appearances must command as high a price as from five to ten dollars per bushel for wheat, and from two to six dollars for corn, and other things in proportion.

"When these small matters of journeying more than a thousand miles over the sage plains, and settling and preparing to live, and sustain ourselves with the common necessaries of life are overcome, then the poor shall feel our helping hand to assist them to remove to this valley."

As the emigration is now fairly on the way, news from their moving camps in the form of letters to their friends will be of deep interest to the readers of the succeeding generation.

"CAMP OF ISRAEL, NEAR FORT CHILDS, TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHT MILES FROM WINTER QUARTERS,

"Sunday, August 5th, 1849.

"BROTHER ORSON HYDE:

"While the bright and glorious luminary of day is mounting up from his eastern temple and the camps of Israel are corraled in the open prairie, with the canopy of heaven for their covering, except their canvas, and the herdsmen are guarding the cattle with their rifles in hand, and the camps are busy doing the duty devolving upon them, by our request our clerk has seated himself to write a hasty sketch to you for the Guardian, and to all others whom it may concern.

"We received with joy, on the morning of the 2nd inst., the letters you sent us by Captain Cane, and we wish you to embrace every opportunity of doing the like, and we will cheerfully return the compliment.

"We have had no serious accidents in our camps. All have enjoyed good health, with one or two exceptions. We have met with no losses of cattle. Indeed, in everything we have been blessed, for which we feel to raise our hearts in prayer, thanksgiving and gratitude to our Father in heaven. Surely the angel of mercy has gone before us, and round about the camps of Israel. We had two or three stampedes before we adopted the plan of chaining and tying up our cattle. Since then none have occurred in our camp, but our cattle rest in peace and quietness. We corral our loose cattle, horses and sheep inside and tie our oxen outside, which we think the safest plan in case of fright or stampede, and we find it answers well. * * * * *

"In Captain Richards' company a stampede took place last Sabbath evening, but without loss. They corraled. This company we expect is at Elm creek, thirteen miles ahead of us. On our journey thus far we have passed seven graves. Some of gold-diggers, others of Saints. All but one, an infant, died of cholera, as the head-boards inform us. Among others we see the name of A. Kellogg, at Prairie creek, one hundred and eighty-seven miles from Winter Quarters. Died of cholera, 23rd of June last. Also Samuel Gully, captain of a hundred in Brother O. Spencer's company of Saints, lies one hundred and eighty-five miles from Winter Quarters in the open prairie, his grave is neatly turfed over. He died of cholera, July 5th, 1849, aged thirty-nine years. * * * * So you perceive the destroyer is on the vast plains as well as in the cities and towns. * *

"Since we wrote you concerning our organization at the Elk Horn, we have had a re-organization at the Platte liberty pole, which we deemed advisable. The rules of the camps are the same as those adopted by President Young's company last year. The camps are denominated G. A. Smith's, including the Welsh company, and E. T. Benson's, including the Norwegian company. It was thought best to divide thus on account of numbers, and so separate the camps but keep close to each other. Isaac Clark, president of both camps in G. A. Smith's company. Elisha Everett, captain of hundred. Charles Hopkins, captain of fifty in E. T. Benson's company.

"The reason we are anxious for all companies coming

A STAMPEDE AMONG THE CATTLE.

this way to tie up their cattle is because of loss and danger. Indeed, there are few that can comprehend the terrors of a stampede. Picture to yourselves three or four hundred head of frightened oxen, steers, cows, etc., running, bellowing, roaring, foaming, mad and furious, the ground shaking beneath their feet like an earthquake; chains rattling, yokes cracking, horns flying and the cry of the guard, `Every man turn out.' Horses mounted and, in the darkness of night, through high grass, sloughs, mud and mire, pursue the bellowing and furious herd, leaving the women and children frightened, with a few guards with rifles to guard the camp. After an hour or two, perhaps, the cattle will begin to get weary and quiet, and if luck and good fortune attend the horsemen they will head them and drive them back to camp, except those that sometimes swim rivers, etc. The terrors of a stampede are not soon forgotten. Good chains and ropes to tie up will prevent this. * * *

"Signed, WILLIAM J. APPLEBY,

"Clerk and Historian of the camps."

Another communication from Messrs. Smith and Benson to Elder Hyde followed the above, headed:

"CAMP OF ISRAEL, SPRING CREEK, THREE HUNDRED AND "FORTY-FIVE MILES FROM WINTER QUARTERS,

"August 21st, 1849.

"BROTHER HYDE:

"* * * * Another opportunity favors us this morning of writing you by Brother Babbitt, who came into camp a few hours ago, twenty-six days from Salt Lake.

* * * * * * * * *

"We have sustained no losses, no serious accidents of any kind. The destroyer has not laid any of us low; but, indeed, in everything we have been blessed and prospered, and the angel of peace and mercy, it appears, has been our shield and Joseph's God our protector, for which we feel truly thankful to Him whose we are and whom we desire to serve and obey. To be sure, we have had our trials in wet, muddy, miry roads, sand bluffs, sloughs, rivers, etc., also quite frequent and heavy showers of rain, thunder, lightning, wind and great hail, but it has caused where last year no grass grew and no water was to be found, plenty of each for us the present year, and the buffalo, antelope, ducks, etc., supply the camps with meats which are excellent and plenty.

"So you will perceive we are happy and contented, and blessed with the spirit of the Lord. We surely rejoice, and oft is the time the camps resound with the songs of Zion, and fervent aspirations to heaven for the mercies and blessings we enjoy, including protection from the Indians. They have not molested us. Indeed, we have not seen half a dozen Indians since we left Winter Quarters. The cholera, it appears, has frightened them and they have deserted the path of the white man. Scores of them have already died with it and been left on the prairie, covered over with a few skins, and the wolves have come and devoured the flesh from their bones. * * * * *

"We have been visited with two or three severe hail storms. One took place last Friday evening. A description of it we copy from Elder Appleby's journal of the camp.

"August 18th. Last evening we experienced another heavy shower. It came on as the camps were tying up their cattle. A dark cloud had been observed lying off south of the Platte, near which we were encamped. After sometime it appeared to separate; one part passed east of us, the other, a short time after came over us, and saturated our canvas well, and made those who were tying up their cattle expedite the business or else take the large, cold drops. However, it soon passed over and appeared to follow the one gone east, as if to wage a battle, as both seemed prepared.

"After a little they appeared to meet and, united, they bent their way to give the camp a round of their artillery. On they came, riding upon the wind with the speed of the llama over the prairies, roaring and tumbling, charged with electricity, the lightning flashed its vivid glare through the darkness of the night and storm. Sometimes a shaft would descend to earth followed by rumbling peals of thunder that caused the earth to tremble. At length they reached the camp, and, as if to defeat us if we undertook to keep them at bay, they first gave us a fine drenching, perhaps to wet our ammunition. * * After a few minutes their batteries were opened indeed; first canister, then grape, afterwards the half pounders, not hot shot, but cold and hard, was poured into our camp. The plains and distant hills reverberated with the sound of the artillery of heaven. The cattle being made fast withstood the storm without seeking for shelter, except some horses that broke loose, and loose cattle in the corral.

"The guard, in the midst of the battle, cried the hour as the hail fell upon them, sometimes striking them on the head nearly stunning them. * * * * However, after a while, appearing to have spent their fury they retired, leaving the camp master of the field, and a considerable quantity of their large shot behind lying in and around it. * * * The camp after their retreat reposed in sleep. The sentinels paced the dark, and in the morning all was well; no one killed nor wounded; no cattle missing, and not an enemy lying on the battle field."

On the evening of September 3rd, 1849, Hon. A. W. Babbitt, bearing the above letter, arrived in Kanesville. He was thirty-six days on the road and water bound eight days of that time. He went safely through with one man, Oliver G. Workman, seven horses and a light wagon in whichhe took the mail.
