James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXV.

SYNOPSIS OF NEWS FROM SALT LAKE—GREAT SACRIFICE OF PROPERTY BY CALIFORNIA EMIGRANTS—CURIOUS HISTORY OF A LETTER FROM CAPTAIN GULLY—SECOND GENERAL EPISTLE FROM GREAT SALT LAKE VALLEY—NEWS FROM EMIGRATING COMPANIES—FOOD SUPPLY IN THE DESERT—COME! FROM THE NATIONS, COME—ORGANIZATION OF THE P. E. FUND COMPANY—ANOTHER LETTER FROM SMITH AND BENSON—TREMENDOUS SNOW STORM—SIXTY ANIMALS PERISH—PIGS AND CHICKENS FREEZE TO DEATH—REMARKABLE PRESERVATION OF HUMAN LIFE—GRAVES OF THE GOLD DIGGERS.

THE following is a synopsis of the news from Salt Lake, furnished by Colonel Babbitt to the Frontier Guardian of September 5th, 1849. The prophecy of Heber C. Kimball, in the autumn of 1848, that goods would be sold cheaper in the streets of Salt Lake City than they could be purchased in the eastern cities, was amply fulfilled in the summer of 1849. The valley had been a place of general deposit for the surplus property of the California emigrants. When they saw a few bags and kegs of gold dust which had been brought from California by returning Mormons, they became wild with enthusiasm. Pack mules and horses, worth in ordinary times, twenty-five or thirty dollars, readily brought two hundred dollars in valuable property at low prices. Good property was daily offered at auction in all parts of the city.

Sometimes three or four heavy wagons, with a yoke of oxen thrown in, would be offered for a light one-horse wagon. Common domestic sheeting sold for from 5 to 10 cents per yard by the bolt; the best of spades and shovels for 50 cents each; vests, that cost in St. Louis $1.50, for 371/2 cents; full chests of joiner tools worth $150 in the east, sold for $25. Almost every article, except sugar and coffee, sold on an average, 50 per cent. below wholesale prices in the eastern cities.

"Through the alkali belt, east of the South Pass, their losses in cattle were enormous. Many of the men would pay no attention to the warning of the Saints, not to let their cattle drink water strongly impregnated with saleratus. They said it was all a `Mormon humbug' about the alkali being strong enough to kill their cattle. As the result more than 2,000 carcasses of oxen lay strewn along the road in the alkali district, and the offensive smell made it almost impossible to travel in the vicinity."

The cholera had been very fatal among the Indians. Mr. Babbitt reported passing, in one place, ten deserted lodges with many dead Indians lying about, and the bodies torn and half eaten by wolves.

Livingston and Kinkead's company, and Captain William Miller, were met two hundred miles west of Laramie, at the time all well. Captain Howard Egan and company were met at the Weber river, about forty miles from the valley. Messrs. Hickman and Hatch west of the South Pass; Perkin's hundred, of Captain Allen Taylor's and Enoch Reese's fifties, still east of Laramie.

Apostles George A. Smith and E. T. Benson's companies were well but getting along slowly on account of constant rains and high water. But four of our people had died of cholera on the road. We copy the following verbalim from the Frontier Guardian:

"Mr. Babbitt certainly deserves our thanks for his perseverance in swimming rivers and towing over his wagon on rafts made with a hatchet and tied together with lariats. It cannot be a very pleasant job to freight a rude sort of raft with a wagon, push off into a rapid current, pull out about one-fourth of the distance across, then take one end of a rope in your teeth, while the other end is attached to a raft and plunge into the stream, like a spaniel, and swim over with raft and cargo in tow, being swept down streams over snags and sawyers, for a quarter or half a mile, as Mr. B. informs us has been his lot in two or three instances.

"But, Oh! the sacrifice of property thrown out and left by the road side, by the Californians between Laramie and the valley, is beyond calculation. * * * * *

"Mr. B. thinks that Livingston and Kinkead will be broken merchants because of so many goods getting into the valley before theirs and having been sold for less than prime cost. The market is glutted."

Mr. Babbitt's surmises that Salt Lake was over-stocked with goods proved not to be well founded. Livingston and Kinkead soon disposed of their stock of merchandise; sugar and coffee at 40 cents per pound, calico 25 cents per yard, and other goods at proportionately high prices.

The following papers not only give some items of historical interest but are as well a curiosity. The writer evidently expected they would fall into the hands of Messrs. Smith and Benson but they forded the Loupe Fork lower down the stream. They were found on the grave of a gold-digger and, through a Mr. Reed who was hunting with the Indians, they found their way into the hands of the editor of the Frontier Guardian. As before stated Captain Gully died with the cholera and was buried by the wayside.

"UPPER CROSSING OF THE LOUPE,

"June 26th, 1849.

"Bros. Geo. A Smith and E. T. Benson:

"MY DEAR SIRS: We arrived here on the 22nd and 23rd, all in tolerable health. Soon after the arrival of Brother Wm. Miller's fifty, Brother Nelson McCarthy was attacked with cholera and is buried at this point. * * * We have waited here three days with but little prospects of crossing until today about twelve o'clock, when the Disposer of all good seems to have ordered a place for us to cross. * * * We have found the road very heavy. Yet our cattle have improved. * * * As yet I have not been able to send back the report of our numbers, but have them ready for the first opportunity. I leave them here hoping you may receive this. I do it short as I am in feeble health. Wagons, 120; souls, 352; oxen, 480; cows, 315; loose cattle, 17; horses, 29; mules, sheep, 102; pigs, 31; chickens, 62; cats 25; dogs, 25; geese, 2; ducks, 2; doves, 7; hives of bees, 1.

"Most respectfully your Friend and Servt.,

SAMUEL GULLY."

Considering this was the third season's emigration, this company was well fitted out with animal life for the benefit of the new colony.

With the wonderful changes of forty years, it seems like a dream of the past that the writer crossed the plains in 1849, with Enoch Reese's fifty, of Captain Perkins' hundred. At one time stampedes were so frequent and dangerous that there seemed but little room for choice between hostile Indians and stampeding cattle.

So subject to panic did the cattle become, that the leaders of the people thought it advisable for the companies to break up into tens long before reaching Laramie. The following morning, after this was done, the cattle of Captain Lorenzo Clark's ten to which the writer belonged, stampeded with quite serious loss: He arrived in Great Salt Lake valley on the 16th of October. He found a destitute but cheerful people, struggling with the sterile elements for existence. Nature had poorly remunerated the labors of the husbandman; the country was nearly destitute of game available for subsistence, and the scarcity of cattle rendered their preservation necessary for the future prosperity of the increasing population. The people were a thousand miles from outside resources, and necessity compelled the utmost economy in the preservation of food, until time permitted them to organize the means of subsistence from the elements, and learn the invaluable lesson how to turn deserts into gardens and desolate places into fruitful fields. Baptized in the fires of persecution, tempered to bear oppression and wrong to the limit of human endurance, practically outlawed and expelled from the soil of Missouri and Illinois by their fellow citizens for their religious belief, the principles of liberty and equality, embodied in the constitution of their country, had become indelibly stamped on their hearts by the brand of affliction. Here in the fastnesses of the mountains they hoped to be free from oppression, until they were able to struggle successfully for the right.

There are few instances in modern history where a people so few in number, so oppressed by enemies, so crippled in resources had been of so much practical benefit to their country, and fewer still who received so little care and so many insults from their government.

Taught self relience by the necessity of self preservation; accustomed to hardship and toil from the force of circumstances; indifferent alike to the attacks of slander and to the sneers of contempt, through implicit confidence in the divinity of their principles, they were, at the time of which we speak, masters of the situation into which their enemies had forced them.

The second general epistle of the Presidency of the Church, from Great Salt Lake valley dated October 12th, 1849, was published in the Frontier Guardian of the ensuing 26th of December. Of the emigration not yet arrived in the valley it says:—

"Elder Dan Jones, from Wales, is within a few days travel, accompanied by a portion of the Welsh brethren and the remainder are located on Pottowatomie lands. "Elders Geo. A. Smith and E. T. Benson are in the same vicinity, with Dan Jones, accompanied by their families and a large company of Saints, from whom we received an express five days since, which left them in universal health and prosperity. They will probably be here in two weeks. We have sent teams to help them on their journey.

"The direct emigration of the Saints to this place will be some five or six hundred wagons this season, besides many who came in search of gold have heard the gospel for the first time, and will go no further, having believed and been baptized" * * * * * *

The epistle states that the grain crops had been good, but late crops of corn, buckwheat, vegetables, etc., had been injured by the frosts, but it speaks very encouragingly of the food supply for the ensuing year.

"We have great occasion for thanksgiving to Him who giveth the increase, that He has blest our labors so that, with prudence, we shall have a comfortable supply for ourselves and our brethren on the way who may be in need, until another harvest; but we feel the need of more laborers, for more efficient help, and multiplied means of farming and building at this place. We want men; brethren come from the States, from the nations, come! and help us build and grow, until we can say enough; the valleys of Ephraim are full."

We have seen by a letter from the Presidency to the authorities in Pottowatomie county, written on the 26th of the previous July, that a great effort for gathering the poor was then in contemplation. This epistle gives an account of that important organization the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company, and outlines its operations for the year 1850.

"About one month since we suggested the propriety of creating a perpetual fund for the purpose of helping the poor Saints to emigrate to this place, agreeably to our covenants in the temple that we would never cease our exertions, by all the means and influences within our reach, till all the Saints who were obliged to leave Nauvoo shall be located at some gathering place of the Saints. The Council approved the suggestion and a committee was immediately appointed to raise a fund by voluntary contribution to be forwarded east next mail.

"The October Conference sanctioned the doings of the committee, and appointed Brother Edward Hunter, a tried, faithful and approved Bishop, a general agent to bear the Perpetual Emigrating Funds to the States, to superintend the direction and appropriation thereof and return the same to this place, with such poor brethren as shall be wisdom to help.

"We wish all to understand that this fund is to be Perpetual, and is never to be diverted from the object of gathering the poor to Zion while there are Saints to be gathered, unless He whose right it is to rule shall otherwise command. * * * * *

"This Perpetual Fund is to be under the direction of the Presidency at all times, and as soon as Bishop Hunter shall return with the same and his freight of Saints to this place, the cattle and teams will be disposed of to the best advantage, and the avails with all we can add to it, will be sent forth immediately on another mission and we want you all prepared to meet it, and add to it, and so would we continue to increase it, from year to year, until when `a nation is born in a day' they can be removed the next if the Lord will. Therefore ye poor and meek of the earth, lift up your hearts and rejoice in the Holy One of Israel, for your redemption draweth nigh: but in your rejoicings be patient, for though your turn to emigrate may not be the first year, or even the second, it will come, and its tarryings will be short, if all Saints who have been assisted will be as liberal as those in the valley."

This organization continued its beneficent operations in gathering many thousands of poor Saints from the nations, opening to them a way of temporal salvation from poverty and oppression, until it was throttled by congressional enactment in 1887.

The following is another interesting letter from the emigrating companies on the plains.

"CAMP OF ISRAEL, MUDDY FORK, 930 MILES FROM WINTER QUARTERS,

"October 18th, 1849.

"Elder O. Hyde,

"DEAR BRETHREN: * * * * The last we wrote you was at Fort Laramie, since then no opportunity of sending letters to the States has presented itself. After leaving Laramie we continued our journey slowly as heretofore, but making progress every day, keeping a vigilant eye to the welfare of our cattle. The first three hundred miles of our journey nearly was through mud and mire, after that heavy sand for a considerable distance, but pasture was first-rate. Our cattle withstood the journey well, and up to our arrival at Laramie, we believe, neither our camp nor Brother Benson's had lost a single head with the exception of one or two cows that got killed in the yoke.

"After we passed Laramie the feed became inferior, but we found a sufficient supply for our cattle. Indeed, we have found a plenty all the while, with the exception of two or three days in the neighborhood of the Willow Springs, where the alkali or poisonous springs abound. Through these wild plains lie the bones of hundreds of cattle that have died the past summer. No less than the bones of nine head were counted in one heap, belonging to the gold diggers bound for California. Through this desolate part of our journey we lost but a few head of our cattle, and those that died were chiefly worn down by the journey. When we arrived at the Sweetwater river, about six miles below Independence Rock, a recruit of some sixty yoke of cattle, together with several wagons and teamsters from the valley, met us. They had been sent by the President to our relief under the charge of Brothers David Fullmer and Joseph Young. This was a welcome meeting to us, as our cattle were much fatigued and needed respite.

"The cattle thus sent were divided between the three camps, viz.: E. T. Benson's, Captain Richard's and ours. This relieved us much, and the weather being pleasant we rolled along with ease. At Independence Rock some twenty-five or thirty head strayed away, but we recovered them all, except one cow, after following thirteen head about one hundred miles.

"We crossed over Rocky Ridge on the 2nd of this month, near the summit of the South Pass, with the Wind River chain of mountains on the north. Towards night it began to snow and blow quite hard and fast from the north-east. The weather increased in coldness, which obliged us to encamp the best way we could without corraling, on a branch of the Sweetwater. E. T. Benson's and Captain Richard's camps were ten or twelve miles ahead of us on Willow Creek.

"We turned our cattle loose and drove them into the willows near by to do the best they could and share their fate. Such a storm of wind and snow as we experienced, we think, was never exceeded in severity in Pottowatomie. For thirty-six hours it continued to howl around us, unceasingly blowing nearly a hurricane, drifting the snow in every direction. The snow froze to whatever it touched. Being unable to keep fires, except a few who had stoves in their wagons, we had to be content without them and do the best we could.

"Many were the mothers and infants who were obliged to be in bed under their frail coverings that sheltered them from the pitiless blast and kept them from perishing, with, perhaps, only a dry piece of bread or a few crackers to subsist upon. * * * The snow drifted around us in some places to the depth of three or four feet. Many were the reflections that passed through our minds in regard to our situation and the welfare of our cattle during the storm; but we felt resigned to our fate and Heaven's will.

"On the morning of the third day the storm abated. We turned out in the chilling blast from off the everlasting snow-capped mountains, ourselves at an altitude of 7,000 feet, to look for our famishing, perishing cattle. As we wended our way down the stream among the willows, it was, indeed, a sorrowful sight to behold our dead cattle, one after another, cold and stiff, lying in the snow banks, food for wolves, ravens, catamounts, magpies, etc., that inhabit these mountainous regions in countless numbers and live on prey.

"The greater part of our cattle had made their way during the storm about five miles off, to the Sweetwater, where they obtained pasture and fared quite well, not one being found dead, while those that tarried behind fell a prey to hunger and the merciless storm. Upwards of sixty head of cattle perished in the three camps. Those that survived the storm did not recover from its effects for several days, others died in consequence, and some show the effects yet, although they are improving at present as we find plenty of mountain grass, and that hearty and good. We are in tolerable good rolling order, making from twelve to fifteen miles per day. We hope, if we are prospered, to reach the valley in eight or ten days from this time. * * * *

"Not a solitary death has occurred, of man, woman or child, in our camp, although we have experienced storms and endured cold weather. It was so cold during the storm and after, that chickens, pigs, etc., froze to death and men crossed over the Sweetwater on the ice.

"Many have been the graves we have passed on our journey, some of friends near and dear, others of strangers that have fallen by the shaft of the destroyer while traveling over these boundless plains of sage and mountains of rock, where the buffalo, elk, antelope, bear, ravenous wolf, etc., range undisturbed, except by the red man or the journeying emigrant. We have seen many graves of gold-seekers whose bodies have been disinterred by wolves, and the bones, pantaloons, hose and other things strewed around, with the headboard lying near, informing the traveler who had been buried, where from, the day they died, age, disease, etc. But we have not seen a solitary tomb of the Saints disturbed by the wolves.

"Among the graves of those whose bones lie around bleaching in the sun, their flesh consumed by the ravenous wolves, we recognize the names of several noted mobocrats from the states of Missouri and Illinois who took an active, prominent part in persecuting, mobbing and driving the Saints from these states. Among others we noticed at the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains, the grave of E. Dodd, of Gallatin, Missouri, died on the 19th of July last, of typhus fever. The wolves had completely disinterred him. The clothes in which he had been buried lay strewed around. His under jaw bone lay in the grave with the teeth complete, the only remains that were discernible of him. It is believed he was the same Dodd who was a prominent mobocrat and who took an active part in the murder of the Saints at Haun's Mill, Missouri. If so, it is a righteous retribution. Our God will surely inflict punishment upon the heads of our oppressors in His own due time and way. * * * *

"As ever, we remain your brethren in Christ,

"GEORGE A. SMITH,

"W. I. APPLEBY."
