James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXVI.

BISHOP HUNTER AGENT FOR GATHERING THE POOR—CHARACTERISTIC ANECDOTES—INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE EMIGRATION OF 1850—THE CALL FOR THE GATHERING OF THE CAMPS OF ISRAEL—DEARTH OF NEWS IN GREAT SALT LAKE VALLEY—NEWS FROM PARTIES SNOWED IN IN THE MOUNTAINS.

THE first company of Elders sent on foreign missions from Utah left Great Salt Lake City on the 19th of October and carried the last mail sent east in 1849. It was under the leadership of Jedediah M. Grant.

With this company went Edward Hunter, Bishop of the thirteenth ward of Great Salt Lake City. He was sent by the chief authorities of the Church to the Missouri river as agent of the P. E. Fund Company, with $30,000 in gold to gather up as many as possible of the Saints remaining of the Nauvoo exodus and bring them to Utah. His character peculiarly adapted him for the work of gathering the poor.

Aside from his excellent business qualifications nature had endowed him with humane and self-sacrificing principles. Under the unavoidable hardships of traveling, in that early period, he not only manifested a kindly regard for the comfort of others but, as well, ever carried his full share of the general burden. What was said of the Prophet Joseph Smith was, as well, applicable to him, "He was always willing to carry his part of the burden, and to share in any suffering or deprivation inflicted upon his friends."

The following incidents, related by Charles F. Decker who traveled with him illustrate this trait of his character and also his detestation of "camp shirks."

He had a good natured way of making such characters ashamed rather than angry. It was necessary to cross the Platte river. The quicksand was bad and it was thought necessary for those in a condition to do so to wade the river and thus lighten the loads. It was, no doubt, a chilling operation at that altitude in the month of November. It appeared to require a general lively effort to insure the crossing of the teams in safety. Some persons in poor health, whom the strong brethren proposed should remain in the wagons, refused to do so, while others, in good health seriously objected to wetting their lower extremities.

The brethren began to roll at the wheels of a wagon, the team of which appeared to have more than it could contend with in the quicksand. In the wagon was a Brother J. who, although enjoying very good health, objected to getting out for fear of catching his death cold. Bishop Hunter, having hold of one of the hind wheels, quietly remarked, "Brethren, I think this wagon will have to be tipped over before it will go out." Suiting action to the idea he raised his side of the wagon until it appeared to be going over. Mr. J., inside, anticipating such a catastrophe, cried out, with some energy "Oh let me get out first!" and sprang into the water. The Bishop quietly remarked, "Well, well, brethren, I think the wagon will go along now, suppose we try it."

One cold evening the company encamped on the bank of the Platte river. Wood for camp purposes could only be obtained by crossing a considerable branch of the river on to an island. It was very unpleasant to ford the stream, but of two evils this seemed the least. The more ambitious of the men took their axes and started, at once, for the island. Mr. J. and another similar character remained on the bank to take wood from those who might bring it through the water. Bishop Hunter discovering the situation, as he came from camp passed between them, seized one with each arm and took both with him into the water, good naturedly remarking, "Come brethren, we are wet now, let us go and get some wood."

This company arrived in Kanesville December 11th, 1849. It carried the following letter of instructions concerning the emigration of 1850. It emphasizes the fact that the spirit of gathering the scattered Saints burned in the bosoms of the First Presidency of the Church and the Apostles, and that, by their teachings and examples they were spreading the fire until it was reaching the heart of every person, endowed with the spirit of the latter-day work in the United States.

"GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,

"October 16th, 1849.

"PRESIDENT ORSON HYDE:

"Beloved Brother: The Lord has been devising, or rather making manifest, ways and means to facilitate the gathering of His Saints in these last days, and we lose no time in cheering your heart with the intelligence, and offering such suggestions as may be wisdom for you to follow in helping to roll on this glorious work of gathering Israel. * * * * * * * *

"We write you more particularly at this time, concerning the gathering, and the mission of our general agent for the Perpetual Emigration Fund for the coming year, Bishop Edward Hunter, who will soon be with you, bearing the funds already raised in this place, and we will here state our instructions to Bishop Hunter, so that you may the more fully comprehend our designs.

"In the first place this fund has been raised by voluntary donations, and is to be continued by the same process, and by so managing as to preserve the same and then to multiply.

"Bishop Hunter is instructed to go direct to Kanesville and confer with the general authorities at that place, and, by all means within his reach, procure every information so as to make the most judicious application of the funds in the purchase of young oxen and cows, that can be worked effectually to the valley, and that will be capable of improving and selling after their arrival, so as to continue the fund the following year.

"We will give early information to those whom we have directed to be helped, and such others as he shall deem wisdom, being aided in his judgment by the authorities among you, so that they may be preparing their wagons, etc., for the journey.

"Wagons are so plenty here that it is very desirable not to purchase with the Perpetual Fund; but let those be assisted who will make wagons of wood, when they cannot get iron, such as will be strong and safe to bring them here, so that all the funds may be appropriated to the purchase of such things as will improve in value by being transferred to this place.

"The poor can live without the luxuries of life on the road and in the valley, as well as in Pottowatomie and other places, and those who have means to purchase luxuries, have monies to procure an outfit of their own and need no help. Therefore, let such as are helped receive as little in food and clothing, wagons, etc., as can possibly make them comfortable to this place, and when they arrive they can go to work and get their outfit of all things necessary for comfort and convenience better than where they are, and even luxuries.

"As early in the spring as it will possibly do, on account of feed for cattle, Brother Hunter will gather all his company, organize them in the usual order, and preside over the camp, traveling with the same to this place; having previously procured the best teamsters possible, such as are accustomed to driving, and be gentle, kind and attentive to their teams. When the Saints, thus helped, arrive here, they will give their obligation to the Church to refund to the amount of what they have received, as soon as circumstances will permit, and labor will be furnished to such as wish on the public works, and good pay; and as fast as they can procure the necessaries of life, and a surplus, that surplus will be applied to liquidating their debt, and thereby increasing the Perpetual Fund. By this it will be readily discovered that the funds are to be appropriated in the form of a loan, rather than a gift; and this will make the honest in heart rejoice, for they love to labor and be independent by their labor, and not live on the charity of friends, while the lazy idlers, if such there be, will find fault and want every luxury furnished them on their journey, and in the end pay nothing. The Perpetual Fund will help no such idlers; we have no use for them in the valley; they had better stay where they are; and if they think they can devise a better way of appropriating the emigrating funds than we propose let them go to work, get the funds, make the appropriation, set us a better pattern, and we will follow it; and by that time we are confident they will have means of their own and will need no help.

"Brother Hunter will return all the funds to this place next season, when the most judicious course will be pursued to convert all the cattle and means into cash, that the same may be sent abroad as speedily as possible on another mission, together with all that we can raise besides to add to it; and we anticipate the Saints at Pottowatomie and in the states, will increase the funds by all possible means the coming winter, so that our agents may return with a large company. The few thousands we send out by our agent, at this time, is like a grain of mustard seed in the earth; we send it forth into the world, and among the Saints, a good soil, and we expect it will grow and flourish, and spread abroad in a few years, so that it will cover England, cast its shadow in Europe, and in process of time compass the whole earth. That is to say, these funds are designed to increase until Israel is gathered from all nations, and the poor can sit under their own vines and inhabit their own house and worship God in Zion." * * * *

On the 23rd of January, 1850, the Frontier Guardian sounded the call for the gathering of the camps of Israel for the march across the plains. It was in the spirit of the general epistle and it was no uncertain sound.

"The friends abroad throughout the states will do well to gather to this point as early in the spring as they can. * * * Come early to this place, and, if you are unable to go on you will be in time to put in crops; and if you are able to go on, you may start with the first companies. Let all prepare that can and be off to the valley. But we want every nook, corner, and field, put into spring grain before you start. It will probably be a forward spring, and much small grain may be put in during the month of March. The first company will probably leave here for the mountains about the 1st of May, one about the middle of May, one about the 1st of June, and one about the 15th of June—none later. Every company of emigrants will have experienced guides who know the route, who know the Indians, and who well understand the mode and manner of traveling on the plains."

The third general epistle from the valley was dated April 12th, 1850. It reached Kanesville in time for the Frontier Guardian of June 12th. It states that the colony in the Great Salt Lake valley had had no news from abroad since the previous September, a period of seven months. The chief interest of the following excerpt is the news concerning the parties caught in the snows of the Wasatch mountains in the beginning of the previous winter.

"Some emigrants from Michigan arrived at this place on the 15th of November, accompanied by Mr. Vasques, bringing letters from Elders then going east, who were at Little Sandy, October 30th, all well. And on the 22nd of the same month snow covered the valley from one and a half to two inches deep; and on the 24th it was about three and a half feet in Mill Creek canyon; on the same day Elder P. P. Pratt, with a company of about fifty men, left the most southern settlement of this valley, where they had rendezvoused the day previous for the purpose of exploring the south country to learn its geography, history, climate and locations for settlements.

"Nineteen emigrants arrived December 1st, in a very destitute situation, having left their wagons more than forty miles back, and their teams about twenty; themselves without provisions. They reported having left the states on the 24th of September, and having passed Elder Taylor's company at Independence Rock, November 6th, but so closely were they pressed by the snow, they did not bring us one newspaper, though they said they had many in their wagons. * * *

"On the 30th of January, four men arrived from Fort Bridger, having left their goods and remaining pack animals in Weber canyon; a portion of their horses having died on the way before reaching the canyon. This was the second attempt of the same company to pass from the fort to the valleys, and their goods remained in the canyon on the 30th of March."
