James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXVII.

THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY WAGONS START UP THE SOUTH SIDE OF THE PLATTE—IMMENSE EMIGRATION TO CALIFORNIA—PROSPEROUS CONDITION OF THE SAINTS—THE "DESERET NEWS'"—PANORAMIC VIEW OF THE EMIGRATION—RAVAGES OF THE CHOLERA—THE DISEASE IN ITS MOST FEARFUL STAGES—GRAVES BY THE WAYSIDE—THE LAST OF THE MORMON EMIGRATION ON THE WAY—O. HYDE ON HIS WAY TO THE MOUNTAINS—HIS ACCOUNT OF THE EMIGRATION—GOOD CROPS AND FOOD ABUNDANT IN THE VALLEY—"RICH AND POOR GATHER TO THE STATE OF DESERET"—THE SAINTS COUNSELED TO TRAVEL ON THE NORTH SIDE OF THE PLATTE.

THE Frontier Guardian of June 12th, 1850, has the following interesting summary of the season's operations up to date, under the head of

"EMIGRATION.

"We have attended the organization of three hundred and fifty wagons of Salt Lake emigrants, up to Saturday the 8th inst. Captain Milo Andrus is ahead with fifty wagons. Next follows Captain Benjamin Hawkins with one hundred, Thos. S. Johnson, captain 1st division and captain—of second division. We left them at Council Grove, twelve miles from Bethlehem, west of the Missouri river, on the morning of the 7th. Next in succession is Bishop Aaron Johnson with a train of one hundred wagons, Elisha Averett, captain of first division and Matthew Caldwell, captain of second division. Next in order is Captain James Pace with one hundred, Richard Sessions, captain of first division, and David Bennett, captain of second division.

"The emigrants are generally well fitted out with wagons and teams, provisions, etc., etc. *

"The number of California wagons that have crossed at this point, is about 4,500, averaging three men to the wagon, making 13,500 men, and about 22,000 head of horses, mules, oxen and cows. Our own emigration to Salt Lake valley will amount to about seven hundred wagons as nearly as we, at present, can determine. They take two new carding machines, in addition to one sent last year, besides much other valuable machinery. They also take about 4,000 sheep and 5,000 head of cattle, horses and mules."

Another congratulatory editorial follows in the Guardian of June 25th, under the same heading of

"EMIGRATION.

"We feel highly gratified to see our emigration so well fitted out as they are. They generally have two good yoke of oxen, and from one to three yoke of cows to each wagon. The average freight of each wagon is 1,850 pounds. The average amount of breadstuff to the person, old or young, is one hundred and twenty-five pounds—bacon, sugar, coffee, tea, rice, dried fruit, and other little necessaries in proportion.

"To see a people who, three or four years ago, had to sell their all to get bread to last them until they could raise it, and now see them with from one to four wagons each, with plenty of good teams, thousands of sheep and loose cattle, horses, mules, and machinery of every kind; wagons all new and stock all young and thrifty, is gratifying in the extreme."

This is another recorded evidence of the wonderful recuperative powers of the Latter-day Saints. There were many personal experiences that would be interesting as illustrating remarkable providences which opened the way for individuals to obtain the means of gathering to the mountains. It is in accordance with the whole history of this people, that almost miraculous blessing has often attended the efforts of individuals when working under untoward circumstances for the accomplishment of some specific purpose, in the line of duty and progress.

From the evacuation of Nauvoo until the publication of the Frontier Guardian in February, 1849, the Church had no representative periodical on the American continent. The first number of the Deseret News appeared June 15th, 1850, in Great Salt Lake City. The first was evidently intended to forward the emigration interests at the eastern end of the route across the plains, then to be abandoned. The Deseret News was as evidently designed to be the leading periodical of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

As seen to-day the first volume of the Deseret News bears the impress of the difficult circumstances under which it saw the light. Its editor was Willard Richards, one of the First Presidency of the Church. The prospectus of the News is replete with the straight-forward, honesty and love of truth which characterized this man. Probably the peculiar circumstances surrounding the issuing of this paper will not find a parallel in the history of the continent. The first volume is already an historical curiosity, and, with the rapidity the world has been moving, may be considered already ancient. Its motto, "Truth and Liberty," was characteristic of a people who were under the ban of Christian civilization, for attempting to solve important social problems through the power of divine inspiration; and for this had endured a long series of vindictive persecutions.

The following excerpt was doubtless written with a prophetic view of what the miniature sheet was to become in the future. We "designed originally to record the passing events of our state, and in connection, refer to the arts and sciences, embracing general education, medicine, law, divinity, domestic and political economy, and everything that may fall under our observation which may tend to promote the best interest, welfare, pleasure and amusement of our fellow citizens." For forty years the paper has been considered so far the organ of the Church as to usually indicate its policies.

The following account of the journeying of a company from Great Salt Lake City to Kanesville, is from a letter of Elder Robert Campbell's published in the Frontier Guardian July 7th, 1850. Its chief interest in this connection, is the excellent panoramic view it affords of the emigration, as it was met in the mountains and on the Platte river.

There was considerable mortality from the cholera in 1849, on the south side of the Platte, and several deaths from it among emigrants on the north side. In 1850, this terrible scourge swept out on to the plains in the majesty of its power, as it had not before done. Perhaps it had more to feed it, as the emigration to California was immense.

The company with which Mr. Campbell traveled left Great Salt Lake City on the 20th of April, 1850. May 15th, they met S. B. Crow's company of California emigrants, from Kendall county, Illinois, near Dry Sandy, the people well, and to the astonishment of the company, their animals in good condition. They had been fed on grain until the supply was exhausted, after that flour, as their owners depended on replenishing their stock of provisions in Salt Lake valley.

The evening of May 16th, they found Denison's company of two hundred people from Ohio, encamped at the first crossing of the Sweetwater. A few minutes later another company of emigrants rolled across the river to the west side and encamped. The animals of this company were in poor condition. The 21st of May, a few ox teams were met that had wintered at Laramie. Also a man, said to be a Dutchman, with a wheelbarrow. Several men had offered to haul his bedding and provisions. He thanked them kindly and wished to be excused, as he could not wait on the slow movements of a camp. He seemed to appreciate the fact that he had no horses for Indians to steal, and that he never lost any rest through dread of a stampede. Three hundred miles from Salt Lake City, the road was thronged with emigrants for the land of gold.

The 25th of May, the company arrived at the Upper Platte ferry and ford. From this point the road was nearly covered with emigrant wagons. Laying around on camp grounds were harness, casks, axes, augurs, stoves, etc., but these were but small in amount compared with the articles thrown away by the emigrants the year previous. These had evidently learned some wisdom from what friends had experienced who preceded them. They fitted out with light wagons and good teams and had taken no surplus property to throw away on the plains.

At the ferry was met a Mr. Hickman and others from Missouri. They were running a boat. Some of the mail company assisted the old pioneer ferryman who had come out with them, build and launch two good, substantial boats. Some of the company, going through also traded oxen for horses and refitted up a little for their journey. They left the Upper Platte ferry on the 3rd of June. They met almost a continuous train of emigrant wagons and arrived at Laramie the 10th of the month. At Laramie, a Mr. Sommerville, employed by the government to keep an account of the passing emigration, furnished the company with the following items: "Total number of emigrants passed this post up to June 10th, 1850, inclusive, 16,915 men, 235 women, 242 children, 4,672 wagons, 14,974 horses, 4,641 mules, 7,425 oxen, 1,653 cows. Signed,

"CALVIN C. SOMMERVILLE, Clerk."

The 12th of June, the company encamped by Robidau's trading post near Scott's Bluff's. There the cholera was met among the emigrants. They were informed that the Sioux Indians had gone to White river, for fear the white men would bring the cholera among them as they had done the year before. The 18th of June the animals and wagons forded the South Fork of the Platte, but the goods were boated over. Several of the company were attacked with disease but recovered through the administration of Elders. They were daily meeting cholera in its most fearful stages. Graves by the wayside were common, sometimes several in a group. They were estimated at an average of one per mile. Two places were seen where bodies were disinterred by the wolves, and the bones lay bleaching in the sun. The companies in which cholera had made its most direful ravages were mostly from Missouri, with a few from Illinois. They were late and generally had ox teams.

The 20th of June, the emigrant teams were more scattering. The people called themselves Oregon emigrants. Captain Haight bought tea of a woman who stated she had seen her father, mother and sister interred within a few days. A lone wagon was on the river bank. Death had taken all who traveled with it. A gentleman was met with, who said he was alone in his mess, his two companions having died. There was thought to be many graves out of sight from the road in camping places on the river bank. The emigrants called this part of the route, "The Valley of Death."

The 24th of June, they passed an unorganized company of Saints and encamped in the evening with Messrs. Lorenzo D. Young and Charles F. Decker. The 25th, at Fort Kearney, they found Livingston and Kinkead's teams and Captain Lake's fifty of Saints. From this post was met the main body of the Mormon emigration of about eight hundred wagons. They were generally in good condition though cholera had made inroads among them. Mr. Appleton Harmon thought that sixty-two deaths had been reported to him. The party arrived in Kanesville about the 6th of July.

The Frontier Guardian of July 10th, 1850, gives us the first details of the departure of our people across the plains. It says: "By the arrival of Messrs. Johnson and Hall from the Indian country, we are informed that Elder Orson Hyde and company, of this place, left Platte river camp on the morning of the 6th inst, on a visit to the valley of Great Salt Lake. This is the last company of the season, all others being in advance. Bishop Hunter with his company, also a small company of California emigrants from Michigan, are a few miles in advance, all well. We are informed the cholera followed the California and all other emigrants for several hundred miles out, which proved very fatal. Several hundred died with the epidemic. It has, however, nearly or quite subsided, and all are moving forward."

With the season's emigration on the way across the plains, followed by Elder O. Hyde, the following letter will indicate to the reader the stirring times on the shores of Salt Lake.

"GREAT SALT LAKE CITY, DESERET.

"July 28th, 1850.

"Dear Brother Orson Hyde:

"The emigration poured in here to such numbers that they raised provisions to a very high price. Flour sold for one dollar per pound, which was sufficient to induce some of our speculators to sell the last morsel and go without. Harvest commenced with the 4th of July, and has continued until the present. * * * It is a general time of health with the Saints, and peace, and plenty of hard work, as every one has been so busy that they can hardly get time to eat or sleep. You speak about hurry and bustle at Kanesville; but if you were here, to see, feel and realize the burdens, labors and responsibilities which are daily, hourly, momentarily, rolling, piling, tumbling and thundering upon us, you would at least conclude that there was no danger of our getting the gout from idleness or too much jollity. * *

"BRIGHAM YOUNG,

"H. C. KIMBALL,

"WILLARD RICHARDS."

Further interesting details of the movements of the emigrating companies is furnished by Elder Hyde, in a letter to Mr. McIntosh, who was temporary editor of the Frontier Guardian.

"UPPER CROSSING OF THE PLATTE,

July 30th, 1850.

"Brother McIntosh:

"DEAR SIR—We crossed the Platte yesterday. Ferried over wagons and swam our horses, leaving Captain Milo Andrus and company on the banks crossing. All well. * * * * * *

"Grass is very scarce though the rains through the Black Hills have been constant and powerful. But how the vast multitudes of cattle and horses are to get through, God only knows. There will be no lack of water, but grass is eaten up root and branch; and in many cases the animals have eaten out the wild sage.

"August 1st, at Independence Rock on the Sweetwater, all well. We have just passed through the "valley and shadow of death," a country of about fifty miles in extent, where the waters are deeply impregnated with nitre, saleratus, sulphur, etc., etc. There is little or no grass at all through this region, but is mostly a sandy desert. The carcasses of cattle and horses lying along the roadside are very numerous, having perished through fatigue, hunger and through drinking poisonous waters.

"This country lies between the upper crossing of the Platte and the Sweetwater river on the banks of which we are now comfortably encamped. * We are now beginning to overtake the California and Oregon emigration. They have suffered much in the loss of teams and animals; and oh! the sacrifice of wagons, clothing, firearms, beds, bedding, buffalo skins, trunks, chests, harness, and in the loss of life. The road to gold is strewn with destruction, wretchedness and woe, and yet thousands and tens of thousands follow on the way with the hope of securing the wealth of this world. *

"There are about five hundred new graves on the south side of the Platte and but three deaths are reported at Laramie as having occurred on the north side. * If wood were as plentiful as tools, wagon tire and iron in general, on the road, we could have our hot dodger, coffee and fried or boiled bacon whenever we pleased.

"BIG SANDY, August 8th, 1850.

"The eight or ten hundred wagons of emigrants' and merchants' trains behind us have but a sorry prospect. Much of their stock must and will unavoidably perish. Cows already give but little milk, because they have but little to eat, and families whose chief dependence for food on the journey is milk and butter from their cows, will be cut short of their expectations in some respects. But if they can stand it through to Green river they will find plenty of grass, in my opinion.

"There are three hard places for stock and teams to cross over. First from Laramie across the Black Hills to the upper crossing of the Platte, a distance of 120 miles. The road is mostly over rocks, sharp gravel and flint. This is severe on cattle's feet. * * * The second hard place is from the upper crossing of the Platte to Independence Rock on the Sweetwater, a distance of fifty miles. Through this section the alkali or poisonous waters may be mostly found. * On the Sweetwater there is generally some grass; but there is more or less alkali from the upper crossing of the Platte to the South Pass of the Rocky Mountains, and whenever emigrants discover the road white with saleratus, also the banks and breaks in the land, they should be careful about letting their animals drink from the standing pools.

"The third trying part of the road for stock is from the South Pass to Green river, a distance of 65 miles. Sand and sage, sage and sand, dead horses, mules, cows, and oxen, with snow-capped mountains on your right and left, are about the variety which the eye meets in passing through this section. I would give a more flattering account of this section if I could, conscientiously. I have this assurance, however, that those who travel this road hereafter will testify to the truth of what I have written."

The following important items are from an Epistle of the First Presidency of the Church, dated Great Salt Lake City, September 27th, 1850:

"The crops have been abundant in all the settlements of Deseret this season; and we have made every exertion to have them secured for the benefit of all; and although from the best information obtained, we have reason to expect that our population will be strengthened nearly, if not quite 15,000 this season, yet we are confident, if all will be prudent, there will be seed grain and bread sufficient to sustain the whole, till another harvest. The estimated population of 15,000 inhabitants in Deseret the past year, having raised grain sufficient to sustain the 30,000 for the coming year, inspires us confidently to believe that the 30,000 the coming year can raise sufficient for 60,000 the succeeding year, and to this object and end our energies will be exerted to double our population annually, by the assistance of the Perpetual Emigrating Poor Fund, and otherwise provide for the sustenance of that population.

"Viewing the gathering of Israel, which produces our increased population in the valleys of the mountains, an important part of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and one of the most important at the present time, we shall send few, or no Elders abroad to preach the gospel this fall; but instruct them to raise grain and build houses, and prepare for the Saints, that they may come in flocks, like doves to their windows; and we say, arise! to your wagons and your tents, O scattered Israel! ye Saints of the Most High! rich and poor, and gather to the State of Deseret, bringing your plows and drills, your reapers and gleaners, your threshers and cleaners of the most approved patterns, so that one man can do the labor of twenty in the wheat field, and we will soon send the Elders abroad by hundreds and thousands to a harvest of souls among the nations, and the inhabitants of the earth shall speedily hear of the salvation prepared by Israel's God for His people."

The Epistle also recommended the route on the north side of the Platte as the best for the Saints.

The Deseret News thus briefly notices the arrival of the last companies of the season's emigration. Bishop Hunter and company arrived on Sunday, October 13th, 1850; Elder Woodruff and company on Monday, the 14th. Both companies were east of the second mountain on Thursday during the snow-storm, and passed through considerable snow in coming in, though they arrived in health and most joyfully are the last camps of the Saints welcomed in the valley, and particularly after so long an absence our old friend and pioneer, Brother Woodruff.

The Frontier Guardian of December 11th, 1850, emphasizes the counsel of Brigham Young for the Saints to travel on the north side of the Platte the ensuing season. "The awful scenes of cholera and death on the south side of the Platte last season should be a warning to those concerned louder than thunder, to avoid a late start, and to avoid the south side of the river. More than five hundred fresh graves on the south side of the Platte between the Missouri and Fort Laramie, while from the thousands who traveled on the north side only three graves can be found that were made this season."

The efficient and arduous labors of Elder Orson Hyde, in managing Church and Emigration affairs at the eastern terminus of the route to Salt Lake valley, cannot be fully appreciated. This season the 5th of July, before the last company of emigrants were fairly on the way, he left Kanesville for Salt Lake valley, arrived there on the 15th of August, attended to the important business for which the trip was undertaken, and was welcomed back to Kanesville by his numerous friends the 18th of the following November.

Jos. E. Johnson under date of February 2d, 1851, reports his return trip from the valley. He evidently accompanied Elder Hyde, although the fact is not stated. Started for states the last day of September with the addition to company of twelve men. Met the last of the emigrating companies, Bishop Hunter's, on the mountains west of Bear river. Met an unpleasant snow storm near the South Pass, and another gale of snow at the upper crossing of the Platte. From here kept the north side of the river the entire way down. Found the north side much better route than the south side to Laramie. From there down found many advantages on the north side; better water for camp use, more feed and better road, buffalo abundant down as low as Fort Kearney * * * We found no hostile Indians but they stole all the small articles they could conceal which they could not beg. We arrived in Kanesville on the 18th of November, occupying fifty days in our return, being absent from home four and a half months."
