James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE EMIGRATION OF 1851—NEWS FROM COMPANIES ON THE PLAINS—THE FIRE OF THE GATHERING—HAND-CARTS FORESHADOWED—ELDERS EZRA T. BENSON AND J. M. GRANT SENT TO SUPERINTEND THE EMIGRATION OF 1852—ELDER MARGETTS' TRIP FROM SALT LAKE TO KANESVILLE.

NEITHER the Frontier Guardian at the eastern end of the route to Salt Lake, nor the Deseret News at the western terminus, furnish much news of the emigration for the year 1851. President Hyde made another flying trip to Salt Lake, doubtless to thoroughly post himself in the views and counsels of the First Presidency. He left Kanesville the 28th of June, and arrived in the valley the 17th of August attended by Albert Carrington, and a few others, all of whom were plundered by the Pawnee Indians. Elder Hyde, after a successful trip arrived in Kanesville the 17th of October, 1851.

The following from the Frontier Guardian of August 22nd, 1851, furnishes a few items of interest:

"A party of seven men arrived in Kanesville from Salt Lake on the 19th of August, 1851. They left there the 15th of July, making the trip in thirty-four days. They met Phineas Young and General Brown five miles east of the valley. President Hyde and company thirty-three miles west of Laramie, getting along well. * Captain — and his company were, on the first of August, four miles west of Fort Laramie; Stevens' company five miles east of the fort; Captain Day's company in sight; Captain Cummings and company of one hundred wagons ten miles west of Ash Hollow; Shurtliff's company of fifty wagons five miles in rear of Cummings' train; Captain John Brown, with the emigrating poor twenty-two miles east of Ash Hollow; Wilkins' merchandise train of ten wagons, with a Scotch company in the rear, were met near Brown's company. Gordon's company were met the next day. They met Father Allred's company the west side of Cold Springs, and Elder O. Pratt's company at the Springs."

The General Epistle of October, 1851, says of the emigration:

"Elder Orson Pratt is on the way from the States; and about five hundred wagons, mostly of these who are emigrating to this place; but they started too late, were hindered by heavy rains and floods, and it will be very late before the last company will arrive."

The general epistle sent out in the autumn of 1851 as usual also gives instructions for the gathering of 1852. It is full of the fire of the gathering and says: "The voice of the good Shepherd is to all Saints, even to the ends of the earth; gather yourselves together, come home; and more especially to the Saints in Pottowatomie, the United States, Canada and the British Isles; come home! come home!!" In the following we see the future hand-cart companies foreshadowed:

"Some of the Saints, now in our midst, came hither with wagons or carts made of wood, without a particle of iron, hooping their wheels with hickory or rawhide, or ropes, and had as good and safe a journey as any in the camps with their wrought iron wagons; and can you not do the same? Yes, if you have the same desire, the same faith. Families might start from Missouri river, with cows, hand-carts, wheelbarrows, with little flour and no unnecessaries, and come to this place quicker, and with less fatigue, than by following the heavy trains with their cumbrous herds, which they are often obliged to drive miles to feed.

"Elders Ezra T. Benson and Jedediah M. Grant will repair to Kanesville, immediately after conference, and superintend the emigration the coming season. They are sent expressly to push the Saints to the valley."

It was evidently the intent by the epistle that the Nauvoo exodus should culminate with the emigration of 1852, by the removal of all the Saints on the Missouri river to Great Salt Lake valley. President Orson Hyde, who, for nearly five years had the presidency of affairs at the eastern end of the road across the plains, was directed to move his family to the valley, Elder F. D. Richards, president of the European missions was directed to send two ship-loads of Saints as early as April.

The following from the St. Louis Weekly Union of October 7th, 1851, indicates the interest with which many were watching the growth of the Mormon colony in the mountains:

"No body of people in the whole world, not greater in number, seems to us, to occupy a position so peculiarly prominent and powerful, whether considered in reference to religion, politics or commerce, as these people who have founded their Zion in the bosom of the Salt Lake country."

A letter from Elder Thos. Margetts to the Millennial Star, Liverpool, England, dated Kanesville, July 4th, 1852, furnishes the earliest information of that season's emigration that the writer has been able to find. It is a sketch of a trip across the plains with a party of Elders. It states that this party left Salt Lake on the 5th of May, 1852. At the Sweetwater, six miles above Devil's Gate, they met a small company of emigrants for California with mule teams; a few hours after a company of packers. At Independence rock a large company with horse teams crossing the Sweetwater. From the ford of Sweetwater the emigration grew more numerous daily, until it seemed almost a continuous string of teams. This was on the north side of the Platte, for they traveled the entire distance on that side, without crossing the river at all. At every point where they could see the road on the south side they discovered that it was also lined with wagons. They all looked well. They had light loads, light wagons and strong teams. No horses were seen left, but few cattle, and only eight or ten wagons and they were broken up.

The company rolled along, answering questions, cracking jokes with the emigrants. There was a general opinion among the latter that Mormons and Indians were united in bands on the road for the purpose of robbing companies. The Elders talked and sang with them and in this way convinced them of the folly of such reports, when they would often show the change in their sentiments by the expression, "Well, the Mormons are d—d good fellows, and bring good things from their wagons and invite all to partake of the excellent fare."

At Wolf creek the company met the first sickness and saw the first graves. The number increased until they reached Wood river. From there the graves gradually lessened as they neared the Missouri river and sickness disappeared. They did not see over two hundred graves, which they thought few considering the great number of people who were traveling the road.

They met the first Mormon train, Captain Higbee's fifty, two hundred and fifty miles from Winter Quarters, and after that companies of Saints almost daily. When circumstances permitted they stopped in their camps. After the good news from the valley were told and a thousand and one questions answered they would all turn in, in true Mormon style, to dance and sing. Including those waiting at the Ferry they met about 1,400 Mormon teams, with which traveled not less than 10,000 people. It is stated in the editorial of the Millennial Star of November 13th, 1852, that twenty-one companies of Saints, averaging sixty wagons or upwards each emigrated on the north side of the Platte river, and two companies besides the company with the sugar mill machinery on the south side. These estimates indicate a very heavy emigration that season. Evidently the able management at Kanesville make a very successful one.

The following items from an editorial in the Deseret News of July 10th, 1852, make up a vivid picture of the ravages of death on the lower Platte: "From observations made by travelers, it is supposed a thousand graves have been called into existence between the Missouri river and the South Pass, previous to the 4th of July. Bishop Smoot, with a company of English Saints, was on the south side of the Platte in the midst of cholera at the latest dates. Some cases of cholera had appeared on the north side of the river, but its ravages appear to correspond with the amount of emigration which was much greater on the south side.

"The emigrating Saints commenced leaving Kanesville about the 25th of May. The first week in June the first company, which was from St. Louis, was near the Loupe Fork. While the Saints in these valleys are enjoying the richest blessings of heaven and earth, let them not be unmindful of their brethren and sisters and their little ones who are now passing the valley of death on the Platte river. Not through the valley of the shadow of death,' but through the valley of death itself, where men, women and children have been left on the ground where they died, if travelers tell the truth, with no other change or covering than a few loose clods thrown over them, to hide them from the light of day, while the tent that should shelter them was hurriedly forced from its fastenings, so that the survivors might go their way. And why? For fear that death would leave the departed and cleave to themselves and not, as humanity would hope, from any want of respect to the departed."

The 2nd of June, 1852, A. W. Babbitt left Kanesville for Salt Lake, and made the trip in twenty-seven and a half days. He passed Captain John Higbee's company, at Shell Creek, the 5th of June, and A. O. Smoot's company above Fort Kearney, June 9th. Captain Higbee's company crossed the Missouri river the 30th of May. It arrived in Great Salt Lake valley about the 20th of August, the first of the season's emigration.

Ezra T. Benson and J. M. Grant returned to Salt Lake, August 11th, 1852, from the mission of gathering the Saints from Pottowatomie. They left the country almost vacated. The last family that wanted to come was brought along. The last companies of this season's emigration were late. Snowstorms in the mountains retarded their progress and made them short of provisions. Two hundred teams went from the valley with 40,000 or 50,000 pounds of flour and large supplies of vegetables which enabled them to come in safety.

The following list of names of men who led fifties across the plains in 1852, is from the Deseret News of September 18th. It is evidently not complete. Abram O. Smoot, captain of the Perpetual Emigration Fund emigrants from Great Britain; John Higbee, James W. Bay, James J. Jepson, F. C. D. Howe, Joseph Outhouse, John Tidwell, David Wood, H. B. M. Jolley, Isaac M. Stewart, James McGaw, Harmon Cutler, John B. Walker, Robert Weimer, Uriah Curtis, Isaac Bullock, James C. Snow, Eli B. Kelsey, H. W. Mille, Allen Weeks, Wm. Lang, Joel Edmonds. There were probably about 6,000 people in these organizations.

The writer has found no record of the captains of hundreds. Elder Warren Foote led a hundred of which Elder Samuel Mulliner was historian. The latter gave his journal to Captain Foote, and from this and the autobiography of the latter, the following narrative of the travels of this hundred has been compiled. It is the best illustration that has come to hand of the travels of the Saints across the plains in 1852.
