James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXIX.

CAPTAIN FOOTE'S HUNDRED—ITS HISTORY ILLUSTRATES THE DIFFICULTIES ENCOUNTERED BY THE EMIGRATING SAINTS IN 1852—THE CULMINATION OF THE NAUVOO EXODUS—THE OPENING OF A NEW ERA—GATHERING THE POOR FROM EUROPE UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE PERPETUAL EMIGRATION FUND COMPANY.

WHILE the Saints have been repeatedly plundered by the Gentiles, the latter have been often compelled, by circumstances over which they had no control, to minister to their necessities. This was the case in Pottowatomie county in the spring of 1852. The weather was cool, grass late in starting, the emigration for California very numerous, and they were compelled to wait on the frontier for grass to grow on the Platte bottom. This made farm products in good demand. Corn went up to $2.00, and wheat to $2.25 per bushel. Everything the Saints had to sell they cashed at good prices.

For some reason the most of the Mormon emigration traveled the south side of the Platte. They crossed the Missouri river eighteen miles below Kanesville, at an insignificant hamlet called Bethlehem. This hundred was organized by Apostle O. Hyde before crossing, with Warren Foote captain, Otis L. Terry captain of first fifty, and Wm. Wall captain of second fifty. The hundred comprised 105 wagons; 476 persons; 743 cattle; 19 horses; 273 sheep. June 17th, the hundred camped three miles west of the Ferry. The officers met and adopted the following by-laws for the regulation and good order of the camps. As they probably did not differ materially from rules generally adopted by the companies of emigrating Saints, we give them in full:

"Resolved, first—The horn shall be blown at 4 o'clock in the morning, when the people will arise, and, after the necessary preparations for starting, the horn will be blown again for the people to come together for prayers, and at half past eight at night the horn will be blown again for evening prayers, which each family will attend in their wagon.

"Resolved, second—That if any person while on guard at night shall neglect his duty by sleep or otherwise, for the first offence he shall be reported publicly, and if afterwards found guilty of neglect he shall again be reported and be subjected to extra duty in the day time herding cattle.

"Resolved, third—That any member of this camp who shall indulge in profane language shall be reported by his captain of ten, and if he shall afterwards persist in profanity he shall be published publicly.

"Resolved, fourth—That if any persons practice unnecessary cruelty to their animals, and after being reproved by their captain of ten, shall still persist in such cruelty, they shall be brought before the captains of the camp, who shall levy such fine or punishment as they may deem just."

These resolutions were afterwards submitted to the whole company for their approval. Accidents, births and deaths characterized human life here as elsewhere.

The 18th of June a child was born, and a boy run over by a wagon, but not seriously injured. There was much rain, making the roads muddy and creating great discomfort.

The 20th, a number of California emigrants were met returning home discouraged. They reported the cholera terrible in companies ahead. There were several cases of cholera in the second fifty. Alfred Brown died of this disease and was buried in the morning before starting.

The 21st and 22nd of June four children of Thomas Spafford died of cholera in the second fifty, and a girl had her leg broken. This was taking a family pretty rapidly, and the event must have spread a deep shadow over the company. For some unknown reason there was much more sickness and death in the second than in the first fifty. Severe storms were frequent, and a matter of considerable dread to emigrants.

The 24th, several more deaths were reported in the second fifty. A meeting was called by Captain Foote, and the Lord besought to turn the destroyer away.

The 26th, there was another death in the second fifty.

The 27th of June Elder Moses Clawson, and several others going on missions, were met. Up to this time the first fifty had enjoyed comparative immunity from the general sickness.

The 27th, about noon the company came on to the Platte bottom. That night there was a severe thunderstorm, and the next day the ground was so soft that if teams were stopped wagons often settled down to the hubs of the wheels. Water was scarce for the animals, and the sun shone very warm. Owing to almost constant exposure to wet some of the company complained of sickness in the first fifty. In traveling the third and fifth tens fell behind but came up late at night and, for the first time, the power of death was felt in the camp. A little boy belonging to John Dart, who started out in the morning to drive loose stock, died in the afternoon of the 28th with the cholera, and a sister of the lad's died early in the morning of the 29th. This threw another family into the depths of affliction. Franklin Cunningham was nearly drowned in swimming the Platte to get wood. Elders Campbell and Crosby, with a mail from the valley, were met by the company. After this visitation of the Dart family the health of the first fifty was again very good.

July 2nd, a child of Sister Hart's died. The graves of a brother Sergeant and son, from Kanesville, were passed. Brother Smallham, who was well in the morning, was brought into camp sick with the cholera. He died and was buried the following morning.

July 5th, a California emigrant, by the name of King, who traveled with the company, died of cholera. He was from Illinois and without relatives along.

Captain Wall, of the second fifty, came into camp and reported three deaths in the company within a few days. Mrs. Dart died in the evening. About 10 o'clock a. m., July 6th, the company passed Fort Kearney.

The 7th, the second ten of the first fifty wished to stop to take care of the sick.

On the 10th, buried a Sister Proctor who died the night before. Owing to much wet weather the cattle were badly crippled with sore necks and feet.

The 15th of July the company passed about twenty graves of California emigrants, and three or four of our people. From dates on head-boards these deaths occurred between the 3rd and 17th of June. Several men came into camp loaded with buffalo meat. It was the first obtained. The next day the company laid by for the hunters to bring in a good supply of meat. Apostle O. Hyde and party passed the company on their way to Salt Lake.

The 17th of July, Father Rose, who had died of cholera, was buried. The company were passing through large herds of bufialo.

July 18th, the company had passed many graves in the previous few days. They were mostly of people from Missouri, and had been made between the 5th and 15th of June. Scarcely a grave that had not been robbed of its contents by wolves, and the bones of its occupant lay bleaching on the prairie. Beds and bedding were strewn around unfit for use without cleansing.

August 7th found the company in the Black Hills, west of Laramie. In the morning they started a half mile east of what is called in the guides "The Bend in the Road," near Dead Timber creek, and as the last ten were coming into line on the road a stampede occurred with the last teams. A brother Clemens ran in before them to stop them, but he was knocked down, trampled on and a wagon ran over his bowels. Also Wm. McDonald, who was on horseback a little ahead of the stampeding teams, rode in forward of them at the risk of his life, and succeeded in stopping them before they came up to the main body of the company. The first wagons had arrived at the gulch, which caused the bend in the road, and if the stampede had not been checked, there is no doubt but the whole company would have been plunged into the gulch, which was eight or ten feet deep. Elder Clemens was so badly hurt that he died before night. A sacrifice in a noble effort to save his friends.

August 17th, the company was met by Elders Stratton and George Madsen, who had been sent out by President Young to assist the companies in finding feed for their animals, which was very scarce in some places, owing to the immense overland emigration. They also brought a very cheering letter from President Young.

Aug. 18th, the company crossed the north Fork of the Platte river. On account of heavy rains it was rising rapidly. Soon after the company were over, it became impassable.

August 19th, the company did not move. The cattle suffered with cold and hunger. It was supposed to be the last time the hundred would camp together. A meeting was called and difficulties were amicably settled. As a result all felt well. Heavy storms and poor feed were very hard on animals.

The 24th of August the company remained in camp to repair wagons, hunt buffalo for a supply of meat, and rest the weary and hungry cattle. The company did not move until the 28th.

September 25th, the company camped on Last creek at the west foot of the Little Mountain. The people were again called together and all difficulties settled. The next day they arrived in Salt Lake City.

The following remarks of Elder John Taylor, in Salt Lake City, August 22nd, 1852, concerning what he saw in Kanesville and the surrounding country on his way home in the early part of the season, is a fitting close to this outline sketch of the Nauvoo exodus. It shows the season's operations to have been the crowning effort to gather the exiles and complete the fulfillment of the covenants made in the Nauvoo Temple.

Elder Taylor says, "It gave me great joy on my way home to find the Saints leaving Kanesville. It almost seemed as though they were swept out with a besom. When I was there I rode out in my carriage one day to a place called Council Point. I though I would go and visit some of the folks there, but when I got there behold there were no folks to see. I hunted around and finally found a place with something like `Grocery' written upon it. I alighted and went into the house and asked a person who presented himself, if he was a stranger there? `Yes,' says he, `I have only just come.' `And the people have all left, have they?' `Yes,' was the answer. I next saw a few goods standing at the side of a house, but the house was empty. These were waiting to be taken away. I went to another house and there were two or three people waiting for a boat to take them down the river. These were all the inhabitants I saw there.

"When I reflected upon this removal my heart felt pained. I well knew the disposition of many in those frontier counties, and I thought that some miserable wretches might come upon them after the main body of the Saints had removed, and abuse, rob and plunder the widow, the orphan, the lame, halt, blind and destitute who might be left as was done in Nauvoo. * * * But thank God they are coming, old and young, rich and poor."

Scarcely had the last victims of the Nauvoo exodus arrived in the valley, when the first company of Saints emigrated from Europe by the Perpetual Emigrating Fund company, were welcomed home with discharges of artillery, with feasting and music. They arrived in the afternoon of the 3rd of September, 1852. "They were the poor gathering up to Zion. For this reason much interest was manifested in their arrival. The train consisted of thirty-one wagons under Captain A. O. Smoot. Captain Pitt's band met the company at the mouth of Emigration canyon, where aged Saints of both sexes, danced and sang for joy.

"The luxuries of melons and cakes were distributed. The band joined the escort and enlivened the scene with music. Following these in the procession came a band of women and children. They were weather beaten but not forlorn. The lightness of their hearts was manifest in their countenances. After these followed the wagon train, the good condition of which did credit to the excellent management of Bishop Smoot. As the procession passed the temple block it was saluted with nine rounds of artillery, while thousands of people gathered from all parts of the city to swell the joyful welcome."

There are some interesting resemblances in the histories of ancient and modern Israel. The first Israel suffered from monarchial despotism. The modern one, after thirty-three centuries, from the ignorance and prejudice of a free people; both alike destructive and cruel. Both have been hated for their religion, their social institutions, and feared for their cohesiveness, their policies and their rapid increase. Both fled from their oppressors into a desert. The former conquered a populous country for an inheritance, the latter created one. In a short time the Saints learned that to take an active part in breaking up old landmarks of religion and social conditions, was to take upon themselves as a heritage, the world's opposition.

The Saints driven from Illinois had previously experienced little else than antagonisms in the form of annoyances, plunderings and drivings. A strange thing had appeared among men. A people had arisen who claimed that the heavens had condescended to commune with men. A Prophet was among them clothed with Divine inspiration. In these facts there was power to awaken mankind from the slumber of ages, and break chains of darkness that had bound the race for centuries.

Suffering begat in the hearts of the Saints an intense desire for rest, for refuge from unrelenting enemies. As we have seen, prophetic declarations early led them to look to the Rocky Mountain region, to the unexplored deserts of the west, for the fruition of their hopes. When the route was marked out, and the place for gathering located, the getting there became a question simply of ability. On arriving there they exerted themselves to provide for their own needs, and for the sustenance of those who were to follow. In the meantime the latter struggled to make an outfit and gather to the assistance of those who had preceded them. As we have endeavored to show from the beginning of the Exodus there was a general and very efficient organization for carrying out one grand purpose, the gathering of the people to the shelter prepared for them, where they could develop the purposes of their life's mission. In this comprehensive sense they were all pioneers of the highest type. Those who afterwards gathered for the first time, assisted in building the grand superstructure of which the Nauvoo exiles laid the foundation.

The gathering to Kirtland, the move westward to the frontiers of Missouri, the Exodus from there to Nauvoo, from there across the prairies of Iowa, all originating and culminating under unusual difficulties, were so many lessons in nomadic life. They afforded leaders and people a vast experience in the best methods of outfitting and of traveling with wagons, with families and domestic animals. The force of circumstances made them at home in journeying during the day, and in making camp by the wayside at night. It cultivated the habit of suiting themselves to a great diversity of circumstances and conditions, and if possible of profiting by those diverse conditions.

These experiences were a grand educational process which fitted the Saints for great changes without any weakening effect on their organization as a religious body. Constant efforts of enemies to weaken their union only drew the band more tightly.

The old adage, "A rolling stone gathers no moss," has been reversed in the history of the Latter-day Saints. The "rolling stone" has constantly increased in velocity and in the same ratio, in power to contend with antagonisms. In each succeeding change the foundation has been laid for greater expansion, for accellerated growth. From a country village in Ohio they held the balance of political power in counties in Missouri. In six years they built a fine city and ruled a county in Illinois.

Within six months after the commencement of the Nauvoo exodus, they moved 300 miles to the western frontier of the United States to the lands of the Pottowatomie Indians on the Missouri river. In less than eighteen months they so nearly obliterated it, by planting a colony midway between the Missouri river and the Pacific ocean, that it became a reminiscence of the past. In what was then a vast, unexplored region they laid the foundations of empire and made practicable a highway for the locomotive to cross the continent, to bind together the natural eastern and western divisions of the republic.

In these moves leaders and people displayed a masterly energy. The power of Providential circumstances behind them, and an intense desire to be free from their enemies which welled up in their afflicted souls together, constituted a motive power sufficient to rouse every latent energy. The successful results of their movements, many of which, from a practical stand-point, appear like daring the fates, evidences they were led by an inspiration that made no mistakes, and that a kindly Providence overruled temporal and spiritual influences to favor them.
