James A. Little, From Kirtland to Salt Lake City ( 1890)

CHAPTER XXX.

THE WAYMARKS OF THE SAINTS ALONG THEIR ROUTE OF TRAVEL—FAIRVIEW CEMETERY—THE GRAVE OF SOLOMON HANCOCK—RELICS OF WINTER QUARTERS.

IT is worthy of record that the main body of the Latter-day Saints, in all their forced and voluntary movements, in their journeyings from Seneca county, New York, to the Great Salt Lake, have remained in a geographical belt of about 300 miles in breadth, and quite uniformly between 37 and 44 degrees north latitude, and within the climatic belt which is generally supposed to be adapted to developing the best capabilities of the race.

Some notice of waymarks they have left along this route the writer believes will be a fitting conclusion of this sketch. The Temple in Kirtland, the first edifice dedicated in these latter times to the performances of the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood, is still standing. Around it are numerous marks of the labors of the Saints, and in an adjoining grave-yard lie many of their remains. The land along the ordinary early routes of travel is also consecrated by their sleeping dust.

The writer visited Independence in December, 1875. He was shown the dilapidated remains of cabins occupied by the Saints when they were driven from Jackson county. He was informed there was considerable real estate in the county to which the present claimants had no legal title, it being still vested in Mormons who had purchased the lands from the general government, and been afterwards driven from their possessions.

The spot where the corner-stone of the Temple was said to have been laid was still unmolested, except being used as a play-ground by the youth of the surrounding families.

The writer did not visit other portions of Missouri which had been occupied by the Saints, but, doubtless, there are many marks of such occupancy, and many places where their dead were deposited now known only to the angels. We have already quoted Colonel Thomas L. Kane's unparalleled description of desolated Nauvoo. The Liverpool Route, speaking of the visit of its artist, Mr. Frederick Piercy, in 1853, says of Nauvoo and the Temple: "After the surrender of Nauvoo by the Saints, it gradually dwindled away in importance until it became what our artist found it. On the 10th of November, 1848, the Temple was fired by an incendiary, and on the 27th of May, 1850, a tornado blew down the north wall, and so shook the building that the Icarians, who had been engaged in re-building the edifice for their use, deemed it advisable to pull down the east and south walls, leaving only the west wall. This beautiful ruin is all that is left of what was once a work the most elegant in its construction, and the most renowned in its celebrity, of any in the whole west, and which had been built by the Latter-day Saints in the midst of poverty and persecution."

When the Mormons arrived at Council Bluffs, on the Missouri river, the country was Indian Territory. They were the "van of empire" rolling westward in that direction. The remains of their pioneering labors are fast disappearing, as well as the knowledge of them among the people who have been their successors. The writer was on a mission in that section of the country in 1876. Some of his observations will be of interest in this connection.

At the time, Utah flour was worth 50 cts. more per hundred than the home article, on account of its superior quality. Walking along the main street of Council Bluffs he noticed this difference in price marked on sacks exposed for sale. He asked the vendor what made this difference in price. He replied, "He did not know, unless it was that Utah had been settled longer than Iowa, and, therefore, had better flouring mills." This man, although of average intelligence, had no idea that the Mormons had opened farms and built the pioneer gristmill of that country, before pioneering their way to Utah.

The writer remembers the country around Council Bluffs as quite romantic and inviting in appearance. The railroad depots, many dwellings, and most of the business houses of the city were located on the level bottom land of the Missouri river.

The great majority of dwelling houses lined streets that ran up into coves and romantic glens between the high bluffs. Many of these dwellings were fair specimens of architectural elegance, and of the refined tastes of their occupants. They afforded the advantages of a suburban residence in close proximity to the business centre of the town.

Through the western portion of the town ran Indian, alias Lousy creek. The latter name was suggestive of unpleasant reminiscences. Surmising there must be a cause for so unromantic a name, on inquiry, he was informed that the stream was very fickle and changeable. Today murmuring along, a harmless rivulet, perhaps tomorrow an angry, billowy flood, washing away portions of its banks, regardless of man's profit or convenience. Running along its western bank about half a mile was Greene street, so named in honor of Mr.

KANESVILLE.

Evan M. Greene, who was one of the first residents in the locality. He was an early pioneer, and the first post master of the place, then called Kanesville, in honor of Col. Thos. L. Kane, the philanthropist.

In the immediate vicinity, but on the east side of Indian creek, was the residence of Mr. Wm. Powers and his amiable lady. From their garden the latter pointed out the location of this primitive post office, and also that of the Log Tabernacle, in which the Priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ organized its second First Presidency, soon after the return of B. Young and others of the pioneers from Great Salt Lake valley, in December, 1847, and also in which the writer was ordained a Seventy in the spring of 1849, under the hands of President Joseph Young.

On the south-east side of the town is a cove which, in the early days, was occupied by Apostle George A. Smith and family. It is still known by many as "George A's Hollow." In 1876 it was occupied by a couple of fine brick residences.

Twice he strolled into Fairview cemetery. This is a well-laid-out, modern cemetery on the slope of a high bluff just out of town, on the north-west side of Indian creek. He had been informed that the "Old Mormon burying ground" was on this hill. Rambling over the inclosure he failed to recognize it. Inquiring of a laborer on the grounds, he was informed that he would find the object of his search on the summit of the hill, and that modern improvements had not encroached on the sacred place.

The summit affords a fine view of the city and surrounding country. The surface of the ground was in such a shape that no reliable estimate could be formed of the number buried. The boards and billets of wood which had been placed at the heads of graves, the former in some instances with the indistinct remains of lettering in memory of the departed, were gradually disappearing, leaving only little knobs of earth covered with rank grass, scarcely distinguishable from the surrounding surface, to indicate where weary wanderers found a resting place.

No carving was found in memory of the dead dating farther back than 1850. The corroding influence of the elements had obliterated everything of earlier date. One inscription on a head board, which had decayed at the surface of the ground and fallen over, on account of family ties and personal friendship, interested him more than the few others. It bore the following inscription: "John P. Greene, infant son of Evan M. and Susan Greene, died March 3rd, 1852, aged 8 months and 16 days." Memory reminded him that the grandfather, and namesake of this little waif, was prominently connected with the early history of the Church. Inquiring of one who was a citizen of Nauvoo at the time of the exodus, he was informed that Mr. Greene sank under excessive labor and exposure in protecting the Saints during their persecutions, and that he found a resting place on the bank of the Mississippi. Perilous times were the heritage of the little one that bore his name, and we trust it was a kindly Providence that early released it from sorrow which it was not fitted to endure.

One more reminiscence of Fairview cemetery. This city of the dead had its pioneer as well as the neighboring one of the living. A marble headstone, broken off near the surface, and lying on the ground, marks the place of deposit. The erasure of the name and date, from the inscription and general appearance of the stone, indicated that it was a stray from some other locality. Malicious reports were once in circulation that it had been stolen from another grave. Whoever circulated them failed to give due weight to the consideration that one who would incur considerable expense and trouble to gratify the impulses of affection, might be expected to have a proper regard for the tender sentiments of others.

A person was found who had previously made some inquiries concerning this grave, and was informed that the headstone was purshased at Trader's Point, some ten miles below Council Bluffs, of the owner of an old burial place that had been ploughed and its monuments removed. The grave was the resting place of a daughter of Elder Silas Richards. Mrs. Mary Powers informed the writer that she visited the ground in an early day when this was the only grave there. The epitaph on the stone would alike be appropriate over a grave near a frontier trading post, or over the resting place of a Mormon pilgrim on the top of a high bluff on the bank of the Missouri river, 40 years ago.

"Here, lonely and sad, in this wilderness land, Thy parents, resigning, deplore thee; Sweet, sweet be thy rest, till thy Savior's command, In beauty and youth shall restore thee."

The 12th of May, 1876, the writer visited Elder John Mahood and family, about six miles east of Council Bluffs. The prairies were becoming green with the fresh verdure of spring. The wild fruit-trees and shrubs were in full bloom, and forest trees in all stages of development from the bursting bud to nearly the full-grown leaf. Mr. Mahood's residence was enveloped in the forest. From sunset until early dawn, whenever sleep gave way to consciousness, might be heard the echoing notes of the whip-poor-will with a peculiar curt accent on the last note, as if the wakeful night-bird was angry with itself for the everlasting monotony of its song. When at early dawn it retired from active life, it was succeeded by the ceaseless twitter and merry-making of such a variety of birds that every tree and shrub of the forest seemed alive with the music of their song. It was an earthly paradise, well fitted for the activities of life or for a resting place when its energies were exhausted. On a farm, then owned by Mr. Joshua Gregg, a little over a mile from Mr Mahood's, was a quiet cove, open on the east but otherwise quite surrounded with timber. Abruptly jutting out into this vale, on the south side, was a prominent, well-defined point. The ground between and around a few large linn trees that had lived through the storms and prairie fires of a century or more, was covered with a thick growth of small timber. About half-way up the point was a large linn tree with several smaller ones growing from its roots. About ten feet south-east of these were the remains of a black walnut head-board. It had decayed at the surface of the ground and fallen over. The following inscription, carved in the wood, was still legible: "In memory of Solomon Hancock, who died December 2nd, 1847." Although his name is historical, as he was an active Elder in the Church, it is probable that this passing notice is the only record of the place of his sepulture. There were indications of several other interments on the spot. Two or three stakes, indicating places of burial, were still standing, and several more, partially decayed, were lying around.

Several families of exiles from Nauvoo built their cabins in this sheltered nook, and mutually assisted each other in raising food with which to recruit their wasted energies. Evidently quite a heavy per centage of them found a resting place in this lonely, romantic spot.

This little mausoleum, now being rapidly hidden in the growth of a young forest and its annual fall of leaves, is a silent and impressive way mark of these pioneers of western civilization. There are, doubtless, many similar burial places in the country, the signs of which are obliterated by the plough or covered in a new forest growth, beyond the recognition of the living.

The following sequel to this story was learned from the aged widow of Solomon Hancock, Mrs. Phebe Hancock, in the autumn of 1888. She informed the writer that her husband went west from Winter Quarters with the company of Miller and Emmett and, with them, went into camp for the winter near the mouth of Running Water river, late in the autumn of 1846. He and his family did not remain there long, being advised by those in authority to go, with others, to Rush Valley on the Missouri river to assist in taking care of the cattle belonging to the Saints in Winter Quarters. It was harrassing business, as the Indians were troublesome and stole a large number of cattle.

Elder Hancock had been much afflicted with chills and fever and continued to suffer, more or less, with the disease when herding the cattle. In the spring of 1847 the camp of herders was broken up and Elder Hancock, with his family, located near the secluded spot where he was buried, in company with twelve or more families. The hamlet was presided over by Elder Brownell and it was called Brownell's Settlement. After planting some crops of vegetables for his family to look after during the summer, Elder Hancock's health being much improved, and the necessities of his family great, went down into Missouri to seek labor.

He took a job of chopping timber, labored very hard, and when he had nearly completed it he was again taken sick. The Missourian, under the plea that he had not completed the job, refused to pay him anything for his labor. He returned home as destitute as he left it, and after a sickness of about three months found rest; his spirit in the abode of the faithful, his worn-out body in the lonely but lovely spot we have described. The black walnut board, which had fortunately served to perpetuate his memory and the place of his sepulture, was cut from the headboard of the bedstead where he had rested during life, and where he had breathed his last. He was a member of Zion's Camp, a faithful preacher of the gospel, shared with the Saints the persecutions of Missouri and Illinois and now rests beneath the luxuriant growth of a modern forest.

The 16th of May, 1876, the writer visited Florence, on the west bank of the Missouri river, six miles above Omaha. It occupies nearly the same ground as the Winter Quarters of 1846-47. For several years after the culmination of the Nauvoo Exodus, it continued to be the outfitting point for the emigrant road on the north side of the Platte. It became quite a flourishing village. When no longer an outfitting point it went rapidly to decay. In 1876 the few tenements, the appearance of which indicated thrift in their occupants were generally the residences of successful cultivators of the soil.

To meet the storms of the coming winter of 1846-47 log cabins, "dugouts" and shelter in any and every available form were hastily constructed by the exiled Saints. These very imperfectly sheltered their inmates from the severe cold and storms of that latitude. In the bodies of many the seeds of disease had been already sown by hunger, exposure to the elements and excessive toil. To obtain food severely taxed their slender resources, and when obtained it was often inadequate for their needs both in quantity and quality. The only observable mark of this dark period of the history of the Saints was the cemetery over the hill west of the town. About all that indicated their use of it were the many little inequalities of the ground showing that it had been disturbed. Those were no times for chiseled urns or marble momuments in honor of the departed. Many of the weak, debilitated survivors were barely able to perform the rights of burial, and an unhewn stake, or rude headboard was all they could afford to mark the spot where remains of loved ones were deposited. Decay and prairie fires had destroyed nearly the last vestige of these. The piece of ground has been designated as a burial place by the citizens of Florence and in 1873, they inclosed about two and a half acres of it with a good fence. It is supposed that several hundred of the Saints found a resting place there. In addition to the thousands who found rest on the prairies of Iowa between the Mississippi and Missouri rivers and at Winter Quarters many laid down their lives along the road "To the West" where lay the final object of their toils—a place of refuge from their enemies. Well might the Prophet Joseph when he saw the valleys of the mountains in vision, and the sufferings of his people in getting there exclaim in anguish of spirit, "Oh, the dead that will lay between here and there!"

MORE READING FROM LDS ARCHIVE PUBLISHERS

A Brief History of the Church (Edward Anderson)9.95Life of Brigham Young (Edward Anderson)9.95History of Joseph Smith for Youth (George Q. Cannon)10.95The Life of Nephi, Son of Lehi (George Q. Cannon)8.95The Latter-day Saints' Emigrants' Guide (William Clayton)1.95The Edmonds Law & Unlawful Cohabitation Defined (Court Report)6.95Thrilling Experiences (Solomon F. Kimball)7.95Early Scenes from Church History (George C. Lambert)6.95From Kirtland to Salt Lake City (James A. Little)12.95 Jacob Hamblin (James A. Little)8.95The Martyrs: A Full Account of the Martyrdom (Lyman O. Littlefield)7.95 Mormon Settlements in Arizona (James H. McClintock)18.95Prophecies of Joseph Smith and their Fulfillment (Nephi Morris)10.95From Plowboy to Prophet (William A. Morton)8.95Mother Stories from the Book of Mormon (William A. Morton)8.95The Martyrdom of Joseph Standing (John Nicholson)8.95The Tennessee Massacre or the Utah Conspiracy (John Nicholson)5.95Does the Bible Sanction Polygamy? (Orson Pratt)10.95Key to the Science of Theology (Parley P. Pratt)9.95A Voice of Warning (Parley P. Pratt)9.95Are We of Israel? (George Reynolds)3.95Myth of the Manuscript Found / Manuscript Story (Reynolds/Spaulding)11.95Joseph Smith: Prophet-Teacher (B. H. Roberts)4.95The Rise and Fall of Nauvoo (B. H. Roberts)18.95Life of Orson Spencer & History of Primary (Aurelia Spencer Rogers)14.95Key to Succession in the Presidency (P. J. Sanders)10.95The Book of Mormon-1830 Edition (Joseph Smith)22.95Blood Atonement & Origin of Plural Marriage (Joseph Fielding Smith)6.95The Origin of the "Reorganized" Church (Joseph Fielding Smith)7.95Eliza R. Snow Smith (Funeral Remarks)2.95Mediation and Atonement of Jesus Christ (John Taylor)10.95The Government of God (John Taylor)6.95Martyrdom of Joseph Smith & The Mormons (Taylor/Kane)5.95A Concise History of the Mormon Battalion (Daniel Tyler)16.95The Mormon Prophet's Tragedy (Orson F. Whitney)6.95Joseph Smith as Scientist (John A. Widtsoe)9.95The Life of David Patten (Lycurgus A. Wilson)4.95Leaves from My Journal (Wilford Woodruff)8.95Memoirs of John R. Young, Pioneer of 1847 (John R. Young)16.95

If your bookstore doesn't have it in stock, call or write to us.

LDS Archive Publishers P. O. Box 1476, Grantsville, Utah 84029

(435) 884-1072

* Prices subject to change without notice.
