One of the most thrilling and humbling stories in the Book of Mormon for me is the account of the brother of Jared (see Ether 2–3). Because of his great faith, he could not be kept from the presence of the Lord. He performed great miracles and was shown marvelous visions.

The story is thrilling because it teaches that through faith and obedience, great knowledge and glorious truths are available to each of us.

The story is humbling because it shows me that I am no brother of Jared. At times in this life, I might have received much greater knowledge and spiritual strength from my Heavenly Father if I had not fallen short in faith.

For me, two truths emerge from this story: (1) believing is the key to seeing the Lord do marvelous works in our lives, and (2) it is never too late to believe and then see.

When we doubt, we close our spiritual eyes. In Ether 12:27 the Lord not only pointed out that we mortals have weakness but also said, “If they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them.” This suggests that when we humble ourselves in faith, our Father can help us see the possibilities that He sees for us—what we might become and what we might achieve.

We may think, “Why would He make great things known to me?” This is essentially the question that Nephi’s older brothers Laman and Lemuel asked. When they struggled to understand their father’s visionary teachings, Nephi asked, “Have ye inquired of the Lord?” They answered: “We have not; for the Lord maketh no such thing known unto us.” In reply, Nephi repeated the Lord’s invitation: “If ye will not harden your hearts, and ask me in faith, believing that ye shall receive, with diligence in keeping my commandments, surely these things shall be made known unto you” (1 Nephi 15:7–9, 11). This promise is for all of us.

Words of the premortal Jesus Christ to the brother of Jared offer hope to those who exercise mighty faith and obedience in seeking divine direction: “Because of thy faith thou hast seen” (Ether 3:9). Our faith can lead us to see His marvelous works in our own lives.

It is not only our privilege and opportunity to seek knowledge from the Lord but also our duty and responsibility. He commanded: “Seek learning, even by study and also by faith” (Doctrine and Covenants 88:118).

We have this inspired instruction from President Russell M. Nelson:

“Does God really want to speak to you? Yes! …

“I urge you to stretch beyond your current spiritual ability to receive personal revelation, for the Lord has promised that ‘if thou shalt [seek], thou shalt receive revelation upon revelation’ [Doctrine and Covenants 42:61].”

I know at least three ways He will help us see His works in our lives when we believe.

When I was 16, a patriarch who had never seen me before and knew nothing of my background gave me my patriarchal blessing. In it the Lord answered specific questions I held in my heart related to some personal challenges. My thoughts about them seemed too intimate to share. One challenge concerned whether I would find a loving woman courageous enough to marry me in spite of my prominent birth defect—one our children might inherit. The answer was yes. I did marry Marie, and we had five beloved children.

The Lord’s answers in that blessing respected my concerns and my privacy. They were phrased so that only I would fully understand their meaning. From that day, I have had a firm personal witness that my Heavenly Father knows me intimately.

My career brought joy, growth, and satisfaction through trying to serve Him and His children. After I retired, the world and my career field moved on without me. Some days, in “down” times, I have wondered if I really did any good during those years—if my offering was worthy of the great promises I was given.

During one of those times, I felt this answer: reread your patriarchal blessing. As I read it, pointed questions came to my mind: “Did I not give you this blessing as I promised? Did this not come true in your life? And this?” I saw clearly how the Lord has fulfilled blessings He promised me. I felt assurance that things I had offered humbly and willingly were acceptable and also an admonition that I am not done yet—there are still more opportunities to serve.

I was impressed too that I am not alone in these concerns. Many others may wonder, when they look back on their lives and see no great mortal landmarks, if they have done any good. But we do not see as the Lord sees. Perhaps if we choose to focus on what He has given us, rather than on the things we desired but did not get, we would see more clearly how His hand touched our lives.

The margins in my scriptures, particularly the Book of Mormon, are full of notes on what the Lord has helped me see about applying their teachings. A few years ago, I started making a separate journal of notes, sometimes verse by verse, recording what the Lord teaches me. I have read through the Book of Mormon several times now in this manner, then the Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and recently the New Testament. When I approach my study prayerfully, asking the Lord to open the scriptures to me, I am amazed at how much He helps me see.

Stories and parables that seemed to offer simple, good examples of individual behavior suddenly have practical applications in my life. Scriptures that I have seen as historical background suddenly have far-reaching meanings for the continuing Restoration of the gospel. I see how the experiences of Joseph and Daniel, Peter and Paul, Nephi, the two Almas, and Captain Moroni apply to the challenges we face every day. The war chapters in the Book of Mormon offer not only an account of Captain Moroni’s far-sighted battle plans but also a personal strategy for meeting the unrelenting attacks of the devil: we can fortify personal spiritual strongholds in advance.

The things I see through personal study might not be new to others. But recording what I am taught has become important in my personal spiritual progress.

We have been encouraged many times by prophets and Church leaders to record what the Lord teaches us if we want Him to give us more. Elder David A. Bednar of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles explains: “I have also learned that properly recording spiritual impressions demonstrates to the Savior how much I treasure His direction. The simple practice of writing down spiritual thoughts and feelings greatly enhances the likelihood of receiving and recognizing additional promptings from the Holy Ghost.”

He has shown me how to handle problems ranging from painful spiritual challenges to more mundane home repair. He has shown me challenges ahead and how to prepare. He has shown His power in my life when I have been fearful and doubting—when I said, like the father pleading for his son to be healed, “Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief” (Mark 9:24).

Perhaps we do not take Him seriously enough when we read, “Ask, and it shall be given you” (Matthew 7:7) or “If you will ask of me you shall receive” (Doctrine and Covenants 6:5). The promise that “he who hath faith to see shall see” (Doctrine and Covenants 42:49) seems to refer to physical healing, but I don’t believe its meaning was limited. When we have sufficient faith, He can open our spiritual eyes to see His miracles in our own lives.

I can’t go back to change the past. But for however much time may still be ahead of me, I hope I can exercise greater faith in His loving desire to show me more of His works. I hope to hear, like the brother of Jared, His confirming words: “Because of thy faith thou hast seen.”

The author, a former managing editor of Church magazines, wrote this faith-filled article before passing away from pancreatic cancer in September 2023.
