Our prophet, President Russell M. Nelson, has spoken repeatedly concerning the priesthood power available to men and women through a covenant relationship with God. He said:

“Every woman and every man … who participates … in priesthood ordinances [and makes and keeps covenants with God], has direct access to the power of God. …

“The heavens are just as open to women who are endowed with God’s power flowing from their priesthood covenants as they are to men who bear the priesthood.”

As daughters of God, we can be endowed with priesthood power—the power of God we have access to as we make and keep priesthood covenants. This has such important implications. As endowed women, we have the right to draw liberally on the Savior’s power to help ourselves, our families, and others.

I received my own endowment when I was 20, but for decades I did not understand the heavenly power I had access to through the covenants I had made with my Father in Heaven and Jesus Christ. However, as I look back, I recognize the added strength and capacity I was given to weather the many different challenges in the varied circumstances of my life. What a blessing that we live in a time when there is more understanding of the increased power, peace, and strength that can be ours through a covenant relationship with God.

As our prophet has taught, when we enter a covenant relationship with God, our relationship with Him becomes much closer than before our covenant, and He will never abandon that relationship. He will never tire in His efforts to help us, and we will never exhaust His patience with us. We are joyfully bound together through an everlasting covenant that we have chosen to enter into with Him.

This knowledge should give us great peace and assurance as we go through the difficulties and heartaches of this life. God’s power will amplify our spiritual gifts and talents, give us strength beyond our own to carry the heavy burdens of mortality, and give us the peace and power we need as we face the physical, emotional, and spiritual earthquakes of our lives.
