As a Church, we are blessed to have members from diverse backgrounds and circumstances. Heavenly Father has blessed each of us with unique traits, gifts, and talents, and that is part of what makes the Church of Jesus Christ so beautiful. Even with all our differences, the Lord commands us to “be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine” (Doctrine and Covenants 38:27). Though we can’t and shouldn’t be the same, we can be one as we strive to join together and live the gospel of Jesus Christ.

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “In a later prayer, Jesus included a plea for unity. ‘Father,’ He said, ‘I pray unto thee for them, … that they may believe in me, that I may be in them as thou, Father, art in me, that we may be one’ [3 Nephi 19:23]. We too can pray for unity. We can pray to be of one heart and one mind with the Lord’s anointed and with our loved ones. We can pray for mutual understanding and respect between ourselves and our neighbors. If we really care for others, we should pray for them [see Matthew 5:44]. ‘Pray one for another … ,’ taught James, for ‘the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much’ [James 5:16].”

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about unity. They also have shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

“When I read the scriptures, I’m impressed with how much of the Savior’s work has to do with bringing people together. Jews and Gentiles, publicans and fishermen, men and women.

“Unity is a powerful testimony of the Savior’s influence. Jesus Christ declared that the world would believe in Him when they saw the unity of His servants. Perhaps more people in the world would gain a testimony of Jesus Christ and His Church if they saw more unity among us, His disciples.

“The unity we seek is not to have everyone see things in the same way; it’s to have everyone look in the same direction—toward Jesus Christ. It is not our common experiences or background that unites us. It is our common objective. We are one, not because of where we’ve been but where we are striving to go, not because of who we are but who we seek to become.

“Of course, our perfect example in seeking unity is our Savior, Jesus Christ. Thanks to His atoning sacrifice, all of God’s children may be eternally blessed.

“The challenges of establishing the Savior’s Church requires multiple perspectives, but all of them with an eye single to the glory of Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, June 23, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“I dusted off my hat to greet ambassadors and diplomats from countries across the globe at a recent Western-themed gathering. This wonderful event left me feeling grateful for both the friendships we have developed over the years as well as the new relationships we continue to build.

“We come together with distinct cultural, linguistic, and religious backgrounds. Let us appreciate the uniqueness each person, neighbor, and friend offers as the fellow brothers and sisters we truly are.

“‘Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God’ (Ephesians 2:19).”

Elder Quentin L. Cook of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Nov. 3, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook.

“One of the reasons Jesus Christ established a church, His Church, was to give us experience in loving others, to learn what being motivated by charity means in practice.

“There is genius in the organization of local Church units based on geography. We don’t choose a congregation based on who we like or want to be with. Wards are chosen for us based on a reasonable geographic alignment, and we learn to live with, serve, and love people who might well be different in background, preferences, and opinions.

“Some we might even find a bit prickly, but we are to become one in the body of Christ. My plea is that we look to Jesus Christ in our thoughts and actions so that we may be filled with the pure love of Christ which God bestows ‘upon all who are true followers of his Son, Jesus Christ’ (Moroni 7:48).”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Nov. 30, 2023, facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“If we hope to feel the Spirit of the Lord, we must spend time in places where His Spirit can easily dwell.

“Among the most holy of places where we can stand are in the Lord’s temples. This weekend, I had the distinct pleasure of joining members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Japan as I dedicated the Okinawa Japan Temple.

“You may know the country of Japan has a special place in my heart. Visiting always feels like going home. In addition to serving as a missionary for the Church of Jesus Christ as a young man in Japan decades ago, Lesa and I served as mission leaders, and more recently in the Asia North Presidency. In total our family has lived in Japan for seven years.

“One of the remarkable aspects of this temple is the fact that it will serve the Japanese-speaking Okinawa Japan Stake as well as the English-speaking Okinawa Japan Military District.

“To consider the history that is part of both of these groups and see them come together to serve the Lord in the temple is simply remarkable.

“This temple will allow Okinawan members of the Church of Jesus Christ to honor their ancestors—including the many who faced untimely deaths associated with war.

“For those in Okinawa—and for all of us—the temple can bring peace and comfort and unity of heart and mind and respect and devotion to our departed ancestors.”

Elder Gary E. Stevenson of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Nov. 12, 2023, facebook.com/stevenson.gary.e.

“The Iguazu River flows through southern Brazil and empties into a plateau that forms a system of waterfalls known worldwide as the Iguazu Falls—one of the most beautiful and impressive of God’s creations on earth. A colossal volume of water flows into a single river and then separates, forming hundreds of unparalleled waterfalls.

“Metaphorically speaking, this phenomenal system of waterfalls is a reflection of God’s family on earth, for we share the same spiritual origin and substance, derived from our divine heritage and kinship.

“However, each of us flows in different cultures, ethnicities, and nationalities, with different opinions, experiences, and feelings. Despite this, we move forward as God’s children and as brothers and sisters in Christ, without losing our divine connection, which makes us a unique people and a beloved community.

“May we align our hearts and minds with the knowledge and testimony that we are all equal before God, that we are all fully endowed with the same eternal potential and inheritance.

“May we enjoy more the spiritual kinship that exists between us and value the different attributes and varied gifts we all have. If we do so, I promise you that we will flow in our own way, as does the water of the Iguazu Falls, without losing the divine connection that identifies us as a peculiar people, the children of Christ and heirs to the kingdom of God.”

Elder Ulisses Soares of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Facebook, Nov. 19, 2023, facebook.com/soares.u.

“One of the guiding principles of the Relief Society is to work in unity to help those in need. In 2022, Relief Society members worldwide aided in this work through countless volunteer hours and contributions to the Church’s humanitarian work.

“In the last year, women in the Church have painted furniture to benefit displaced persons, participated in 483 emergency response projects around the world, and even trudged through the mud to personally deliver much-needed supplies to those in need.

“Sylwia, a Church member in Poland, summed up the sisters’ desire to serve perfectly: ‘This is natural. When you see people who need help, you help. … It doesn’t matter whether you are a member of the Church or not. [Heavenly Father] loves all people.’

‘To learn more, check out the Church’s 2022 Annual Report on Caring for Those in Need.”

Note: You can also learn more in the 2023 Summary: Caring for Those in Need.

Sister J. Anette Dennis, First Counselor in the Relief Society General Presidency, Facebook, Apr. 4, 2023, https://www.facebook.com/RS1stCounselor.

“When we walked into the chapels in both San Diego and Nauvoo, we felt something. We realized we were in a room full of sisters who were hungering and thirsting for the Savior’s love, healing, and relief. They put aside other things they could have been doing on a Friday night and came together to receive personal revelation.

“We felt unity as daughters of God and members of the Relief Society as we stood together at the pulpit with our arms around each other. The hungering and sacrifice of those sisters and the unity we felt as women of God opened the way for remarkable nights of power and revelation. We put aside our notes and spoke what the Lord put into our hearts. We trusted that through our imperfect words and messages, the Lord would speak to each sister’s heart individually. He never misses an opportunity to love and bless His daughters when they gather in His name.

“How has gathering together as women of God and members of the Relief Society brought you closer to the Savior?”

President Susan H. Porter, Primary General President, Facebook, Nov. 1, 2023, https://www.facebook.com/PrimaryPresident.

“While reading the ‘Priesthood Principles’ in the General Handbook, my heart and mind were filled with two specific words: unity and equality. Other than the matchless gift of His Only Begotten Son, I cannot think of a greater manifestation of the love God has for His children than the incalculable blessings that are available equally to His sons and daughters through His holy priesthood.

“‘God’s priesthood power flows to all members of the Church—female and male—as they keep the covenants they have made with Him’ (General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 3.5, Gospel Library).

“How has the holy priesthood blessed your life?”

Sister Amy A. Wright, First Counselor in the Primary General Presidency, Facebook, Jan. 1, 2024, https://www.facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor.

“This … story from my dear friend Kathryn Godderidge, Primary General Advisory Council Member, touched my heart deeply:

“‘My husband and I attended a sacrament meeting with our son and his family in Simpsonville, South Carolina. His wife had gone to church early to play the organ, and we came in a little bit late with our son and grandchildren, finding seats in the back. We quickly settled in and began listening to the organ music for the opening hymn, when we discovered that our two-year-old grandson had brought with him his favorite binoculars. He began using them to carefully search the congregation, and when we tried to help him put them away, he protested, “I need to see mama on the organ!”

“‘What a sweet expression of love and desire from a little boy for his mother!

“‘Oh, that we all would pack our own “binoculars” to not only find that which brings us joy but to also truly see each other as we gather and worship together on Sunday.’

“‘As we are preparing for sacrament meeting, are we intentionally “seeing” all the individuals in the congregation? Do we “see” our precious children, youth, and young single adults as vital participants in this great work? Do we “see” them as covenant members with a unique role to play in building the kingdom of God?

“‘I testify that as we begin to “see” and engage all members of the congregation, our Sabbath day worship will become more joyful, sacred, holy, and centered on Jesus Christ.’”

Sister Amy A. Wright, First Counselor in the Primary General Presidency, Facebook, Feb. 19, 2024, https://www.facebook.com/Primary1stCounselor.
