Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Foreword

When a missionary goes into the field today he is provided with an excellent missionary plan that makes it possible for him to become immediately fruitful. Nevertheless, problems will arise. This book is written to show missionaries, prospective missionaries, and teachers a method which takes most of the pain out of these problems. If a member of the Church knows this method well, he can meet every objection to the gospel without knowing anything else.

vii This is not to say that there is a short-cut to knowledge, or a substitute for knowledge. In The World and The Prophets, Dr. Hugh Nibley, of the Brigham Young University faculty, tells how rhetoric destroyed education in the ancient world. Rhetoric is what they called the ancient version of "how to win friends and influence people." It was a substitute for knowledge. And it seemed to succeed. It did succeed if material rewards and fame are the only criteria of success. But there really is no substitute for true spiritual knowledge. And I do not wish to have any part in schemes which lead missionaries to hope for a substitute.

vii The system of meeting all objections with a single answer, as described in this book, requires some real effort to learn. But it recognizes the fact that young missionaries do not have time to learn a separate intellectual or scriptural argument for each objection. It also recognizes the fact that our job is not to intellectualize the gospel or make it more reasonable. "The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God." (1 Cor. 1:22-24.) The expending success of the new mission plans is due partly, at least, to the fact that they- increasingly capitalize on the power which is in the gospel itself and do not try to force the gospel on the ungodly and the unready. The "single-answer" system is potent for the same sort of reason. It weeds out the deceitful, lazy and unready, and shows one and all that a testimony can be obtained only on God's terms.

viii A missionary does not need a thousand answers, rationalizations or proofs to start his work. He needs a testimony and an understanding of how to get that testimony before as many people and types of people as possible. The tangible evidence of that testimony is the Book of Mormon. The more people a missionary can challenge with the Book of Mormon and the more ways he can challenge them with the Book of Mormon, the better missionary he will be. With that in mind, this book will attempt to show how to meet the objections of Christians and non-Christians alike right in the context of the group cottage meeting or individual discussion.

viii Nothing which is presented in this book will be of any value in improving your missionary ability unless you actually put it into practice. It is somewhat like learning to swim or ride a bicycle. All the theory can be explained—even illustrated with movies and diagrams—and you still have to go out and get into the water and go through that initial floundering stage when the main result is a lot of splashing of the water. You still have to go out and get on that bicycle and take your spills before you learn to turn the wheel the correct amount in the direction of the list. Your first efforts in missionary work will not be as fruitful as later ones. However, like swimming and learning to ride a bicycle, you will learn a lot faster if you have received some prior instructions from someone who has been through the experience.

ix Glenn Laurentz Pearson
