Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Part One Problem Solving with the Book of Mormon

A Problem Arises

A pair of missionaries, John and Fred, were giving the second lesson of a missionary plan. They had six investigators and eleven members present. Most of the members were recent converts. Five of the investigators were present when the first lesson was given and accepted it with enthusiasm. The sixth investigator, Mr. Jones had been invited by one of the new converts, and this was his first contact with missionaries.

1 Mr. Jones did not seem to be too attentive. There was a scowl on his face, and his eyes wandered. Suddenly, he raised his hand, and, without waiting to be acknowledged, asked, "Why do you discriminate against women ?"

1 John attempted to set this question aside and proceed as he had been taught. But Mr. Jones interrupted again and said, "Reverend Humberg said you would refuse to answer me. I don't want to hear any more until you tell me your attitude toward women."

1 At this point, Brother Kirkpatrick, the newest convert and a very fair minded man, spoke up and expressed the feeling that Jones should have an answer. He said he knew it was a matter of policy to try to give the lesson first; but he was sure the missionaries had a good answer for everything. In this case, circumstances made it advisable to give their answer before proceeding with the lesson. In general, the group seemed to agree with Brother Kirkpatrick.

2 The rest of that evening was spent discussing such subjects as pre-mortal existence eternal marriage, temple ceremonies, and regulations, priesthood, women's rights, the Pearl of Great Price and where it came from, civil rights, sociology, future opportunities for LDS women, and many other subjects. The lesson was never taught. One member apostatized. Three new members required considerable counseling to keep them in the Church. And Jones never came to another cottage meeting. But he did hold anti-"Mormon" meetings of his own.

2 The above is not a true story in the sense that it claims to describe an actual event. But it is true in the sense that it is very much like what sometimes happens.
