Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Letters from the Mission Field

An elder in Australia wrote an urgent letter asking what to do about Seventh-day Adventists. He said,

2 "In this Community there are a lot of Seventh-day Adventists. They seem to take their religion more seriously than anyone else around here. Their minister seems to know a lot about the LDS Church. Last Sunday he spoke about "Joe Smith and the Gold Bible." He advertised ahead in the local paper. A lot of our investigators went. Now they are full of questions about such things as the Spaulding Manuscript. Also, the Adventists have found out who our investigators are and where we tract. Wherever we go we find they have been there ahead of us. Can you send me some information on the Spaulding Manuscript and on how to prove we should worship on Sunday, not Saturday? If you do not have time to write some instructions, can you tell me what books I could have my parents send me? Our work is at a standstill. We need help right away."

3 An elder down in Ciderslough, Arkansas writes that he has been challenged to a public debate by a Church of Christ minister. He says this minister lies in wait for every new elder and that he specializes on the Adam-God doctrines blood atonement, and plural marriage. He seems to have read a great deal about the L.D.S. Church and knows more about our Church than any of the elders. This Elder wants some information in a hurry on what the Church really teaches about Adam-God, blood atonement, and plural marriage and how to prove these doctrines from the Bible.

3 An elder in France writes that he has accepted a challenge to a private debate with a Catholic priest. The stakes are the soul of a very lovely investigator. Her mother made her promise to hear such a debate before joining the Church. This elder wants information on how to handle the problems of transubstantiation and apostolic succession.

3 A missionary in Germany is beseiged by Jehovah's Witnesses. In general she wants to know all about them, how to cope with them, and how to prove that there is life between death and the resurrection.

4 A missionary in California has an investigator who is a philosophy student. He doesn't believe in anything but science, money, and a good time. Yet, he is very taken up with a study of "Mormonism." "We don't know what to do with him. Can you tell us the way
