Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Revelation is the Problem

"It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecution that arose against me, almost in my infancy? Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the before-mentioned religious excitement, and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying, it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them. I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me. "

6 The above remarks by Joseph Smith epitomize all the objections that ever have been made against this dispensation of the gospel—or any dispensation of the gospel. When a man questions LDS doctrines, he really means that he does not believe we have prophets and are guided by God through divine communication. If he were truly convinced that Joseph Smith and his successors were and are prophets, he would have to agree that they are following the right program and teaching the right way of life, or else he would have to be guilty of pitting his own wisdom against that of God. He may believe that the future might bring a change of policy; but, whatever the reason, God has not seen fit to tell his chief stewards to change their husbandmanship of the vineyard at present. Whether the issue is doctrinal or administrative, the same principle applies: the only objection is that the objector does not believe God has revealed His will to the Church through the prophets. The same is true of objections that arise from dissident members of the Church. They, too, have failed to learn the doctrine of divine leadership of the Church through apostles and prophets. No one could break away from the Church and join one of the apostate factions if he understood this principle as the Lord has revealed it.

7 The only procedure a missionary needs to learn to meet the objections that arise is to show his investigator that the problem is always revelation—not what it appears to be. In other words, the missionary does not need to prove or disprove anything about plural marriage, seventh-day worship, life between death and the resurrection, Adam-God, transubstantiation, or any other conceivable objection. It would be nice to know all these things. We even might say that it is the duty of the Saints to continue to increase their knowledge along these lines all their lives. But the missionary can do his job just as well without having all the pat answers to these questions. All he needs is to understand and know how to use the following formula.
