Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

The Steps Are Not Always In Order

While it is important to get all the steps of the formula into the discussion, it is not necessary that they be in order. In fact, there are times when it works better if they are not in order. They even may be reversed.

12 The following dialogue tells a true story of how one lady and her daughter were brought into the Church. This lady had been attending the Church for ten years. She even had held offices in the Relief Society. But she had never been baptized because she felt her Baptist immersion was good enough. Several pairs of elders had been sent to try to get her to submit to a proper baptism; but they had all failed-probably because they insisted on arguing their case from the Bible. At last two elders who knew the Book of Mormon approach were sent to see her. These elders decided to find out, first of all, if she believed in the book of Mormon. This is about how the conversation went:

13 Elder: We understand that you feel you do not need to be baptized again.

13 Lady: When I was a young girl in my teens I was immersed in the Big Muddy River. I can remember to this day the feeling that I had as I went under the water. I felt clean and healed from my sins. And I felt the Lord was pleased with my submission to His will.

13 Elder: I am sure He was. In pursuing this and other questions relative to your association with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I wonder if you would answer some questions?

13 Lady: Yes, I will. But you must expect me to be honest and answer according to my convictions.

13 Elder: That is exactly what we want you to do. First of all, tell us, have you ever read the Book of Mormon?

13 Lady: Yes, I have.

13 Elder: What did you think of it? Did you feel it was true?

13 Lady: Yes. I believe it is true.

14 Elder: Then, you must believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet. If that book is true, it could have come only the way he said it did. In that event, he had to be a prophet. Is that not right?

14 Lady: Yes, I suppose it is.

14 Elder: If Joseph Smith was a prophet, his revelations which are accepted by the Church must be from God. Would you agree with that?

14 Lady: I had never thought of it that way; but I can see you are right.

14 Elder: Here is a book called the Doctrine and Covenants. It contains many of the revelations of the prophet Joseph Smith. Are you acquainted with this book?

14 Lady: Yes, although I have not read it.

14 Elder: Would you feel it would be consistent to accept some of these revelations and reject others?

14 Lady: No.

14 Elder: I want to read one of these revelations to you.

14 The elder then read D&C 22 to this lady and she accepted it. Perceiving that something still bothered her, he asked her if she didn't have another problem. She then confessed that she had found it difficult to accept the idea of eternal marriage. The elders then persuaded her that she had to accept D&C 132 for the same reason she had to accept D&C 22. She and her daughter were baptized the next week.

14 In addition to pointing out the fact that the steps of the Book of Mormon formula are not always in order, it might be well to explain that sometimes step one (recognizing the problem) has been so well take care of in the development of the discussion that you do not have to formally restate the problem. just be sure that complete understanding is there and that no spirit of contention has crept in.
