Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Dialogue on Plural Marriage

Jim: I can't see how you people can believe men like Brigham Young were prophets.

16 Elder: Why?

16 Jim: They were just like animals, living with all those women.

16 Elder: I take it you believe it was immoral for Brigham Young and others to practice polygamy?

16 Jim: That's putting it mildly.

16 Elder: Jim, who is the author of what is right and wrong, you or God?

16 Jim: What do you mean?

16 Elder: As I see it, either there is a God who tells us what is right and wrong, or else men decide it. If God decides it, we are in no position to argue. If men decide it, there is no absolute standard of morality. That is moral which any given concensus is convinced is moral. Who do you think has a right to say what is good or evil—men or God?

17 Jim: Well, God, of course. What's that got to do with it?

17 Elder: If men have a right to decide what is morally good or evil, you have no logical basis for criticisms of the standards of any given society. But if God is the one who decides what right conduct should be, you must go to Him to find out. And that is the whole point, Jim. We are convinced that it was God who commanded certain members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to practice polygamy. If He did command it, they had no choice but to obey. Your only job is to find out if God commanded it. Would you like to know how to find out?

17 Jim: You have already told me. I must find out if the Book of Mormon is true. But tell me this: if it was so righteous and obedient to practice polygamy, why did you quit it?

17 Elder: Jim, you are playing God again. God can "Command and revoke, as it seemeth... good. " (D&C 56:4) We don't have to know why. Sometimes he tells us and sometimes he doesn't. It is enough to know that it is God's will. It so happens that he did reveal to President Wilford Woodruff the reason. But it would have made no difference if he hadn't. Those who understand the principle of revelation, the principle of the keys of the priesthood, and the principle of common consent all bowed to the will of the Lord, while some haughty dogmatists have rejected the Manifesto which brought an end to the divine sanction of a plurality of wives. It all hinges, again, on whether you believe we have prophets at the head of the Church. I suppose you know bow to find that out, Jim?

18 Jim: I surely do. And I see your point. I just can't get you to argue with me, can I?

18 Elder: I have no intention of being maneuvered into a position where I appear to pretend that I can or will prove any religious matter to someone else. I have found out for myself. The God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob has revealed to me that the Book of Mormon is true. I know it as well as I know I exist. It is up to you to decide this matter for yourself.

18 Jim: I can say this much: I know that Joseph Smith couldn't have written that book. No other man of our day could have written that book. And no group of men of our day could have written that book. [^1]

These were Jim's very words. He was baptized and is now an elder, married in the temple to a lovely Latter-day Saint girl.

---
Notas:
[^1] Recognizing the Objection
