Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Each Investigator Must Decide for Himself

Not only are all objections only one objection, but, also, the missionary does not have to answer that objection for anyone but himself he does not have to prove that we have revelation. He only has to show people that they must find out for themselves, or decide to accept revelation on faith (D&C 46:13,14

24 Furthermore, you cannot prove to anyone that there is modern revelation. Revelation is an entirely subjective experience. That is, there is no means within a person himself alone by which he can convey to someone else just what he experienced when he had his revelation. He can bear his testimony. And the Spirit can convey the truth of his testimony to the other person's heart. But then the other person has himself received a revelation. And it, too, is subjective.

24 We can convey information about the physical world from one person to another. For instance, if we wish to teach the rationale of the classifications in the animal kingdom, we can examine skeletal structures, exterior or skin coverings, reproductive patterns, utilization of food, digestive processes, locomotion, and a myriad other pertinent details, all of which are rooted in sense-perception which is common to all or available to all. The state of a man's soul is only of remote concern. That is, a scientist could rob a bank the night before and it would not prevent him from going about his research if he were a cool and hardened person so as not to have his faculties impaired by emotional concern. In other words, the moral aspects of the robbery could only interfere if the criminal were not inured to the pangs of conscience that might preoccupy his mind and interfere with his objectivity. But the state of a man's soul is all-important in obtaining a testimony of the gospel. Spiritual knowledge is conveyed from person to person and from God to man only with the help of the Spirit of the Lord. (1 Cor. 2:11-14.)
