Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Signs of Gradual Change

Many tracts and books have been written attacking the Book of Mormon and other claims of modern revelation. But there are signs that the Christians are beginning to awaken to the inconsistency of their official rejection of any revelation since the Bible or besides the Bible. It is true that there is no strong indication that churches are officially changing their position; but there are now some groups and some members of the clergy here and there who sound like they would agree to modern revelation if approached properly. Of course, there always have been large numbers among the Christian masses who immediately see that there is no more reason to believe in ancient revelation than in modern revelation.

28 Within the past few years there have been numerous reports of both Protestant and Catholic lay-members who have claimed that Christians believe in revelation besides the Bible. They almost always cite the recent alleged vision of the late Pope Pius, and often refer to the Fatima episode. Sometimes Joan of Acr is used as evidence of non-biblical revelation.

29 Many Christians readily admit that prayer is meaningless unless there is modern revelation. Also, they often believe in some sort of operation of the Holy Spirit and see that this implies an acceptance of modern revelation.

29 The higher critics have caused countless thousands to reject the Bible as an inspired book and often countless thousands to look upon its revelation as imperfect and as having come from the best in human thinking combined with some sort of impersonal divine guidance. Thus, they believe that God slowly reveals His will "in history. " Most of these people have been entirely " emancipated "-- as they like to think of it -- from any genuine belief in direct and personal (as we think of personal) revelation; but they usually agree quite readily that the idea of modern revelation is no less plausible than the idea of ancient revelation; and, occasionally, one of them is led by this open-mindedness into a sincere investigation of our claims.

29 Of course, the old militant rejection of any revelation besides the Bible lingers on, notably in certain sections and among certain churches.

29 To sum it up, a missionary is faced with the distinct possibility of two opposite reactions to our claim of modern revelation. Some may, in effect, say, " So what? We have revelation, too. " Others may say, " The Bible teaches that all revelation has ceased. Our purpose here is to suggest a program to follow in the event of either of these two reactions or any variation of them.

30 A missionary always should start where the investigator is-not where he wants him to be. So he needs to know (1) how to find out where his investigator is, and (2) what to do about it. It is best not to get into a position where you have said, " Your church does not believe in revelation. " Then your whole program would rely on his agreement with that statement. This may just lead to arguments.
