Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

"Our Church Believes in Revelation"

John: I don't see why you are not allowed to drink coffee and tea. There may be some sense in abstaining from tobacco and liquor because they may be harmful to you. But, even there, I can't see that it is morally wrong. It is your own body. You aren't hurting anyone but yourself in most cases.

31 Elder: John, we don't base our acceptance of the word of wisdom on reason alone. We base our acceptance of it primarily on the fact that God revealed it as His will. If you knew that God had commanded you to abstain from these things, would you than abstain from them?

31 John: Yes. But I believe our Church has revelation and my minister is a good man. If anyone could receive revelation from God, he could. And he says that it is all right to smoke and drink in moderation. He says your word of wisdom contradicts the Bible. Jesus said that it is not that which goes in the body that defiles it but what comes out of the body.

31 Elder: Yes, I am familiar with that passage. You must realize that Jesus was partly speaking in parables there. But first let me say this: I do not wish to appear to be attacking your minister. You feel he could be inspired. Is this not an admission that you believe in the possibility of modern revelation?

31 John: Yes. I do.

31 Elder: Then you should have no prejudice against investigating our claim of many new revelations. You see, John, I do not consider this question of the Word of Wisdom the primary question. If you become convinced that we have a real living prophet as powerful as Moses or Peter, you will have no trouble deciding to accept the word of wisdom.

32 This is the real question: do we have prophets and apostles? Do we have scriptures besides the Bible?

32 Do you remember the story of Cornelius in Acts 10?

32 John: Was he the fellow whom God sent to see Peter?

32 Elder: Yes. That is the man. Did you note that, even though Cornelius was a very good man and was visited by an angel, he still had to go to Peter and the Church of Jesus Christ for baptism. He had revelations before he joined the Church, and he spoke in tongues. But there were apostles and prophets on the earth and the Lord's Church had been set up. So the Lord did not tell Cornelius to set up another church. He sent him to the one that had already been established. Isn't that right, John?

32 John: Yes. I guess it is. But why then does your church claim the true church had to be established again in our day if it was set up in ancient times?

32 Elder: It was revealed to us, John. When Joseph Smith went to the Lord to ask what church he should join, he had no idea but what one of them was the right one. But the Lord told him to "join none of them. " And He told him that he would, in due time, be an instrument in re-establishing the Church of Jesus Christ upon the earth.

33 There was an apostacy, John. That is, the ancient apostles were killed off. The right to perform legal and binding ordinances in the name of God was lost. There was no central prophetic office left to save the saints from drifting away in various directions after their own inclinations. There are many churches which claim to trace their existence back to the apostles; but none of them are like the church described in the New Testament.

33 John, if what I have told you is true, it would be the greatest message you have heard, wouldn't it?

33 John: Yes, it surely would.

33 Elder: I can tell you how to find out for yourself that it is true. Here is a book called the Book of Mormon. [^1]

See part one of this book, " Problem Solving With the Book of Mormon. "

---
Notas:
[^1] Recognizing the Objection
