Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

The Nature of Inspiration, Revelation, and Scripture

Inspiration, revelation, and scripture are all the same in the sense that all three are communication from God. In other words, inspiration is communication from God. Revelation is communication from God. And scripture is communication from God. Hence all three are alike in this one sense: they all are communication from God.

35 This is not to say that all revelation or all scripture is inspiration; although one might say that all revelation and all scripture are inspired of God. (2 Tim. 3:16; 2 Pet. 1:20, 21.) Christians of all denominations agree that the Bible is inspired, meaning that the writers were moved upon, or inspired, by the Holy Ghost. (2 Pet. 1:21.) We are told that the Holy Ghost does not speak of himself (John 16:13). This means that the writers of the scriptures were inspired by God through the Holy Ghost. If we accept the Bible as the word of God, we accept the idea that, when men are inspired to write God's word, this inspiration is, indeed, communication from God. God communicates his word or his will to the mind of an inspired man, who, in turn, writes it.

36 Revelation can take many forms. There are visions such as John had on the Isle of Patmos. (Revelations.) There are dreams such as the one Nebuchadnezzar had which had to be interpreted by Daniel (Daniel 2) The voice of God or an angel may be heard such as the one which awakened the boy Samuel in the night (1 Sam. 3:4-14), or the one which spoke to Moses out of the burning bush. (Ex. 3.) Heavenly visitors may appear such as Gabriel who appeared to Zacharias in the temple (Luke 1:19), or Moses and Elias who appeared on the Mount of Transfiguration. (Matt. 17:1-3.) The Old Testament refers to a remarkable instrument, known as the Urim and Thummim, by which the ancients seers communicated with God. (Ex. 28:1-43; Lev. 8:1-14, etc. God reveals or communicates his will every time he heals the sick or performs any kind of miracle. All of these forms of revelation are forms of communication from God. Hence, it would be proper to say that all revelation is communication from God. This definition of revelation is in agreement with any standard theological dictionary definitions

36 The most common form of revelation is inspiration. As pointed out above, all scripture is inspired . John's record of his visions was inspired. The visions themselves came from God and were revelation; but, when John recorded them, he needed to be inspired of God in order to make a true and proper record of these visions. When Peter, Paul, and the other authors of New Testament books undertook to write their testimonies and instructions, they were inspired. Indeed, our acceptance of these books implies an admission that they were inspired. The purpose of the early councils which determined the canon of the scripture was to declare this book or that wholly inspired or not inspired. For centuries the books of the Bible have been universally accepted as inspired. This automatically means that every account or record in the Bible is inspired, making inspiration the most common form of revelation.

37 Besides that, the Bible is full of inspired accounts of inspiration. The patriarch, Jacob, by inspiration, crossed his hands and gave Ephraim the first blessing instead of Manasseh who was the elder. (Gen. 48:13, 14.) By inspiration, the servant of Abraham found a suitable wife for Isaac. (Gen. 24.) By inspiration, David knew that the God of Israel would not fail him in his fight with Goliath. (1 Sam. 17:37.) By inspiration, Peter knew that Jesus was the Christ. (Matt. 16:13-16.) And Jesus called this inspiration a revelation. He said that our Heavenly Father revealed this testimony to Peter. Many times it was inspiration which led Paul and his fellow missionaries from one place to another. It was inspiration which settled the circumcision dispute for those who were obedient to the decision. (Acts 15.) Peter said, " It seemed good to us and to the Holy Ghost to lay no greater burden on you. (v. 28, bold face added.)

37 It appears that in none of the above cases-or in the hundreds like them-was a voice heard or a personage seen or a vision beheld. But the voice of the Spirit communicated the mind of God to a man or to men. Since it was the mind of God communicating to the mind of man, one is compelled to agree that inspiration is revelation if he agrees with the commonly accepted truth that revelation is communication with God.

38 It would be well at this point to sum up what we have presented so far in the paragraphs above. We have said or implied (1) that revelation is any form of communication from God, (2) that scripture is the written record, or form, or description of any kind of communication from God, (3) that inspiration is a form of revelation in which the five mortal senses apparently are not involved, (4) but that inspiration is genuine communication from God, therefore, genuine revelation, (5) and that all three (revelation, scripture, and inspiration) are the same in the sense that all three are communication from God.
