Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Time and Place of Revelation Are Not of the Essence

Time and place of revelation are of no importance to a definition of revelation. That is, a revelation is no more or less a revelation because it occurred at at one time and place instead of another time and place. Time and place are important, especially to those who receive the revelation. But time and place do not determine if an experience is a revelation. In determining whether or not an experience is a revelation, the important question is this: did God communicated

38 Nearly 2000 years before Christ, God told Abraham to get out of the land of his fathers and go to a place where he would be shown. About four hundred years later the same God told Moses to go back to Egypt and set the Israelites free. When about 400 more years had passed away the same God told Samuel to let the people of Israel put on the yoke of monarchy in accordance with their own foolish desires. And from time to time this same God spoke by one means or another to his servants the prophets-and to many others who had no prophetic callings.

39 The point of this discussion is this: when God spoke to Abraham, it was no less revelation than when he spoke to or revealed his will to a man. By definition this constituted revelation. Time or place was not of the essence. The question was whether or not God communicated in each case.

39 The same principle would apply now. If God were to communicate his mind or will to the mind of man, it would be revelation today just the same as it was revelation yesterday. There is nothing about our time which would allow us to define God's communications with us as not being revelation while these same communications would have been revelation at an earlier date. It is not a question of when, but if God were to communicate with us today, it would be revelation just the same as it would have been in any other time.

39 Let us use an example which will illustrate the principle under discussion by drawing a parallel. Suppose we were to say that when Brutus and Caesar spoke to each other, it was conversation; but, when the president of our country and his secretary of state speak to each other, it is not conversation, because conversation is a Latin word and we do not speak Latin in our time. Of course, this is a silly argument. It is not the word, but the idea which it conveys which is important. And it is not the time, but the nature of the operation, which is important. The Romans conversed with each other. We converse with each other. It is the same operation in each case.

40 The Lord spoke to ancient man. We call that revelation. If he were to speak to modern man, it would be revelation. It would be the same operation as it was in ancient times.

40 Since inspiration is a form of revelation, we can say also that, if God inspires modern man, it is revelation. It boils down to this: if you believe you can be inspired or any man can be inspired today, you must accept the possibility of modern revelation.
