Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Dialogue Illustrating Importance of Definitions

Earlier we left John and the elder in a predicament. John had just given the following speech.

43 John: I believe prayers can be answered; but I don't believe that this is revelation like the ancient prophets received. It is a sort of an inspiration. We believe that the Holy Spirit can guide us and give us grace. But we don't believe in revelation besides the Bible.

43 Elder: I'm reminded of a statement Paul made in 2 Cor. 3:6: " The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life. " We don't want to worship words, do we?

43 John: I suppose not. What do you mean?

43 Elder: For instance, if you saw five cows out in a field, you couldn't change one of them into a horse just by calling it a horse, could you?

43 John: No. But if everybody called cows horses and horses cows, it would be just as good as calling cows cows and horses and horses.

43 Elder: Exactly. Except for the etymological problems that would arise, you are right. And the common people couldn't care less about etymology. You see, it is the concept that is important. Words simply are a means of conveying concepts from one person to another. So we agree to accept the word cow to convey the cow idea or concept.

43 Now, John, would you agree that conversation is one means of conveying ideas from one person to another?

44 John: Yes.

44 Elder: Is it the only means?

44 John: No. There are others, I suppose.

44 Elder: Yes. For instance, you can say " I love you to your parent, child, sweetheart, or wife by a look. Other emotions, like fear, hate, and anger, can tell more than words sometimes. And often are far more honest than words. Also, there are many non-verbal signals that convey ideas from one person to another.

44 Would it be correct to say that all of these are means of communication?

44 John: Yes.

44 Elder: My dictionary says that the theological definition of revelation is an act of disclosure by any means by God to man. It can be by word of mouth, by signs, by His divine law, or any other conceivable means. In other words, revelation is communication from God to man. Would you agree with this concept?

44 John: Yes.

44 Elder: If your wife said she loved you by a look or a touch would it be any less communication than if she said it with words?

44 John: No.

44 Elder: Would one type of revelation from God be any less revelation than another type?

45 John: Well, some revelations would be greater than others; but all would be revelations.

45 Elder: Exactly. The important thing is whether or not God actually communicates something to man. Isn't that right??

45 John: Yes

45 Elder: Well, John. If you prayed for wisdom and God really gave you an answer, wouldn't that be communication from God?

45 John: But I wouldn't have to see or hear Him to get an answer.

45 Elder: Exactly. God has another means of communication with man. It is called inspiration. But, if there is a message conveyed by the Holy Spirit from the mind of God to the mind of man, a real communication has occurred, hasn't it?

45 John: I suppose so. But we think of revelation as something more like what the apostles received.

45 Elder: Let us consider the Bible for a moment. Take Peter's statement in 2 Pet. 1:21. There he tells us that " The prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." As we read the scriptures, we find that, in most cases, there is no record of a voice being heard or an angel appearing. The prophet simply speaks. All of Jesus' words were inspired of God and they are considered revelation and scripture. Do you agree?

45 John: Yes. I see you are right.

46 Elder: Take the case where Peter and the Brethren solved the circumcision problem. No sense-perceived experience occurred involving communication from God. Yet, when Peter wrote a letter to send to the Grecian saints, he said that " it seemed good to us and to the Holy Ghost" to do as they did.

46 If you will read John 14, 15, and 16, you will see that the Spirit was to cause the saints to remember things, learn things, prophecy things, and have discernment about good and evil. Anything the Holy Ghost does or says comes from God. (John 16:13) So it would be revelation by definition since revelation is communication from God.
