Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Does the Bible Teach There Will Be No More Revelation?

As explained earlier, there are now an increasing number who admit, even claim, modern revelation. No one who has been taught the scientific principles of uniformity and replication would be likely to believe there were prophets in ancient times if there aren't any now, and visa versa. However, we still have thousands of ministers and their followers who cling to the tradition that the Bible teaches that revelation will cease. They cite certain passages to try to prove this contention. We will discuss some of these passages here in order to give the reader an idea of what to expect.

47 The most common Bible reference which is used by those who claim revelation has ceased is Rev. 22:18, 19, which says,

47 " For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this book, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book:

48 "And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this book"

48 It has been supposed by many that the " book " referred to in the above passage is the whole Bible itself. But this is a supposition that is not warranted by the facts. The Bible has been in its present form so many hundred of years that we tend to think of it as always having been this way. But at the time the book of Revelations was written, the New Testament did not exist as a book. It was several lifetimes later that Revelations (or the Apocalypse, as it is sometimes called) definitely was accepted as a part of the collection of books we now call the New Testament. And there is no reason to believe that it was placed at the end of the collection for any reason involving its age.

48 If we are to conclude that the ban on adding or substracting from the Apocalypse is a declaration that there will be no more revelation, what are we to do with Deut. 4:2 and Deut. 12:32 which say essentially the same thing as Rev. 22:18, 19? Obviously these passages all make it clear that the Lord does not want any of His revelations molested by man. Man is not to add to or take away from the revelations of God. But does God say He will not give more? The Apocalypse itself foretells many future events that involve the appearance of angels and other divine manifestations which are, by definitions revelation.

48 Another old favorite of those who say revelation has ceased is 1 Cor. 13:8, which says,

49 "Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there by knowledge, it shall vanish away"

49 The correct interpretation of this passage is found by a careful reading of the context. Paul was using analogies. He was saying that the mortal man is to the perfect man what a mortal child is to a mortal man. Also he was saying that revelation, as we have it, is like " seeing through a glass darkly." When we see and know all things, these partial glimpses into eternity will seem as nothing and no longer be necessary. The question here is When will prophecy fail? The answer: when " that which is perfect is come. " This passage does not indicate an end of revelation while mortal man remains. A better case could be made for an opposite interpretation, since imperfection so obviously still abides.

49 Matt. 11:13 says that "...all the prophets and the law prophesied until John." This means that all the prophets foretold the coming of Christ until John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, or Elias. To prophesy meant to foretell or testify of Jesus. (See Rev. 19:10.) But many anti-"Mormon" sermons and tracts have been written using this passage as evidence that revelation would cease. They say that there has been no new prophecy since John the Baptist. Any prophecy in the Bible after that date can be found in the Old Testament. Hence, there is no need of modern revelation.

49 This idea we counter with these suggestions: (1) Prophecy is not the only form of revelation. (2) Even if there were no new prophecies in it, the New Testament is all revelation and was all written after John. (3) Jesus said all the prophets prophesied. What did they prophesy? They all prophesied His coming. (See also Luke 24:25, 44.) Yet each prophesy-even though a repetition of what a former prophet had said-was considered a prophecy. Jeremiah was no less a prophet when he foretold Christ because Isaiah had already done it. In the same way, John the Revelator was no less a prophet in having the testimony of Jesus than was John the Baptist. And, if God revealed many future events to John the Revelator, this was no less a revelation because many of the same things had been revealed to Daniel.

50 The following passage from 2 Tim. 3:14-17 is a great favorite of the anti-revelation faction.

50 " But continue thou in the things which thou has learned and has been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them;

50 And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

50 All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrines for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:

50 That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. "

50 In using the above passage against revelation, their argument runs along these lines: " If Timothy had enough to make him "wise unto salvation," why do we need more than him? Besides, verse sixteen says that " all scripture is given." If it has all been given, why expect more?

51 They also quote Acts 20, verses 20 and 27, and interpret them the same way. If Paul " held back nothing " and declared "all the counsel of God" to the Ephesians, why should we think there would be any more?

51 These interpretations are obviously incorrect. They are so ridiculous that a person would think a third-grader would not make such a mistake in his reading. Yet these mistaken interpretations have worked in no-one knows how many cases.

51 The simple and obvious meaning, when explained, may suffice in many cases. But there is a better way. It is the way explained in Orson Pratt's Works. [^1] If Timothy and the Ephesian saints had all or enough, why was the whole New Testament added after their time? Timothy had only the Old Testament. If it is enough, why accept the New Testament? Most passages that are interpreted as meaning that revelation should cease can be handled by this simple device.

51 It is recommended that prospective missionaries read all of Orson Pratt's Works, but especially Chapter One of Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon, "Introduction-To Expect More Revelation Is Not Unscriptural, etc.," page 107ff.

pages 114, 115 (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1945

---
Notas:
[^1] Recognizing the Objection
