Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Prayer and Revelation [^1]

Missionary: Do you agree that any time the Lord communicates His mind and will to man, by any means, it is an act of revelation?

54 Fred: Yes, I do.

54 Missionary: And it wouldn't matter when He did it would it?

54 Fred: No.

54 Missionary: The important thing is not when He did it, but if He did it. Isn't that right, Fred?

54 Fred: Yes, it is.

54 Missionary: When God spoke to Moses, was that revelation?

54 Fred: Yes.

54 Missionary: When God spoke to Paul, was that revelation?

54 Fred: Yes.

54 Missionary: If God were to speak today to any person whom He chose, would that be revelation?

55 Fred: Yes.

55 Missionary: When Peter knew in his heart that Ananias and his wife lied to him, he did not hear a voice or see anything; but it was still a revelation from God, wasn't it?

55 Fred: Yes, I suppose so.

55 Missionary: The Bible is full of such cases where revelation came from the mind of God to the mind of man through the Holy Ghost without any sense-perceived experience, isn't it?

55 Fred: Yes. It is.

55 Missionary: Do you believe the Bible teaches us to pray?

55 Fred: Yes, I do.

55 Missionary: Does it also teach that prayers will be answered?

55 Fred: Of course. If prayers could not be answered, there would be no point in praying.

55 Missionary: Which would be better-to pray for wisdom or for riches?

55 Fred: Wisdom.

55 Missionary: If you prayed for wisdom, and your prayers were answered, what would that be?

55 Fred: Yes, I see. It would be revelation, wouldn't it? But wait. Maybe it would only be inspiration. Isn't there a difference?

56 Missionary: Inspiration is only a form of revelation. That is why I got you to agree that any communication from God by any means and at any time is revelation. Do you remember?

56 Fred: Yes, I do. That is right, too, isn't it?

56 Missionary: Indeed it is. And it is exactly what the apostle James was inspired to write in the first part of his book.

56 "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

56 But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed.

56 For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. " (James 1:5-7.)

56 Do you believe that this Bible promise was made only to the people of James' day, or would it apply as well today as then.

56 Fred: Well, if it didn't apply today, how could we be sure anything else in the Bible would apply today? And what good would there be in the Bible at all?

56 Missionary: It was reading that passage which caused Joseph Smith to ask God which church he should join.

56 Can you see Fred, that anyone who teaches that revelation has ceased is teaching that prayers cannot be answered?

57 Fred: Yes, I see that.

57 Missionary: And this would be in contradiction to the teachings of the Bible, wouldn't it?

57 Fred: It certainly would.

See Matt. 7:7-11; Matt. 21:21, 22; John 14:12-14; and James 1:5-7.

---
Notas:
[^1] Recognizing the Objection
