Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Salvation and Revelation

Missionary: Do you believe it is basic to the teachings of the Bible and the faith of the Christians that men can be saved in our day as well as in ancient times?

57 Fred: I most certainly do.

57 Missionary: On whose terms can they be saved, God's terms or their own terms?

57 Fred: Why, only on God's terms, of course. We cannot dictate to God the conditions under which we must be saved.

57Missionary: Is it not true that Jesus said a man must be born of the water and the Spirit to be saved? [^1]

57 Fred: Yes. That is true.

57 Missionary: If a man is born of the Spirit, he will receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, won't he?

57 Fred: Yes, he will.

57 Missionary: Let us turn to John 14, 15, and 16 to see what was promised through the Comforter or gift of the Holy Ghost.

58 "And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;

58 Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. "

58 (John 14:16, 17.)

58 "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

58 (John 14:26.)

58 "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me: "

58 (John 15:26.)

58 "Nevertheless I will tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.

58 And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:

58 Of sin, because they believe not on me;

58 Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;

58 Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

58 I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.

59 Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come.

59 He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you. "

59 (John 16:7-14.)

59 Missionary: In the passages which we have just read, Jesus promised that the Holy Ghost would do such things as these:

59 1. Speak only what He " heard " from God.

59 2. Reveal things to come.

59 3. Cause a recollection of things.

59 4. Teach all things.

59 5. Discern or reveal the good and evil in the world.

59 If the Holy Ghost did these things, would they not all constitute revelation?

59 Fred: Yes, they would.

59 Missionary: The New Testament is full of accounts of the apostles experiencing these and other gifts of the Spirit. And not just the apostles; but the gifts of the Spirit followed the believers, and signs were promised to the believers. (Mark 16:17, 18.) Can you think of anything the Holy Ghost could do that would not be revelation?

59 Fred: No, I can't. Well, maybe healing, isn't it a gift of the Spirit?

59 Missionary: Yes, it is; and revelation is involved in healing. The one who heals has to know by revelation in his heart and mind what is the will of the Lord and when he is permitted to exercise his gift to heal. Further-more is it not a revelation of the power and existence of God when a person is healed?

60 Fred: Yes, I see that it is. I had never thought of it that way.

60 Missionary: If you will read Acts 1 and 2, you will find that Jesus told the disciples to tarry in a certain place until they had received the " promise" of the gift of the Holy Ghost. You will find further that this " promise" was fulfilled and that Peter, in commenting on it said,

60 " Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

60 For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. "

60 (Acts 2:38, 39.)

60 Notice, Fred, that Peter said that the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost was for all who are called, that is, called to salvation, whether they were in that generation, the next generations or any " afar off " generation. Isn't that right?

60 Fred: Yes, I see that it is.

60 Missionary: Then, Fred, can anyone be saved without receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost?

60 Fred: No. They certainly cannot.

61 Missionary: Could the Holy Ghost be operating in any way if there were no revelation today?

61 Fred: No.

61 Missionary: Then, if anyone teaches that revelation has ceased, he is teaching that no one can be saved any more, isn't he?

61 Fred: Yes, he is.

61 Missionary: Isn't that contrary to the Bible?

61 Fred: Yes.

61 Missionary: Would you feel the Lord would want you to believe a man who teaches things contrary to the Bible or would want you to belong to a church which advocates ideas in serious and direct comost basic Bible teachings?

61 Fred: No, I would not.

John 3:3-5

---
Notas:
[^1] Recognizing the Objection
