Glenn L. Pearson, Book of Mormon, Key to Conversion ( 1963)

Things of God and Revelation

Missionary: There is another aspect to this which we should examine Fred. Throughout this discussion we have been talking about interpretation of the Bible. We have recognized the fact that the ministers of the Christian Churches have commonly interpreted certain Bible passages as teaching that there should be no revelation besides the Bible or since the days when it was written. As I said earlier, we do not agree with the interpretation of these ministers. Do you suppose that the members of the ancient church of Christ had any disagreements about interpretation?

62 Fred: I imagine they did since they were human.

62 Missionary: Yes, they did. The New Testament tells about many of these disagreements. To whom did they turn for clarification when they had disagreements?

62 Fred: To the apostles.

62 Missionary: Correct. Why did they turn to the apostles?

62 Fred: Because they were inspired men of God.

62 Missionary: Right. Fred, would you agree that the Bible is a thing of God?

62 Fred: Yes, I would.

62 Missionary: Peter said that the prophecy of the scripture was not to be interpreted privately-that is, by uninspired men; because it was given in old times by the power of the Holy Ghost. (2 Pet. 1:20, 21.) If it was given by the power of the Holy Ghost, by what power should it be interpreted?

62 Fred: The same power, I suppose, the Holy Ghost.

62 Missionary: We agreed a minute ago that the Bible is a thing of God. Let me read from Paul's first letter to the Corinthians about how the things of God are understood.

62 "For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

62 Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

63 Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

63 But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned."

63 (1 1 Cor. 2:11-14.)

63 Missionary: Paul says here that the things of God are only understood by the Spirit of God and that a "natural man" who does not have the Spirit cannot understand them. If the Bible is a thing of God, who can understand A, Fred?

63 Fred: Only someone who has the Spirit of God.

63 Missionary: If the Spirit of God explained the Bible to someone or caused him to understand it, what would he have received?

63 Fred: Revelation.

63 Missionary: If a minister were to say that revelation has ceased, would he not be saying that interpretation of the Bible is impossible?

63 Fred: Yes, I guess he would.

63 Missionary: Then you couldn't accept that man's interpretation of the Bible, could you?

63 Fred: No. But couldn't he understand it a little?

63 Missionary: Perhaps a little. You see, the Spirit of Christ works on us all and we are able to understand some things that are very simple, like the stories of the Bible and such things as where the apostles went and what they did, etc. But the real important things, like the theology would be understood only be revelation.

64 To sum it up, Fred, if a minister claims that the Bible says that revelation has ceased, he is interpreting the Bible. But the Bible says it cannot be interpreted unless the interpreter has revelation. So, it would be foolish to accept any interpretation by a man who claims he has no revelation.

64 However, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints claims to interpret the Bible by revelation. We claim to have modern prophets and apostles to save us from division and disagreement. Isn't this a wonderful claims? And wouldn't it be a great blessing if it were true?

64 Fred: Yes.
