When I was 12, my local boys’ group went on a road trip with many stops from Elkhorn, Wisconsin, to Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. We arrived, and there it was: the big, beautiful Salt Lake Temple. I had never heard of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and knew nothing about temples, except that only members of the Church could enter them.

But something unusual happened. I heard a voice in my head clearly say, “You will enter that temple one day.” I thought it was strange, but I didn’t dwell on it.

Over a decade later, my mother’s best friend, Millee, had joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. My wife and I planned a trip to Colorado to find a location for my dental practice, and Millee encouraged us to visit Temple Square on our trip. My wife loved the idea, so we extended our trip to Salt Lake City.

When we arrived, we visited every building on Temple Square and spoke with the missionaries. We loved everything we learned and felt a peace we later would recognize as the Holy Spirit.

After the trip, we called Millee and told her we would be interested in joining the Church. She squealed with delight and invited us to chat with her and her husband, Bob. They helped us meet other members, which led us to attend an institute class and eventually meet with the missionaries.

We loved the teachings of the restored gospel and felt the Spirit. Bob baptized my wife and me, and he and Millee helped us prepare to enter the temple. One year later, they again showed their support by driving us almost 800 miles (1,290 km) to the Washington D.C. Temple to receive endowment and sealing ordinances.

As newlyweds, my wife and I both were stubborn. We would disagree and argue about things that didn’t really matter, and it had worn down our relationship. Our marriage wouldn’t have lasted if we had kept going down the road we were on.

But making eternal covenants in the house of the Lord has made all the difference. Our temple covenants changed the focus from “me” to “we.” We learned to value our eternal relationship instead of focusing on our own needs as individuals. Eventually, we became “of one heart and one mind” (Moses 7:18), which vastly improved our course, connection, and communication.

The temple and our relationship with Jesus Christ helped us see what really matters. We have been blessed with 4 daughters, 15 grandchildren, and 1 great-granddaughter—all of whom are here because of temple covenants.

President Russell M. Nelson taught: “Once we make a covenant with God, we leave neutral ground forever. God will not abandon His relationship with those who have forged such a bond with Him. In fact, all those who have made a covenant with God have access to a special kind of love and mercy.”

I have felt God’s love for me through my covenants. He has opened my eyes to all that is wonderful around me. I find joy and eternal perspective in my life through covenanting with Him.

The author lives in Utah, USA.
