I serve as president of a small branch of the Church formed in September 2024. About two-thirds of our members are youth. They come to church weekly, most of them traveling several kilometers. Some walk; some ride bicycles.

The parents of many of these youth are not members of the Church, but they have allowed their children to be baptized. Recently, I met with one of the parents. He wanted to know more about the Church his son was attending.

“I’ve seen a lot of change in my son,” he said. “He’s a different person. He’s obedient and nice at home. I want to find out why.”

This father came to church and saw for himself that the Savior’s teachings and restored gospel were what had changed his son’s behavior. “Now I know that where my son goes is a nice place,” he said afterward. “I will allow others to come too.”

In my branch last year, over 30 youth were baptized. In the next two to three years, we will see a lot of missionaries serving from the branch. We are happy for them. Our work here is to provide opportunities for them to deepen their conversion to Jesus Christ and His restored gospel. So, we make sure that we enroll them in Church programs like seminary and institute to prepare them well.

When I finished my mission, we had only 12 branches in all of Kenya. Today we have over 100 units. It’s amazing to see the way the Church is growing, especially in western Kenya.

One of the reasons my branch has a huge number of young people is that member missionary work among the youth is very effective here. Most of them go to the same school, and they invite each other to church. This has created a lot of optimism.

Another factor that has contributed to growth in Kenya is returned missionaries. They are a great strength to the Church. When they return from their missions, they return home with faith in Jesus Christ and a testimony of His restored gospel. They have developed leadership skills. They stay in the Church. They marry other members of the Church. Their children grow up in the Church. And their children become a strength to the Church.

One more factor is the pioneer members who lived in Nairobi in the 1990s and early 2000s. Now they are retired and going back to their villages in rural Kenya. They carry their testimonies with them, they are trusted, and they share the gospel with relatives and friends.

The life of a member of the Church in the 1990s, however, was a challenge in Nairobi because there were a lot of newspaper articles against the Church.

I’m glad Church members back then were faithful and steadfast. They endured a lot of things. But many Saints were role models wherever they went and in whatever they were doing. That made a big difference.

During my mission, I had the opportunity to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ to my brothers and sisters in Kenya and Uganda. More important, I gained a testimony of Jesus Christ. When I returned home in 1997, I was a different creature (see 2 Corinthians 5:17).

I had the opportunity to serve with companions from different countries. Most of them told me they were going back to college after their missions. I found myself wanting the same thing.

My companions gave me a lot of hope, but going back to my humble life and home after my mission was a culture shock. However, I knew that Heavenly Father would help me, so I was able to live through that time with much faith and hope.

Using loans from the Church Educational System given to returned missionaries, I was able to study. I earned my diploma in medical laboratory, graduating in 2002. Since then, I have had the blessing of serving in many Church callings. When I came to western Kenya, under area leadership we started a group of the Church in Kakamega. That group grew into a branch that has now been divided into two branches.

Currently we hold meetings in a tent that seats about 100. We leave one side open for overflow. Sometimes when there is overflow, people sit under the nearby trees.

For now we only hold sacrament meeting. Some of our branch members walk two hours to and from church just to attend, take the sacrament, and enjoy each other.

The message that appeals to our young members is the sense of belonging they feel when they come to church. They know church is a refuge where they hear the gospel of Jesus Christ and become men and women of character. They know people care about them. They know church is a place where they learn truth, virtues, honesty, integrity, and hard work. They know that people at church will inspire them to study hard at school.

When I was young, a friend invited me to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I was just a young boy with nothing, but my faith in Jesus Christ and my testimony of His restored gospel grew strong. Church members trusted me and invested their time in me. I am blessed to do the same with young people today.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is true. His doctrine changes people’s lives. And it’s what is changing the lives of young people in Kenya.
