At some point during the infancy of our daughter, Jilly, she wasn’t hitting developmental milestones and often seemed overwhelmed by her surroundings. After many prayers and a series of divinely orchestrated events, we learned she had conductive hearing loss.

At 18 months old, Jilly had a surgery that brought her hearing back. It was a miraculous time, watching her blossom as she started communicating with us. But a few years later, new challenges arose. Once again, we sought answers.

As before, through a series of miracles, we learned Jilly had developed auditory processing disorder, meaning her brain couldn’t interpret sound signals properly. We began working with therapists and doctors to help her navigate the world as she experienced it.

I believed with all my heart that if I prayed and stayed faithful, God would heal our daughter. I knew He had the power to do so, so why didn’t He heal her?

Through all this, I felt like Mary and Martha in the New Testament. They had hoped for healing for their brother, Lazarus, but God had a greater miracle in mind. By waiting to arrive at their home, Jesus allowed their faith to grow in ways that would bring glory to the Father and the Son and point to the potential They have in store for our lives.

“Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died,” Mary cried to Jesus after He arrived (John 11:32). He then raised Lazarus from the dead, completely healed.

My answer, like Mary and Martha’s, came in an unexpected way. One morning, this quiet thought entered my mind: “Your daughter doesn’t need healing; she needs love and acceptance.”

At first, I had difficulty accepting this answer. I wanted Jilly to be free from struggles. But as I opened my heart, I realized that God’s plan for our daughter was more beautiful than I had imagined. He knew this experience would help our family grow in faith and trust.

It hasn’t been easy watching Jilly face her challenges. But through this journey, I’ve learned that God’s timing and plans are always perfect. He knows when to be there for us. All we need to do is trust that He always will be.
