I am from Ponce, Puerto Rico. I am currently serving a full-time mission in Las Vegas, Nevada. Reading the Liahona (Spanish) regularly has helped me become a better person and a better missionary. Many times, conversion stories shared in the magazine help me better understand the experiences investigators are going through. Being aware of their needs helps me as I teach them the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Elder Alex González
Nevada Las Vegas Mission

There is much to prayerfully consider in Seito No Michi (Japanese). The counsel in the messages and articles can help us in our daily lives.

I believe that one of my most important responsibilities as a member of the Church is to share the magazine with others and introduce them to the valuable information within its pages—and to the gospel.

Masaru Fukuoka
Ogaki Branch, Nagoya Japan West Stake

During the five years since I was baptized, Seito No Michi (Japanese) has always been by my side. Of the many magazines published in Japanese, this is the one most precious to me.

Knowing how valuable the magazine is to me, I am glad to know that it is available to the Saints in so many languages around the world.

Yukiko Matsuura
Groveland Second Ward, Blackfoot Idaho South Stake

More than two years ago I became a member of the Church. I’ll never forget the day that I met a friend from Canada who told me about the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. Now I am the second counselor in the Port-au-Prince Central Branch presidency.

The Book of Mormon is my constant companion and comfort. I read it daily. Its teachings give me insight into the other standard works.

My other reading companion is L’Etoile (French). It is a superb magazine that inspires me a great deal. I always enjoy articles on Saints in other parts of the world.

Jude W. Jean-Baptiste
Port-au-Prince Haiti South District, Haiti Port-au-Prince Mission

I travel about 70 miles each day commuting to and from work. The Liahona (Spanish) is one of my traveling companions. The magazine is a wonderful balm. It comforts me, renews me, inspires me, and helps me feel closer to Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer.

Magdalena de Pitta
San Isidro Ward, San Miguelito Panama Stake
