Nephi and Lehi, Helaman’s sons, were named after the Lehi and Nephi who had left Jerusalem. Helaman wanted his sons to be righteous like them. Hel. 5:4–7

Helaman taught his sons to believe in Jesus Christ. They learned that forgiveness of sin comes through faith and repentance. Hel. 5:9–12

Nephi and Lehi went as missionaries to teach the word of God to the Nephites and the Lamanites. Thousands of people were baptized. Hel. 5:14–19

When Nephi and Lehi went to the land of Nephi, an army of Lamanites threw them into prison and left them there for many days without food. Hel. 5:20–22

The Lamanites came to kill Nephi and Lehi, but they were protected by a ring of fire. The Lamanites dared not touch them for fear of being burned. Hel. 5:23

Nephi and Lehi were not burned by the fire. They told the Lamanites that the power of God was protecting them. Hel. 5:24–26

The earth shook, and the walls of the prison trembled. A cloud of darkness covered all the people in the prison; they were afraid. Hel. 5:27–28

A voice spoke through the darkness, saying, “Repent ye, repent ye, and seek no more to destroy my servants whom I have sent unto you.” Hel. 5:29

The voice was not a voice of thunder. It was not loud. It was quiet, like a whisper, yet everyone could hear it. Hel. 5:30

The voice spoke three times, and the ground and the prison walls shook. The Lamanites couldn’t run away. It was too dark, and they were too frightened. Hel. 5:31–34

A man who was once a Nephite saw through the darkness that Nephi’s and Lehi’s faces were shining. Hel. 5:35–36

Nephi and Lehi were talking and looking up toward heaven. The man told the Lamanites to look. They wondered to whom Nephi and Lehi were talking. Hel. 5:37–38

The man, who was named Aminadab, told them that Nephi and Lehi were talking to angels of God. Hel. 5:39

The Lamanites asked how to get rid of the cloud of darkness. Aminadab told them to repent and to pray to God until they had faith in Jesus Christ. Hel. 5:40–41

Alma, Amulek, and Zeezrom had already taught these Lamanites about Jesus. They prayed until the dark cloud was gone. Hel. 5:42

When the darkness left, the people saw a pillar of fire around all of them, The fire did not burn them or the prison walls. Hel. 5:43–44

The Lamanites felt great joy, and the Holy Spirit of God filled their hearts. Hel. 5:45

A pleasant voice whispered to them, “Peace, peace be unto you, because of your faith in my Well Beloved.” Hel. 5:46–47

The Lamanites were blessed because of their faith in Jesus Christ. Angels came down from heaven to be with them and help them. Hel. 5:48

About three hundred people saw and heard these things. They went out to tell others what they had seen and heard. Hel. 5:49–50

Most of the Lamanites believed them and put away their weapons of war. Hel. 5:51

The Lamanites stopped hating the Nephites and gave back the land taken from them. Hel. 5:52

The Lamanites became a righteous people, even more righteous than the Nephites. Many Lamanites went with Nephi and Lehi to teach the Nephites. Hel. 6:1, 6
