Heavenly Father has given you agency—the power to choose between right and wrong, good and evil.

When you decide to choose the right, you are setting a standard for yourself. A standard is a pattern that guides your life. Good standards will help you keep the commandments of God and be obedient.

“My Gospel Standards,” found on the back of the Primary My Achievement Days booklet, can help you begin to set standards for your life. Use these standards to guide you. They will help you make important choices and be obedient.

There is a set of “My Gospel Standards” cards on the next page. Below, under “Instructions,” is a list of activities that use the cards. On the blank card, write in an additional standard that you feel will especially help you be obedient to Heavenly Father’s commandments.

Let us know how you have used “My Gospel Standards” to make important choices. Write about your experiences, and send them to:

“My Gospel Standards”

International Magazines, Floor 25

50 East North Temple Street

Salt Lake City, Utah 84150 USA

Remove pages 15–16 from the magazine and cut out the cards along the dark lines on page 16. The cards may be reinforced with a clear plastic covering or with transparent tape. Use the cards for the following activities:

1.  At a family home evening, have your family sit in a circle. As they sing “Choose the Right Way” (Children’s Songbook, 160; The Friend, June 1995, 12), pass one of the “My Gospel Standards” cards around the circle. When the song ends, have the family member holding the card read the standard aloud and then tell how that standard could help him or her choose the right. Selecting a different card each time, play several games.

2.  Choose one card to memorize, and try to live that standard for a week. Read the card many times each day, and think about how you can follow that standard.

3.  Mount two envelopes on a sheet of paper. Place all the cards in one envelope. When you memorize a standard, move that card from one envelope to the other.

4.  With a group of friends or family, divide into two teams. Give each team one card. Tell each team to sing a phrase from as many Primary songs or Church hymns as they can that help them remember to keep that standard. Change cards after every round.

5.  With the permission of a parent, place the cards around the house to help you and the other members of your family remember the standards. For example, mount “I will read and watch only those things that are pleasing to Heavenly Father” on the television.

6.  When you notice one of your friends or family members keeping one of the standards, write them a note saying that you noticed.

I will remember my baptismal covenants and listen to the Holy Ghost.

I will be honest with Heavenly Father, others, and myself.

I will seek good friends and treat others kindly.

I will dress modestly to show respect for Heavenly Father and myself.

I will only read and watch things that are pleasing to Heavenly Father.

I will only listen to music that is pleasing to Heavenly Father.

I will use the names of Heavenly Father and Jesus reverently. I will not swear or use crude words.

I will keep my mind and body sacred and pure, and I will not partake of things that are harmful to me.

I will do those things on the Sabbath that will help me feel close to Heavenly Father.

I will choose the right. I know I can repent when I make a mistake.

I will live now to be worthy to go to the temple and serve a mission. I will follow Heavenly Father’s plan for me.

I am a child of God

I know Heavenly Father loves me, and I love him.

I can pray to Heavenly Father anytime, anywhere.

I am trying to follow Jesus.

1.  Invite several parents to share family rules and why it is important for the children in their families to obey those rules. Discuss the rules of kindness and reverence that make Primary a happy place to be.

2.  Read Exodus 20:7 [Ex. 20:7] aloud with the children. Explain to them that the names of Father in Heaven and his Son Jesus Christ are holy, sacred, and important. That is why we use the names of Heavenly Father and Jesus reverently.

3.  Have the younger children sing “Quickly I’ll Obey” (Children’s Songbook, 197). Let them pantomime things their mothers or fathers might ask them to do.
