Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Preface

Peter said: "Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you."

Many of the answers and much of the inspired reasoning needed by the saints to comply with this counsel is found in the New Testament.

Peter himself recorded his testimony and preserved in writing his doctrinal explanations so "that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance."

There is a crying need in the Church today for more real gospel scholarship, for a knowledge of the doctrines of salvation.

We need to know the doctrines found in the Standard Works, to instil into our souls the inspired teachings of Holy Writ.

Volume III of this Doctrinal New Testament Commentary is designed to help fulfil these needs. The New Testament contains a blueprint of the gospel; it charts a course leading to eternal life in God's kingdom. The Lord has preserved it for us so that we may enjoy the words of eternal life in this world and be led toward eternal glory in the next.

Since the New Testament was written to the saints, to members of the Church, to those who knew and understood the doctrines of salvation, there is no way to absorb its teachings except to have the background knowledge and the personal revelation possessed by the saints. Accordingly, this volume, which begins with Colossians and continues through the Book of Revelation, analyzes doctrinal truths in the light of latter-day revelation.

This work is not a church publication; I alone am responsible for the interpretations and views set forth.

As with the two previous volumes, I find it difficult to overstate how greatly I am indebted to Velma Harvey, my very able and conscientious secretary. She has performed indispensable and superior service. -Bruce R. McConkie Salt Lake City, Utah December 1, 1972

ABBREVIATIONS

Scriptural references are abbreviated in a standard self-identifying way. Other books are cited by author and title, except the following: Commentary I-Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, Volume I, The Gospels Commentary II -Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, Volume II, Acts-Philippians Dummelow-J. R. Dummelow, The One Volume Bible Commentary I. V.-Joseph Smith, Inspired Version of Bible, First Edition Jamieson-Robert Jamieson, A. R. Fausset, and David Brown, Commentary on the Whole Bible Mormon Doctrine-Bruce R. McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, Second Edition Teachings-Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith
