Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Colossians

As with other congregations of the Lord's saints in time's meridian, false doctrine reared its ugly head among the members of the kingdom in Colosse. These church members were faced with the usual Jewish concepts about the law of Moses with all its performances and rites. But they also seem to have been subjected to the idea that a great concourse of angels ministered between God and man. These angels were supposed to govern in mortal affairs and thereby became the recipients of that worship which is properly reserved for God only.

Accordingly, with true apostolic zeal, Paul wrote to remind the Colossian Saints that true worship centers in Christ and his Father and that the Mosaic system has long since been replaced by the gospel. His statements, among others, that Christ is the Firstborn, the Creator, the Head of the Church, in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwells, are inspired writing of superlative quality. His handling of the Mosaic problem falls into his usual pattern, and his then appended comments about seeking holiness and conforming to gospel standards are wise and appropriate.

Gospel Brings Hope, Blessings, Salvation

SCCol 1 1Col 1 2Col 1 3Col 1 4Col 1 5Col 1 6Col 1 7Col 1 8Col 1 9Col 1 10Col 1 11Col 1 12The gospel consists of those laws, ordained by God the Father, whereby progression and advancement come. Accordingly, every good thing in time and in eternity grows out of and flows from the gospel. There is no blessing, no knowledge, no power, might or dominion, no grace or good thing that will or can be withheld from those who live the gospel. Temporarily God's saints may lack health or wealth or power or influence or many desirable things, but eventually all things shall be theirs, for they are Christ's and Christ is God's. (D. & C. 76:50-70.)

Col 1 11. An apostle] See Commentary II, pp. 130-131, 328-333.

Col 1 22. Saints] See Commentary II, pp. 525-529.

Col 1 2God our Father] Elohim the Father of our spirits. See Commentary II, pp. 154-162.

Col 1 33. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ] Elohim the Father of the mortal body of Christ, his Only Begotten in the flesh.

Col 1 44. Faith in Christ] See Heb. 11:1-3.

Col 1 55. Hope which is laid up for you in heaven] See Commentary II, pp. 262-265. Gospel] See Commentary II, pp. 213-216.

I. V. 6. In all generations] In all dispensations; that is, the same gospel now preached by Paul and accepted by the Colossians had been among the saints in generations past. See Commentary II, pp. 491-493.

Col 1 6K. J. 6. The Grace of God] See Commentary II, pp. 233-238.

Col 1 88. Love in the Spirit] Love is of God. It is shed forth by the Light of Christ upon all mankind. But when it is perfected in the lives of righteous saints it comes as a gift of the Spirit, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Col 1 99. Filled with the knowledge of his will] We can learn the mind and will of the Lord in general—in the general sense of obedience to the basic laws of universal application—by reference to the recorded revelations which God has given. But we can only know the Lord's will where our specific and personal affairs are concerned by personal revelation. Hence, when we conform to the divine will calling for baptism and admission to the kingdom of God on earth, we then receive the gift of the Holy Ghost and are entitled to continuing revelation. Then we can be filled with the knowledge of God's will concerning our personal affairs.

Col 1 9Wisdom] See Jas. 1:1-7.

Col 1 9Spiritual understanding] This is what sets the saints apart from the world. Others may equal or excel them in scientific knowledge, in philosophical comprehension, or in any of the things of the world, but only the saints of God do or can understand the things of God, for these come by revelation. For instance, only the saints understand the atonement, comprehend the doctrines of salvation, enjoy the gifts of the Spirit, receive the spiritual re-birth, exercise faith unto life and salvation, and have a sure hope of eternal life.

Col 1 1010. Walk worthily unto the Lord] 'Remember who you are. Honor the name of Christ, which was placed upon you in the waters of baptism. Keep the commandments.'

Col 1 10Fruitful in every good work] Abounding in righteousness; those who keep the commandments thereby work the works of righteousness and do good continually.

Col 1 1111. Patience] See Jas. 5:7-11.

Col 1 1212. The inheritance of the saints] The kingdom of God on earth, which is the Church, and the kingdom of God in heaven, which is the celestial kingdom; hence, peace in this life and eternal life in the world to come.
