Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The General Epistle of James

To have a book written by the Lord's brother is akin to having one penned by the Master himself. And in this General Epistle we find the son of Joseph, often in language reminiscent of that used by the Son of Mary, setting forth the practical operation of the doctrines taught by his Elder Brother.

James—religious by nature; schooled in the strict Judaism of the day; converted after our Lord's resurrection; and said to have died a martyr's death—took upon himself the awesome responsibility to write an epistle to the saints in the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Paul wrote to the saints of his own day, and if his doctrine and counsel blesses us of later years, so much the better. But James addressed himself to those of the twelve scattered tribes of Israel who belonged to the Church; that is, to a people yet to be gathered, yet to receive the gospel, yet to come into the fold of Christ; and if his words had import to the small cluster of saints of Judah and Benjamin who joined the Church in the meridian of time, so much the better.

He it was who chose the words—"If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally"—which led Joseph Smith to his knees in the Sacred Grove in the Spring of 1820, when the dispensation of the fulness of times was ushered in by the personal appearance of the Supreme Rulers of the Universe.

And then he it was who proceeded to tell the yet-to-be-gathered remnants of the Lord's people how to live after they believed the restored message of salvation. The gospel had to become a living reality in their lives. They must bridle the tongue, cultivate patience, rise above envy and strife, resist evil, avoid respect of persons, use money wisely, cleave unto every good gift—in effect, endure to the end in keeping the commandments of Him whose household James had shared in his youth.

In addition to his ethical teachings and to the memorable 5th verse of the 1st chapter of his writings, James teaches two doctrines with a clarity and perfection not equaled by any Biblical author. He shows, with inspiration and logic beyond question, that faith itself, the very beginning of righteousness, does not and cannot exist unless works are present. And he sets forth the Lord's order where the anointing and healing of the sick in the household of faith is concerned.

Truly our understanding of God and his laws is enriched because James was guided by the Holy Ghost to pen this brief epistle!

Ask God for Wisdom

SCJames 1 1James 1 2James 1 31-3. Our author is addressing himself to the members of the Church; he calls them brethren and speaks of the trial of their faith, which can only mean their faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. And yet he names them as the twelve tribes scattered abroad, meaning the dispersed members of the house of Israel. With the conceivable exception of a few isolated individuals, the whereabouts of the Ten Tribes was unknown to James or any of the meridian saints. The resurrected Lord told the Nephites that his "people at Jerusalem" did not know the location of the "other tribes" because of unbelief. (3 Ne. 16:4.)

SCJames 1 1James 1 2James 1 3Thus, to address an epistle to them is one thing; to put it in their hands for perusal is quite another. It would appear that there is no way to make this delivery until their location is discovered, which may well mean that James was addressing himself in large measure to a people who were yet, and that in a distant day, to be gathered to the fold of Christ. Certainly the memorable fifth verse of this first chapter had more of an effect upon Joseph Smith and the destiny of the Lord's latter-day work than it did upon any person or group in the meridian of time.

SCJames 1 1James 1 2James 1 3It is worthy of note that the Prophet Mormon took a similar approach to his message. Isolated from most of Israel, hidden away as it were on the American Continent, he yet recorded: "I write unto all the ends of the earth; yea, unto you, twelve tribes of Israel, who shall be judged according to your works." (Morm. 3:18.) Clearly the message of James and of Mormon can only be delivered in full measure in that future day when the Lord makes known the identity of the whole house of Israel. So far, again with the exception of a few isolated individuals, the work is going forward among selected tribes.

James 1 11. James] The author of this General Epistle is not known for certain. It is generally believed by Biblical scholars that he is that James who is identified as being the Lord's brother.

SCJames 1 2James 1 3James 1 42-4. Afflictions and trials are a necessary part of mortality; without them we could not be tried and tested, and one of the main purposes of earth life would be lost.

James 1 55. That wisdom which leads to salvation comes from God by revelation. Every person on earth, in or out of the Church, can gain wisdom from the Lord, who is the source and font of all truth and righteousness. Those outside the Church who diligently seek will be led to the gospel of salvation where perfect wisdom resides; those in the Church, when they seek righteousness with all their hearts, will be led along the path of truth and revelation until they know all things and have all wisdom.

James 1 5God's counsel to all men is: "Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto you." (D. & C. 4:7.) Through Brigham Young, he said: "Let him that is ignorant learn wisdom by humbling himself and calling upon the Lord his God, that his eyes may be opened that he may see, and his ears opened that he may hear." (D. & C. 136:32.)

James 1 5The perfect illustration of how this principle operates is shown forth in the experience of Joseph Smith in the ushering in of this dispensation. In the midst of that war of words and tumult of opinions which made up the great religious revival in Western New York in the Spring of 1820, the young Joseph read and pondered the sobering words of James. "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine," he said. "It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible.

James 1 5"At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to 'ask of God,' concluding that if he gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture." (Joseph Smith 2:12-13.)

James 1 5Then followed the most glorious vision of which we have record in the entire history of God's dealings with men—the personal appearance of the Father and the Son, and the consequent ushering in of the greatest of all dispensations, the dispensation of the fulness of times. The long awaited mission and ministry of that prophet who was to do more, "save Jesus only, for the salvation of men in this world, than any other man that ever lived in it" had commenced. (D. & C. 135:3.)

James 1 5Thus, this single verse of scripture has had a greater impact and a more far reaching effect upon mankind than any other single sentence ever recorded by any prophet in any age. It might well be said that the crowning act of the ministry of James was not his martyrdom for the testimony of Jesus, but his recitation, as guided by the Holy Ghost, of these simple words which led to the opening of the heavens in modern times.

James 1 5And it might well be added that every investigator of revealed truth stands, at some time in the course of his search, in the place where Joseph Smith stood. He must turn to the Almighty and gain wisdom from God by revelation if he is to gain a place on that strait and narrow path which leads to eternal life.

James 1 5Personal revelation] See Commentary II, pp. 320-322.

James 1 66. Let him ask in faith] "Without faith shall not anything be shown forth except desolations upon Babylon." (D. & C. 35:11.) "For without faith no man pleaseth God." (D. & C. 63:11.)
