Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

What Is Sin?

SCJames 4 13James 4 14James 4 15James 4 1613-16. Those who have taken upon themselves the name of Christ, who have joined his family, who have chosen him as their Father, are now subject to family discipline. They are no longer free to go and come at will. They must conform to the family pattern of life. Their goings and comings and doings are now subject to the will of the Lord, their new Father. They may plan their own affairs as long as these do not run counter to what the Lord may have in mind. But his preferences prevail. He may want them to go on a proselyting mission, to serve in a bishopric, to preside over an elders quorum. Their obligation is to put first in their lives the things of his kingdom.

James 4 1717. "What is sin? John said: 'All unrighteousness is sin.' (1 John 5:17.) Also: 'Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law; for sin is the transgression of the law.' (1 John 3:4.) Paul taught: 'Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.' (Rom. 14:23.) James explained: 'To him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is sin.' (Jas. 4:17.) It should be noted that all of these statements were addressed to members of the Church who had received the gospel law.

James 4 17"Elder Orson F. Whitney made this explanation: 'Sin is the transgression of divine law, as made known through the conscience or by revelation. A man sins when he violates his conscience, going contrary to light and knowledge—not the light and knowledge that has come to his neighbor, but that which has come to himself. He sins when he does the opposite of what he knows to be right. Up to that point he only blunders. One may suffer painful consequences for only blundering, but he cannot commit sin unless he knows better than to do the thing in which the sin consists. One must have a conscience before he can violate it.' (Saturday Night Thoughts, p. 239.) 'Where there is no law given there is no punishment; and where there is no punishment there is no condemnation.' (2 Ne. 9:25.) 'He that knoweth not good from evil is blameless.' (Alma 29:5.)

James 4 17"Sin cannot be committed unless laws are ordained (Alma 42:17) and unless people have knowledge of those laws so that they can violate them. Adam and Eve could not commit sin while in the Garden of Eden, although laws of conduct had already been established, because the knowledge of good and evil had not yet been given them. Unless they had partaken of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil 'they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.' (2 Ne. 2:23.)" (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 735.)
