Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The First Epistle General of Peter

Lo, Peter, the Rock; the senior and chief apostle; the presiding officer in God's earthly kingdom; the one whom Jesus, the Lord, chose as his successor; lo, he now speaketh! And what a message is his; what truths flow from his pen! As Joseph Smith said, having reference to both the doctrines taught and the language used, "Peter penned the most sublime language of any of the apostles." (Teachings, p. 301.)

Dummelow, one of the better sectarian commentators, makes two rather excellent summary statements of the teachings and doctrines of First Peter.

One of these recites: "Peter begins by greeting them in the name of the Holy Trinity; reminds them that all events have their source in God's foreknowledge; that this trial is part of his eternal purpose, and that they are therefore sure of his protection; that, if the veil were lifted, as one day it will be, they would see the divine power and glory surrounding them; that Christ's work was done through suffering, and that suffering is the proper state of Christians, and the condition of their happiness and hope, for safety from the perils of this life is a little matter to those who are heirs of eternal safety; that the Holy Spirit, who in times past gave ancient Israel its Messianic hope, is with them still, making them the people of Christ, the manifested Messiah, binding together the whole brotherhood throughout the world for the fulfillment of God's single purpose, and enabling them to live as a consecrated people should."

In the other he summarizes Peter's views by saying: "His speeches, as recorded in Acts, show that he was sustained in those days by the same kind of thoughts as he expresses in this epistle—obedience is the great duty; the sufferings of Christ were appointed by God, and were not the chance triumph of his enemies; they involved humiliation, rejection, and the curse of the tree; they led to the resurrection which was due to the act of the Father, and is the source of Christian hope; now he sits supreme at the right hand of God, and has poured forth upon his people the Holy Spirit of whom he had received the promise from the Father: from thence he shall come at the time of the restoration of all things to judge the quick and dead. Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah, of whom prophets spoke, and for whom Israel hoped. Forgiveness and repentance come from him, and through faith in his name is safety and salvation. The apostles are his witnesses, and so is the Holy Spirit in his people. All that has happened since he came is the outcome of past history, and there has been no break in the life of the people who are God's peculiar care; among them the believing Gentiles are also reckoned." (Dummelow, pp. 1038-1039.)

And yet how can the uninspired exegetists of the world begin to comprehend the import and depth of Peter's teachings? Particularly when he speaks of that faith which raises men to salvation in spiritual places; of our Lord's call and foreordination to be the Savior and Redeemer; of the elect status of all the saints; of their royal priesthood, the priesthood that makes them kings and priests; and of that glorious proclamation that the Lord of glory took the saving truths of his everlasting gospel to the spirits in prison, to the souls of men who were awaiting their resurrection and judgment.

If Peter had never recorded a syllable of scripture except in those verses which tell of salvation for the dead, his name would have been enshrined forever with the greatest of the prophets. And how appropriate it is that such a glorious doctrine should come to us from the mouth of the chief apostle, the chief undershepherd, the one upon whose shoulders the Son of God had laid the burden of his kingdom in the dispensation of persecution and martyrdom.

Salvation Comes by Faith in Christ

1 Pet 1 11. Peter] The senior apostle of God on earth in the dispensation of the meridian of time. With James and John he held the Melchizedek Priesthood, the keys of the kingdom of God on earth, and the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times, all of which he, in concert with his two associates, conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in about June of 1829. (D. & C. 27:12-13; 128:20.)

1 Pet 1 1An apostle] See Commentary II, pp. 130-131; 328-333.

1 Pet 1 1Strangers scattered] Pilgrims, travelers on earth; Israelites who are scattered in the named locations and who have joined the Church.

1 Pet 1 22. The elect are foreordained to be sanctified, by virtue of the blood of Christ, on conditions of gospel obedience.

1 Pet 1 2Elect according to the foreknowledge of God] See Commentary II, pp. 267-269; 271-278; 283-285.

1 Pet 1 2Sanctification] See 1 Thess. 4:1-8.

1 Pet 1 2Sprinkling of the blood] See Heb. 12:24.

SC1 Pet 1 31 Pet 1 41 Pet 1 53-5. The elect are born again and shall be saved if they keep the commandments.

1 Pet 1 33. Hath begotten us again] See Commentary II, pp. 471-473; 1 John 5:1-5.

1 Pet 1 44. An inheritance incorruptible] Salvation.

1 Pet 1 55. Kept . . . through faith] Those foreordained to be saved shall be saved if they keep the commandments.

1 Pet 1 5Salvation] With three or four possible exceptions all of the revelations of all the ages speak of salvation as being wholly, completely, and totally synonymous with eternal or everlasting life, with exaltation in the highest heaven of the celestial world, with attaining Godhood and being like God the Eternal Father. The exceptions are given to enable us to gain a complete perspective of the plan of salvation and to have an understanding of the goodness of God even where the wicked and ungodly are concerned. In substance and thought content these exceptions equate salvation with resurrection or immortality only, rather than with immortality coupled with eternal glory. (2 Ne. 9:26; D. & C. 76:40-44; 132:17.)

1 Pet 1 5We may, of course, for purposes of clear understanding create definitions of salvation of our own, as telestial or terrestrial salvation, meaning an inheritance in one or the other of those kingdoms. But the gospel is a gospel of eternal life, of exaltation, of glory and honor, and so the Lord chooses to have his prophets equate salvation with the type and kind of life he lives, rather than with the ultimate inheritance of some lesser being, or of some wicked and rebellious person who rejected the gospel, suffered in hell until the second resurrection, and then came forth to that telestial inheritance whose inhabitants cannot go where God and Christ are worlds without end. (D. & C. 76:109-112.) Amulek, for instance, says that "no unclean thing can inherit the kingdom of heaven," and then asks: "How can ye be saved, except ye inherit the kingdom of heaven." (Alma 11:37.)

1 Pet 1 5Salvation is defined and explained in the Lectures on Faith in these words: "Where shall we find a prototype into whose likeness we may be assimilated, in order that we may be made partakers of life and salvation? or, in other words, where shall we find a saved being? for if we can find a saved being, we may ascertain without much difficulty what all others must be in order to be saved. We think that it will not be a matter of dispute, that two beings who are unlike each other cannot be saved; for whatever constitutes the salvation of one will constitute the salvation of every creature which will be saved; and if we find one saved being in all existence, we may see what others must be, or else not be saved.

1 Pet 1 5"We ask, then, where is the prototype? Or where is the saved being? We conclude, as to the answer of this question, there will be no dispute among those who believe the Bible, that it is Christ: all will agree in this, that he is the prototype or standard of salvation; or, in other words, that he is a saved being. And if we should continue our interrogation and ask how it is that he is saved, the answer would be—because he is a just and holy being; and if he were anything different from what he is, he would not be saved; for his salvation depends on his being precisely what he is and nothing else; for if it were possible for him to change, in the least degree, so sure he would fail of salvation and lose all his dominion, power, authority and glory, which constitute salvation; for salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him."

1 Pet 1 5Then after quoting several Biblical passages, the account continues: "These teachings of the Savior most clearly show unto us the nature of salvation, and what he proposed unto the human family when he proposed to save them—that he proposed to make them like unto himself, and he was like the Father, the great prototype of all saved beings; and for any portion of the human family to be assimilated into their likeness is to be saved; and to be unlike them is to be destroyed; and on this hinge turns the door of salvation." (Lectures on Faith, pp. 63-67.)

1 Pet 1 5Immortality and eternal life] See 2 Tim. 1:1-22.

1 Pet 1 5Work out your own salvation] See Commentary II, pp. 535-536.

1 Pet 1 5Few saved or many?] See Commentary I, pp. 494-497.

1 Pet 1 5Salvation for the dead] See 1 Pet. 3:18-22; 4:1-6.

1 Pet 1 71 Pet 1 66. Manifold temptations] 7. The trial of your faith] See 1 Pet. 4:12-19.

SC1 Pet 1 101 Pet 1 111 Pet 1 1210-12. 'All the ancient prophets sought salvation and prophesied of the coming of Christ and his sufferings and atoning sacrifice. They knew beforehand, by the power of the Holy Ghost, what God had in store for the Meridian Saints. And so glorious is the message of redemption that even the angels desire to learn of it.'

1 Pet 1 1111. The Spirit of Christ] The Holy Ghost] The Holy Ghost, a personage of Spirit, is a Revelator. Revelation comes by his power. He is broadcasting all truth out into all immensity all the time. And the Spirit of Christ—the light of Christ, the light that proceedeth forth from the presence of God to fill the immensity of space—is the means and agency used for carrying the revealed word to men, for disseminating eternal truth to mortal hearts. See Jas. 1:17-21.

SC1 Pet 1 131 Pet 1 141 Pet 1 151 Pet 1 1613-16. Christ is the Prototype of salvation, the great Exemplar, the only one who can say with perfect propriety, and without any reservation or limitation on the language used: "Be holy, for I am holy." (Lev. 11:45.) "What manner of men ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am." (3 Ne. 27:27.)
