Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

What Is the Royal Priesthood?

1 Pet 2 99. A chosen generation] Not those living in a particular period or age, but a race of people; the progeny of Jacob in all ages; the house of Israel both anciently, in the meridian of time, and now in these latter-days. "But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend. Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away." (Isa. 41:8-9.)

1 Pet 2 9A royal priesthood] Whenever the Lord has a people on earth he offers to make them a nation of kings and priests—not a congregation of lay members with a priest or a minister at the head—but a whole Church in which every man is his own minister, in which every man stands as a king in his own right, reigning over his own family-kingdom. The priesthood which makes a man a king and a priest is thus a royal priesthood.

1 Pet 2 9To ancient Israel the offer was made in these words: "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." (Ex. 19:5-6.) Peter is here telling the Meridian Saints that they have the same promise, and John records that some of them did in fact obtain this royal status and become kings and priests, who should in due course live and reign with Christ on earth. (Rev. 1:6; 5:10; 20:4.) And the same blessings are available to the Latter-day Saints through the ordinances of the house of the Lord.

1 Pet 2 9An holy nation] "For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God: the Lord thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth." (Deut. 7:6.)

1 Pet 2 9A peculiar people] Faithful members of the Church who have taken upon themselves the name of Christ and been adopted into his family. "Ye are the children of the Lord your God: . . . For thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that are upon the earth." (Deut. 14:1-2.) Manifestly such a people, as certified by their way of life in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, are deemed by worldly people to be peculiar.

1 Pet 2 9Called ... out of darkness] "Darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the people." (D. & C. 112:23.) Thus, every person who accepts the gospel and joins the Church is called out of darkness.

1 Pet 2 9His marvellous light] The Light of Christ, the light of truth, the light of the gospel. "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (D. & C. 50:24.)

1 Pet 2 1010. The people of God] Those who join the Church thereby become the Lord's people. They are adopted into his family; they are set apart from the world; they become part of the nation and kingdom of Israel.

1 Pet 2 10Obtained mercy] Justice is for the ungodly, mercy for the penitent. Mercy comes only to those who repent and live the gospel; all others are subject to the law of justice and pay the penalty for their own sins. (Alma 42:22-26.) "Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations." (Deut. 7:9.)
