Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Why There Are Fleshly Lusts

1 Pet 2 1111. Strangers and pilgrims] See Heb. 11:8-16.

1 Pet 2 11Abstain from fleshly lusts] As part of the Father's plan to enable his spirit children to advance and progress and become like him, two probationary estates are provided—the pre-existent first estate and the second estate of mortality.

1 Pet 2 11In pre-existence we were tested as spirit beings and under circumstances where we walked by sight, knowing who our Father was and having a perfect knowledge that he was the Source and Author of the laws we were counseled to obey. As a result of long association there, the Lord knows exactly how we respond to his will as spirits and when we have a knowledge of him and his laws.

1 Pet 2 11Hence he provided this mortal estate to try and test us under different circumstances, under circumstances in which we would be subject to the lusts of the flesh and when we would walk, not by sight, but by faith. And thus there is an imperative need for fleshly lusts as part of the eternal plan. This very sphere of existence is deliberately designed as one in which all men will be subject to the appetites and passions and lusts of life. The whole issue is whether we as mortals walk in the Spirit, whether we walk by faith as though seeing him who is invisible. The issue is whether we take Peter's counsel and abstain from these fleshly lusts or whether we follow the worldly course of appetite and indulgence.

1 Pet 2 11Probationary estate] See 1 Pet. 4:12-19.

1 Pet 2 1212. 'Set an example of proper conduct to nonmembers, and though they now think evilly of you, perhaps they, seeing your good works, will repent and gain the blessings of the gospel.'

1 Pet 2 12They speak against you as evildoers] It is standard operating procedure for the unrepentant and sin-laden enemies of the truth to accuse the saints of evil-doing. Probably there is no better illustration of this than the charges made by wicked and adulterous persons against the early saints in this dispensation where the practice of plural marriage was concerned.

1 Pet 2 12The day of visitation] The day of judgment, the Second Coming, the day when the Lord comes again to take vengeance upon the wicked and ungodly.
