Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Husbands and Wives Should Honor Each Other

SC1 Pet 3 11 Pet 3 21-2. Nonmember husbands may be led to accept the gospel by the good works of their wives.

1 Pet 3 11. Wives, be in subjection to your own husbands] God Almighty placed man at the head and created woman to be his helpmeet (Gen. 2:18), and there is nothing, in the Lord's eternal providences, that either one of them can do about it one way or the other. By divine law women are commanded to be in subjection to their husbands and to abide by their righteous counsel.

1 Pet 3 33. Outward adorning] Gospel standards call for modest and conservative dress. See 1 Tim. 2:8-15.

1 Pet 3 44. The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit] Such adorning—not the fashions—and jewels of the rich and worldly—constitutes the true ornament of the saints! In the eternal wisdom of God, what covering is to be compared with the robes of righteousness?

1 Pet 3 55. Holy women] The Lord never sends apostles and prophets and righteous men to minister to his people without placing women of like spiritual stature at their sides. Adam stands as the great high priest, under Christ, to rule as a natural patriarch over all men of all ages, but he cannot rule alone; Eve, his wife, rules at his side, having like caliber and attainments to his own. Abraham is tested as few men have been when the Lord commands him to offer Isaac upon the altar (Gen. 22:1-19); and Sarah struggles with like problems when the Lord directs that she withhold from the Egyptians her status as Abraham's wife. (Abra. 2:21-25; Gen. 12:7-20.) Isaac gains from the Lord the promise that his seed shall "multiply as the stars of heaven" (Gen. 26:1-4); and Rebekah, his wife, receives a blessing of her own in which she is promised that she shall be "the mother of thousands of millions." (Gen. 24:59-60.) And so it goes, in all dispensations and at all times when there are holy men there are also holy women. Neither stands alone before the Lord. The exaltation of the one is dependent upon that of the other.

1 Pet 3 66. Whose daughters ye are] Brethren in the Church become "the seed of Abraham" by faith. (D. & C. 84:34.) That is, they believe what Abraham believed; they worship as Abraham worshiped; they are one with him in spiritual things—and are therefore considered to be his followers and sons, for "if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Gal. 3:29.) Thus, to identify the women in the Church as the daughters of Sarah is to testify that Sarah, and Abraham her husband, were also followers of Christ and believers in the same truths of salvation revealed anew in the Christian dispensation. See Commentary II, pp. 465-475.

1 Pet 3 77. Honour unto the wife] See Commentary II, pp. 518-520.

1 Pet 3 7Heirs together] Neither men or women are saved alone. Salvation is a family affair. The fulness of the blessings of the gospel come to men and women together; they grow out of the new and everlasting covenant of marriage.
