Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

"Speak as an Oracle of God"

I. V. 7. To you, the end of all things is at hand] In every dispensation, to gain salvation the saints must overcome the world and endure manfully whatever persecution is heaped upon them. And as each faithful saint approaches the day of his departure to the paradise of God, it is as though he were prepared for the Lord's Second Coming; it is as though the end of the world had come in his day. Luke 12:35-48, as marvelously expanded and clarified by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Inspired Version, sets forth the concept that the Lord comes, in effect, in every watch of the night, so that his saints of all ages must watch and be ready. See Commentary I, pp. 670-677.

1 Pet 4 7Be ... sober] "Be sober." (Alma 38:15.) "Cast away your idle thoughts and your excess of laughter far from you." (D. & C. 88:69.) "Let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your minds." (D. & C. 43:34.)

1 Pet 4 8K. J. 8. Charity] See Commentary II, pp. 377-380.

SC1 Pet 4 91 Pet 4 109-10. Anciently a hospital was a place for the shelter or entertainment of travelers, strangers, or other guests, and hospitality was the treatment given such persons. Since all that we have comes as a gift from God, and is a manifestation of his hospitality to us, it follows that we are to minister from our means to the needs of our fellowmen. Hospitality to each other thus automatically becomes the mark of a true saint and shall ever remain so, although in our modern society it is sometimes considered to be more a matter of showing forth the social graces than of providing food, clothing, and shelter to the needy traveler. In the true Church, hospitality is one of the characteristics of the members and officers, as for instance a bishop. (1 Tim. 3:1-3.)

1 Pet 4 11I. V. 11. Speak as an oracle] 'Speak by inspiration, not of yourself, but simply as a medium through whom the mind and will of the Lord is revealed.' This is an absolute requisite of a true minister. They must preach by the power of the Spirit. See Commentary II, pp. 317-319. Unless they do so they cannot minister life and salvation to the children of men. Hence the divine counsel that the Lord's servants are to treasure up in their minds continually the words of life; to rely upon the Holy Spirit; and then, without taking thought beforehand, to speak forth what the Lord wants them to say, at the very moment of their preaching. (D. & C. 84:85.)

Preaching] See 2 Tim. 4:1-5.
