Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Saints to Be Tried in All Things

1 Pet 4 161 Pet 4 1212. The fiery trial which is to try you] 16. Suffer as a Christian] Mortality itself is a probationary estate (Alma 42), a time of trial and testing for all men. With reference to his eternal plan to send all the pre-existent hosts to earth, the Lord said: "We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them." (Abra. 3:25.) But the greatest trials of life are reserved for the saints. They are the ones whom the world hates (Matt. 10:22), and they must overcome the world, if they are to gain the Lord's approval. They face all that the world faces in the way of mortal difficulties—sickness, disease, calamities, famine, pain, sorrow, death—and in addition their faith in Christ and his work is tested to see if they will serve the Lord at all hazards. "I will prove you in all things," the Lord says to his saints, "whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy. For if ye will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me." (D. & C. 98:14-15.) "Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." (Matt. 5:10.)

1 Pet 4 1717. When men are slain and destroyed for their sins, let it "begin at my sanctuary," saith the Lord (Ezek. 9:6), for where there is more light, there is greater condemnation. (D. & C. 82:3.) "Behold, vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning, and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face of the earth, saith the Lord. And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord; First among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord." (D. & C. 112:24-26.)

1 Pet 4 1818. "If the fire can scathe a green tree for the glory of God, how easy it will burn up the dry trees to purify the vineyard of corruption." (D. & C. 135:6.)
