Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The First Epistle General of John

The Beloved John—apostle, revelator, historian, supreme literary craftsman, and friend and confidant of God—here gives us his own commentary upon the Gospel of John!

Of all the accounts of the life of our Lord, the Gospel of John is the one which is dearest to the hearts of the saints. In it is the most persuasive testimony of the Divine Sonship; in it is the most elaborate imagery and symbolism; in it are many of the more mature doctrinal concepts. And this later writing—as much a treatise as an epistle—is the Beloved Disciple's explanation of many of the great truths announced more than defined in his Gospel.

Written by the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and who in turn had such great love for his Lord and his fellowmen that he gained permission to remain on earth and seek to save souls until the Second Coming—this Epistle has as its essential theme:

That God is love;

That love is the foundation upon which all personal righteousness rests;

That all the purposes and plans of Deity are based on his infinite and eternal love; and

That if men will personify that love in their lives, they will become like the Lord himself and have eternal life with him.

The doctrines expounded include how to gain fellowship with God; how to know God and Christ; how to become the sons of God; how to abide in the light and love the brethren; how to dwell in God and have him dwell in us; how to be born again and gain eternal life.

As far as the Biblical Dispensation is concerned, this treatise is probably the last recorded inspired writing of which we have record. After it was penned, the long night of apostate darkness descended upon the earth; the heavens were sealed and God no longer communed with men in open vision and by angelic ministration.

"If, as seems likely," Dummelow says, "the Epistle is St. John's latest work, these are, in point of time, the last words of Holy Scripture" (Dummelow, p. 1057)—all of which, to Latter-day Saints, singles out the concluding sentence of the Epistle as a message of supreme prophetic insight and warning to all those from John's day forward as long as time shall stand:

"Little children, keep yourselves from idols!"

How to Find Fellowship with God

SC1 Jn 1 11 Jn 1 21 Jn 1 31 Jn 1 41-4. In an introduction which closely parallels the one he wrote for the Gospel of John, the Beloved disciple, as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, bears testimony of the divine Sonship. He has heard, seen, looked upon and handled; he is a witness; he knows. The gospel he preaches will bring a fulness of joy. It is true.

1 Jn 1 1I. That which was from the beginning] The Lord Jesus Christ. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." (John 1:1.)

1 Jn 1 1Which we have heard] That he is God's Son, through whose gospel salvation comes.

1 Jn 1 1Seen... looked ..... . our hands have handled] 'We were with him in the upper room, after his resurrection; we saw his person and looked upon his face. We heard him say, "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself"; and we accepted his invitation: "Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:39.) We know he is the Son of God because he rose from the dead. We are witnesses.'

1 Jn 1 1The Word of life] The Son of God who was in the beginning with the Father; the Messenger of Salvation, who carried the Father's message of eternal life to all the sons of men; the Life of the world.

1 Jn 1 22. The life was manifested] "In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not." (John 1:4-5.)

1 Jn 1 2That eternal life, which was with the Father] Eternal life is the name of the kind of life lived by God the Eternal Father; eternal life is God's life. This life is "manifested" to all men through the gospel, and is the reward of all who live the whole law of the whole gospel.

1 Jn 1 33. We have seen and heard] 'We have seen the Risen Lord; we have heard his word; we bear record; "and the record which we bear is the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son." ' (D. & C. 76:14.)

1 Jn 1 3Ye also may have fellowship with us] Fellowship connotes a community of interest, activity and feeling; it is the association enjoyed by a group of equals or friends. And in the Church, it is not the apostles only who are to see and hear and know and understand and feel and handle; it is all the saints who have fellowship with them, "for God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what he will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them, for the day must come when no man need say to his neighbor, Know ye the Lord; for all shall know him (who remain) from the least to the greatest." (Teachings, p. 149.)

1 Jn 1 3Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ] John—himself soon to be translated—is in the same state of fellowship with the Lord which was enjoyed by the three soon-to-be translated Nephite disciples, to whom the Lord said: "Ye shall have fulness of joy; and ye shall sit down in the kingdom of my Father; yea, your joy shall be full, even as the Father hath given me fulness of joy; and ye shall be even as I am, and I am even as the Father; and the Father and I are one." (3 Ne. 28:10.) Thus, John is here saying: 'Our fellowship is with the Father and the Son; we are one with them; they accept us as friends; and we shall be "equal in power, and in might, and in dominion" (D. & C. 76:95), in that glorious day when we receive of their fulness and grace.' To have fellowship with the Lord in this life is to enjoy the companionship of his Holy Spirit, which makes us one with him; and to have fellowship with him in eternity is to be like him, having that eternal life of which he is the possessor and originator.

1 Jn 1 44. That your joy may be full] "Men are, that they might have joy" (2 Ne. 2:25), the final and complete enjoyment of which is reserved for those who have the fellowship of eternal life with exalted beings in the highest heaven of the celestial world.

1 Jn 1 55. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all] He is the source, the creator, the embodiment, the personification of light—light both temporal and spiritual, that light which is shed forth by the rays of the sun, and that which enlightens the mind; and the Son, who came forth from him, is "the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." (John 1:9.) "The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not; nevertheless, the day shall come when you shall comprehend even God, being quickened in him and by him. Then shall ye know that ye have seen me, that I am, and that I am the true light that is in you, and that you are in me; otherwise ye could not abound." (D. & C. 88:49-50.) "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day." (D. & C. 50:24.)

SC1 Jn 1 61 Jn 1 76-7. Obedience is the test of true fellowship with God; only the obedient are cleansed from sin by the blood of Christ; only the obedient press forward to that perfect oneness with Deity which is eternal life.

SC1 Jn 1 61 Jn 1 7Blood of Christ] See Heb. 10:1-18.

SC1 Jn 1 61 Jn 1 7Light of the World] See Commentary I, pp. 452-453.
