Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

"Try the Spirits"

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"Two spirits are abroad in the earth—one is of God, the other of the devil. The spirit which is of God is one that leads to light, truth, freedom, progress, and every good thing; on the other hand, the spirit which is of Lucifer leads to darkness, error, bondage, retrogression, and every evil thing. One spirit is from above, the other from beneath; and that which is from beneath never allows more light or truth or freedom to exist than it can help. All religion, philosophy, education, science, governmental control—indeed, all things—are influenced and governed by one or the other (in some cases, part by one and part by the other) of these spirits. (Moro. 7.)

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"It should be understood that these two influences in the world are manifest through the ministrations of actual spirit personages from the unseen world. The power and influence wielded by Satan is exercised through the host of evil spirits who do his bidding and who have power, according to the laws that exist, to impress their wills upon the minds of receptive mortals. On the other hand, much of the power and influence of Deity is exercised by and manifest through spirit beings who appear and give revelation and guidance as the Lord's purposes may require. In general, the more righteous and saintly a person is, the easier it will be for him to receive communications from heavenly sources; and the more evil and corrupt he is, the easier will it be for evil spirits to implant their nefarious schemes in his mind and heart.

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"The problem that most men have is to discern the spirits, so that they may know what is of God and what is not. The gift of discernment, that is the 'discerning of spirits,' is itself one of the gifts of the Spirit which comes from God. (1 Cor. 12:10; D. & C. 46:23.) 'Believe not every spirit,' John counseled, 'but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world.' (1 John 4:1.)

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"How can we try the spirits? By what tests shall it be known whether they are of God or the devil? If a messenger appears from the unseen world, how shall we know whether he is a good spirit or an evil spirit? When a revelation is received is it one born of light or darkness? When trances, visions, tongues, enchantments, miracles, and related things come to view, are they from above or beneath? When a philosophy is taught, a doctrine preached, a religion proclaimed, an educational theory espoused, how shall we know whether it is true or false?

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"'We may look for angels and receive their ministrations,' the Prophet said, 'but we are to try the spirits and prove them, for it is often the case that men make a mistake in regard to these things. God has so ordained that when he has communicated, no vision is to be taken but what you see by the seeing of the eye, or what you hear by the hearing of the ear. When you see a vision pray for the interpretation; if you get not this, shut it up; there must be certainty in this matter. An open vision will manifest that which is more important. Lying spirits are going forth in the earth. There will be great manifestations of spirits, both false and true. ... Not every spirit, or vision, or singing, is of God.' (Teachings, pp. 161-162.)

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"As part of a long discussion of true and false spirits, and in explaining how they may be distinguished, the Prophet also said: 'No man can do this without the priesthood, and having a knowledge of the laws by which spirits are governed; for, as no man knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of God, so no man knows the spirit of the devil, and his power and influence, but by possessing intelligence which is more than human, and having unfolded through the medium of the priesthood the mysterious operation of his devices . .

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"'A man must have the discerning of spirits before he can drag into daylight this hellish influence and unfold it unto the world in all its soul-destroying, diabolical, and horrid colors; for nothing is a greater injury to the children of men than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God. Thousands have felt the influence of its terrible power and baneful effects. Long pilgrimages have been undertaken, penances endured, and pain, misery and ruin have followed in their train; nations have been convulsed, kingdoms overthrown, provinces laid waste, and blood, carnage and desolation are habiliments in which it has been clothed.

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"'As we have noticed before, the great difficulty lies in the ignorance of the nature of spirits, of the laws by which they are governed, and the signs by which they may be known; if it requires the Spirit of God to know the things of God; and the spirit of the devil can only be unmasked through that medium, then it follows as a natural consequence that unless some person or persons have a communication, or revelation from God, unfolding to them the operation of the spirit, they must eternally remain ignorant of these principles; for I contend that if one man cannot understand these things but by the Spirit of God, ten thousand men cannot; it is alike out of the reach of the wisdom of the learned, the tongue of the eloquent, the power of the mighty. And we shall at last have to come to this conclusion, whatever we may think of revelation, that without it we can neither know nor understand anything of God, or the devil; and however unwilling the world may be to acknowledge this principle, it is evident from the multifarious creeds and notions concerning this matter that they understand nothing of this principle, and it is equally as plain that without a divine communication they must remain in ignorance.' (Teachings, pp. 204-206.)

SC1 Jn 4 11 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 31 Jn 4 41 Jn 4 51 Jn 4 6"It follows that the discerning of spirits is and can be practiced in righteousness only where the true Church and kingdom of God is found. In the final analysis, it takes apostles, prophets, priesthood, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and a knowledge of God's laws and the manner in which he operates, in order to separate the spirits into their two opposing camps. Only where these things are found can error be segregated from truth, because only there are the channels of revelation open." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 270-273.)

1 Jn 4 11. Believe not every spirit] 'Do not be misled by false doctrines, political theories, or philosophical concepts; believe only those true principles which are inspired of God.'

1 Jn 4 1Try the spirits] 'Test every doctrine; prove every theory; examine every philosophy—using gospel standards as the measuring rod.'

1 Jn 4 1False prophets] See Commentary II, pp. 440-441.

SC1 Jn 4 21 Jn 4 32-3. On the surface John seems to be saying that all Christians, because they have a belief of sorts in Christ, are thereby numbered with the Lord's people, whereas those who do not so believe (meaning non-Christians) are antichrist. In fact he is making no such assertion, and such is far from the truth. The key to an understanding of the great truth here presented is what is meant by the expression, "Jesus Christ is come in the flesh." For instance: In all Christendom, and in all the world, who is it that believes that God the Father is a personal being in whose image man is created; that he has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; that he is the literal Father of the spirits of all men, with Christ our Lord, the Almighty Jehovah, being the Firstborn among the pre-existent hosts; that in that spirit sphere our Lord became like the Father in power and intelligence; that he was the Lord Omnipotent who created all things; that he was foreordained to be the Savior and Redeemer; that he was born of Mary, in the literal sense, inheriting from her the power of mortality, which is the power to die; that he was born of God, in the literal sense, inheriting from him the power of immortality, which is the power to live; that be worked out the infinite and eternal atonement because God was his Father and Mary his mother; and that he has now ascended, in resurrected immortality, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, where he reigns with almighty power forever? Who is it that believing all this and much more that is implicit in it, thereby classifies as one who confesses with comprehension that Jesus Christ actually "is come in the flesh"? And those who disbelieve and oppose all or part of these glorious truths—are they included with the antichrists of whom John speaks?

1 Jn 4 44. The true saints have overcome the spirit of antichrist in the world because they believe and know the truth about God and Christ.

1 Jn 4 55. False prophets, false teachers, advocates of doctrines, or policies, or philosophies, or feelings, or "spirits" that are not of God—all these "are of the world," and so naturally they are accepted by worldly people.

1 Jn 4 66. To catch the full import of this inspired utterance, apply it to the Lord's people in this day: 'We Latter-day Saints are of God; we alone have the truth; we alone have the gospel; we alone can save men in the celestial kingdom. Unless men hear us and receive our message they shall be damned. What we have is true; what the world has is error; all things are judged by the gospel standard which we have.' How plainly and bluntly John and all the prophets speak as the Holy Ghost rests upon them!
