Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The Second Epistle of John and The Third Epistle of John

Why these two brief, personal epistles?

Their doctrinal content and historical recitations are, of course, minimal. But they do add a unique contribution to the revealed word which well pays for their preservation. Their purpose seems to be to give us a glimpse of the private life and problems of the Disciple whom Jesus loved.

We see in them his love for his family, and observe how their acceptance of and conformity to the law of his Lord is his chief concern. We see his intense interest in the spread of gospel truth, his support of those who bring it to pass, and his refusal to fellowship those who oppose the rolling forth of the Cause of Righteousness. And, sadly, we see the vigor of the opposition found in some quarters in the Church itself toward the apostolic witnesses who walked with Christ and were the living oracles for their day and dispensation.

Brief, less significant than some portions of Holy Writ, these two lesser epistles of the Beloved John are yet of eternal worth, and the saints rejoice in the added perspective they give to the Bible as a whole.

"Bring Up Your Children in Light and Truth"

2 Jn 1 11. The elder] John, the apostle. "An apostle is an elder." (D. & C. 20:38.) See 1 Pet. 5:1-4.

2 Jn 1 1The elect lady] "An elect lady is a female member of the Church who has already received, or who through obedience is qualified to receive, the fulness of gospel blessings. This includes temple endowments, celestial marriage, and the fulness of the sealing power. She is one who has been elected or chosen by faithfulness as a daughter of God in this life, an heir of God, a member of his household. Her position is comparable to that of the elders who magnify their callings in the priesthood and thereby receive all that the Father hath. (D. & C. 84:38.)

2 Jn 1 1"In the early days of this dispensation Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife, was in such complete harmony with the Lord's program that he forgave her of her sins and addressed her as an elect lady. (D. & C. 25:1-3; History of the Church, vol. 4, p. 552.) John the Beloved used a similar salutation to certain chosen women in his day. (2 John 1, 13.) Just as it is possible for the very elect to be deceived, and to fall from grace through disobedience, so an elect lady, by failing to endure to the end, can lose her chosen status." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 217.)

2 Jn 1 1Her children, whom I love in truth] Is John writing a personal letter to a wife and expressing appreciation for their children? It is an acceptable thing for righteous parents to rejoice in the faith and devotion of their children, and to take pleasure in the fact that other members of the Church view the conduct of those same children with approbation.

2 Jn 1 22. For the truth's sake] Every act of a true saint is performed for the truth's sake; that is, a faithful person chooses to do only those things which guide him to salvation and which further the Lord's work and purposes on earth.

2 Jn 1 44. Thy children walking in truth] See Commentary II, pp. 520-522.

SC2 Jn 1 52 Jn 1 65-6. See 1 John 4:7-21; 5:1-5.
