Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Certain Angels Kept Not Their First Estate

Jude 1 6Jude's argument here is: Why should the wicked and ungodly think they shall escape damnation when God even cast one-third of the hosts of heaven out for their rebellion? See 2 Pet. 2:1-9.

Jude 1 6Implicit in his usage of this illustration is the fact that his readers (members of the Church who had already received the truth!) knew about pre-existence, the war in heaven, and the probationary nature of this mortal estate.

Jude 1 6The angels which kept not their first estate] See Rev. 12:1-17.

Jude 1 6First estate] "Both Abraham and Jude speak of pre-existence as our first estate, that is, it was the first time we lived as conscious identities. The spirits who were faithful in that first estate earned the right to be born into this world and get mortal bodies, bodies which would become the eternal habitation of the spirit after the resurrection. (Abra. 3:22-28.) But the rebellious pre-existent spirits, 'the angels which kept not their first estate' (Jude 6), have been denied bodies and the probationary experiences of this second estate of mortality." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 282.)

Jude 1 6Of our first estate and the eternal plan of salvation there formulated, Joseph Smith says: "At the first organization in heaven we were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed and the plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it. We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 181.) Also: "They who have tabernacles, have power over those who have not." (Teachings, p. 190.) And also: "The spirits in the eternal world are like the spirits in this world. When those have come into this world and received tabernacles, then died and again have risen and received glorified bodies, they will have an ascendency over the spirits who have received no bodies, or kept not their first estate, like the devil. The punishment of the devil was that he should not have a habitation like men." (Teachings, pp. 305-306.)

Jude 1 6In everlasting chains] Lucifer and one-third of the hosts of heaven are damned forever. For them there is no progression, no advancement, no light—only darkness to all eternity. Of them and of the sons of perdition who shall be added to their number, the Lord says: "I will say unto them—Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. And now, behold, I say unto you, never at any time have I declared from mine own mouth that they should return, for where I am they cannot come, for they have no power." (D. & C. 29:28-29.)

Jude 1 6Pre-existence] See Heb. 12:9-10.
