Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Michael Disputed about Body of Moses

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13What is mighty Michael doing disputing with the devil over the body of Moses? Why does the foremost (under Christ) of all the sons of God contend about the passing of a prophet from this scene of action? That he did so, Jude tells us—parenthetically, almost casually—in the course of a severe and near merciless castigation of false teachers in the Church.

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13If the adulterers and sexual perverts of Sodom and Gomorrah suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude says, why should these filthy dreamers who defile the truth think to escape? In their ignorance, as brute beasts, they corrupt the course of nature. They are condemned with Cain who slew Abel (Gen. 4:1-15), with Balaam who divined for hire (Num. 22, 23 and 2 4), and with Korah and his band who were slain for their rebellion against Moses and Aaron. (Num. 16.) And yet with it all, no railing accusations are intended, for even the archangel left condemnation to the Lord, as witness the affair about the body of Israel's lawgiver.

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13What then was this dispute between Michael and Satan all about? As it happens, this is our only scriptural allusion to it, although it seems perfectly clear that Jude had before him some other scriptures bearing on the point. Its use as an illustration here is manifestly intended to clarify rather than confuse the doctrine being taught, and the facts relative thereto must have been known to and understood by the saints of that day.

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13Commentators assume, and it surely must have been so, that Jude had before him and was quoting from a then current apocryphal book, "The Assumption of Moses," which has been preserved to us in fragmentary form only. This non-canonical work presents the doctrine that Moses was translated and taken up into heaven without tasting death. It appears to deal "with certain revelations made by Moses," and "with his disappearance in a cloud, so that his death was hid from human sight... Michael was commissioned to bury Moses. Satan opposed the burial on the ground (a) that he was the lord of matter and that accordingly the body should be rightfully handed over to him; (b) that Moses was a murderer, having slain the Egyptian. Michael having rebutted Satan's accusations proceeded to charge Satan with having instigated the serpent to tempt Eve. Finally, all opposition having been overcome, the assumption took place in the presence of Joshua and Caleb." Another "Hebrew Apocalypse tells of Moses' transformation into the form of a fiery angel and his ascent through the seven heavens." And yet another deals "with the temporary translation of Moses before his death into heaven... When translated into heaven the heavenly Jerusalem and the Temple were revealed to him, and he was told these would descend to earth after God had gathered Israel a second time from the ends of the earth." Included in these same works are a number of statements not found in the Bible but known by revelation through Joseph Smith to be true, as the fact of a pre-existence for all men and that "Moses was prepared from the foundation of the world to be the mediator of God's covenant with his people," and that "during his 'life Moses was Israel's intercessor with God." (R. H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament, vol. 2, pp. 407-413.)

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13That Moses was in fact translated is confirmed by President Joseph Fielding Smith. After quoting, from the Prophet Joseph Smith, these words: "The Savior, Moses, and Elias [Elijah, in other words] gave the keys to Peter, James, and John, on the Mount when they were transfigured before him," President Smith says: "From that we understand why Elijah and Moses were preserved from death: because they had a mission to perform, and it had to be performed before the crucifixion of the Son of God, and it could not be done in the spirit. They had to have tangible bodies. Christ is the firstfruits of the resurrection; therefore if any former prophets had a work to perform preparatory to the mission of the Son of God, or to the dispensation of the meridian of times, it was essential that they be preserved to fulfill that mission in the flesh. For that reason Moses disappeared from among the people and was taken up into the mountain, and the people thought he was buried by the Lord. The Lord preserved him, so that he could come at the proper time and restore his keys, on the heads of Peter, James, and John, who stood at the head of the dispensation of the meridian of time. He reserved Elijah from death that he might also come and bestow his keys upon the heads of Peter, James, and John and prepare them for their ministry.

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13"But, one says, the Lord could have waited until after his resurrection, and then they could have done it. It is quite evident, due to the fact that it did so occur, that it had to be done before; and there was a reason. There may have been other reasons, but that is one reason why Moses and Elijah did not suffer death in the flesh, like other men do." (Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 2, pp. 110-111.)

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13"Moses, Elijah, and Alma the younger, were translated. The Old Testament account that Moses died and was buried by the hand of the Lord in an unknown grave is an error. (Deut. 34:5-7.) It is true that he may have been 'buried by the hand of the Lord,' if that expression is a figure of speech which means that he was translated. But the Book of Mormon account, in recording that Alma 'was taken up by the Spirit,' says, 'the scriptures saith the Lord took Moses unto himself; and we suppose that he has also received Alma in the spirit, unto himself.' (Alma 45:18-19.) It should be remembered that the Nephites had the Brass Plates, and that they were the 'scriptures' which gave the account of Moses being taken by way of translation. As to Elijah, the account of his being taken in 'a chariot of fire . . . by a whirlwind into heaven,' is majestically set out in the Old Testament. (2 Kings 2.)" (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 805.)

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13It appears, then, that Satan—ever anxious to thwart the purposes of God—"disputed about the body of Moses," meaning that he sought the mortal death of Israel's lawgiver so that he would not have a tangible body in which to come—along with Elijah, who also was taken up without tasting death—to confer the keys of the priesthood upon Peter, James, and John.

SCJude 1 7Jude 1 8Jude 1 9Jude 1 10Jude 1 11Jude 1 12Jude 1 13Translated beings] See Heb. 11:5-6.

Jude 1 99. Michael the archangel] "Our great prince, Michael, known in mortality as Adam, stands next to Christ in the eternal plan of salvation and progression. In pre-existence Michael was the most intelligent, powerful, and mighty spirit son of God, who was destined to come to this earth, excepting only the Firstborn, under whose direction and pursuant to whose counsel he worked. 'He is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men.' (Teachings, p. 157.) The name Michael apparently, and with propriety, means one 'who is like God.'

Jude 1 9"In the creation of the earth, Michael played a part second only to that of Christ. When Lucifer rebelled and there was war in heaven, it was Michael who led the hosts of the faithful in casting Satan out. (Rev. 12:7-9.) When the time came to people the earth, the spirit Michael came and inhabited the body formed from the dust of the earth, the living soul thus created being known as Adam. As the first man he filled his foreordained destiny of standing as the presiding high priest (under Christ) over all the earth. It is through him that Christ is revealed, that all revelation comes, that the Lord's affairs on earth are directed during the pre-millennial era. (Teachings, pp. 157-159, 167-169.) He holds the keys of salvation for all men of all ages. (D. & C. 78:16.)

Jude 1 9"Three years previous to Adam's mortal death he met in the Valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman with his righteous descendants. 'And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the prince, the archangel.' (D. & C. 107:54.) He will sit in council at this same place just prior to the great and dreadful day of the Lord; those of all ages who have served under his direction in the ministry will give an accounting of their stewardships; and the Son of Man will come and receive from Adam and all others a final accounting. (D. & C. 116; Dan. 7:9-14, 21-22, 26-27.)

Jude 1 9"Michael contended with the devil over the body of Moses (Jude 9); ministered comfort to the Prophet Daniel (Dan. 10:13, 21); appeared to Joseph Smith to detect 'the devil when he appeared as an angel of light,' and to confer keys and authorities (D. & C. 128:20-21); and will hereafter partake of the sacrament with Christ and other righteous persons on earth. (D. & C. 17:11.)

Jude 1 9"We know also that he was with Christ in his resurrection (D. & C. 133:54-55); that 'at the time of the end' he shall fight the battles of the saints (Dan. 11:40; 12:1); that all the dead shall come forth from their graves at the sound of his trump (D. & C. 29:26); that he will lead the armies of heaven against the hosts of hell in the final great battle when Lucifer is cast out eternally (D. & C. 88:110-116); and that he does all things 'under the counsel and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end of life.' (D. & C. 78:16.)"(Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 491-492.)

Jude 1 1212. Spots in your feasts of charity] Hidden rocks, found at sacred spiritual feasts, seeking to shipwreck the saints.

Jude 1 12Clouds . . . without water] "Wells without water" (2 Pet. 2:17); ministers without a message.

Jude 1 12Twice dead] Once they were the withered and fruitless trees of winter, who came alive with the baptism of Spring; now they were dead again because of apostasy, and hence are destined to be plucked up by the roots and to die permanently.

Jude 1 1313. Wandering stars] Comets which show forth a flash of prominence for a moment, but soon burn out and travel off into eternal darkness.
