Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

"Keep Yourselves in the Love of God"

SCJude 1 18Jude 1 1918-19. The basic cause of apostasy is sin. Men leave the Church because they are sensual and carnal. It is not a matter of rejecting gospel doctrine, or preferring a more liberal interpretation or application of revealed truth. These are excuses. The basic reason for rebellion against the truth is a desire to enjoy the lusts of the flesh. The choice is not between doctrinal concepts, but between differing ways of life.

Jude 1 1818. Mockers in the last time] See 2 Pet. 3:1-9.

Jude 1 2020. Building up yourselves] Keeping the commandments, growing in grace, acquiring the attributes of godliness, working out your salvation; salvation must be earned; it is free only in the sense that it is freely available to all who will pay the price of righteousness.

Jude 1 20Your most holy faith] The gospel of Jesus Christ. What is more holy and glorious than the gospel which takes fallen man, carnal and sensual as he is, and changes him, by obedience, because of the atonement, into a son of God.

Jude 1 20Praying in the Holy Ghost] Praying by the power of the Holy Ghost, so that all requested petitions are granted, because "it shall be given you what you shall ask." (D. & C. 50:29-30; 101:27.)

Jude 1 2121. 'Keep the commandments and abide in the truth so as to be subject to the law of mercy and thereby gain eternal life.' (Alma 42:22-26.)

Jude 1 2222. 'Be tender and compassionate toward those who have doubts; teach them correct principles and encourage them in righteousness.'

Jude 1 2323. Others save with fear] Preach hell fire and damnation to those who need it. After telling his Nephite brethren of the destruction that awaited them unless they repented, Jacob said: "My brethren, is it expedient that I should awake you to an awful reality of these things? Would I harrow up your souls if your minds were pure? Would I be plain unto you according to the plainness of the truth if ye were freed from sin? Behold, if ye were holy I would speak unto you of holiness; but as ye are not holy, and ye look upon me as a teacher, it must needs be expedient that I teach you the consequences of sin." (2 Ne. 9:47-48.)

Jude 1 23Pulling them out of the fire] In the day of judgment, every corruptible thing will be consumed (D. & C. 101:24), and the wicked shall be burned with unquenchable fire. (Mal. 4:1.) If the erring saints are to be saved, they must be pulled, as it were, from the coming fire, even as God said of Israel: "Ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning." (Amos 4:11.) "If the fire can scathe a green tree for the glory of God, how easy it will burn up the dry trees to purify the vineyard of corruption." (D. & C. 135:6.) See 2 Pet. 3:10-18.

Jude 1 23Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh] To stay the spread of disease in ancient Israel, clothing spotted by contagious diseases was destroyed by burning. (Lev. 13:47-59; 15:4-17.) And so with sin in the Church, the saints are to avoid the remotest contact with it; the very garments, as it were, of the sinners are to be burned with fire, meaning that anything which has had contact with the pollutions of the wicked must be shunned. And so also with those yet in the world who are invited to join the kingdom. To them the call is: Repent, "Save yourselves from this untoward generation, and come forth out of the fire, hating even the garments spotted with the flesh." (D. & C. 36:6.)
