Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

John Seeth the Risen Lord

Rev 1 1212. Seven golden candlesticks] Candlesticks carry light; they do not create it. Their function is to make it available, not to bring it into being. So by using seven candlesticks to portray the seven churches to whom John is now to give counsel, the Lord is showing that his congregations on earth are to carry his light to the world. Christ is the Light of the world. (John 8:12.) "Hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do." (3 Ne. 18:24; Matt. 5:14-16.) So was it also in ancient Israel, when Moses made "a candlestick of pure gold," which held seven candles, for use in the tabernacle (temple). (Ex. 25:31-40.)

Rev 1 1313. In the midst of the seven candlesticks] The Lord is with his people. "I am in your midst and ye cannot see me," he says to his saints. (D. & C. 38:7.)

Rev 1 13One like unto] John is receiving instruction from an angel upon whom the Lord has placed his name, and who therefore speaks and acts in the first person as though he were the Lord, so that his words, acts, and appearance are those of the Lord. See Rev. 19:9b-10.

Rev 1 13The Son of man] "Christ is the Son of Man, meaning that his Father (the Eternal God!) is a Holy Man. 'In the language of Adam, Man of Holiness' is the name of God, 'and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time.' (Moses 6:57.) Thus Christ is the Son of Man of Holiness or more briefly put, the Son of Man. Accordingly, when he asked his disciples, 'Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?' (Matt. 16:13), he was conveying precisely the same thought as he would have done by saying, 'Whom do men say that I the Son of God am?' for that God who is his Father is a Holy Man." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 742.)

Rev 1 13A garment . . . a golden girdle] Robes of the holy priesthood, even as it had been with Aaron and others when they ministered in their lesser priestly offices. (Ex. 28:2, 4, 31.)

SCRev 1 14Rev 1 15Rev 1 1614-16. There are two other recorded accounts of our Lord's appearance in like glory to men on earth. One, before his mortal birth, was to "Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel: And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness." (Ex. 24:9-10.) The other, after his resurrection and ascension to eternal power, was to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple. "We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us," they testified, "and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber. His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying: I am the first and the last: I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father." (D. & C. 110:2-4.)

Rev 1 1616. In his right hand seven stars] The presiding officers of the seven congregations who, as with all his ministers, are in the hands of the Lord. They do not speak or act of themselves; they represent their Master, whose words they speak, whose acts they perform, and in fact whose they are.

Rev 1 16Out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword] The word of God pierces the soul as a sword. See Heb. 4:12-13.

Rev 1 16His countenance was as the sun] There is no way to comprehend or describe the brightness and glory of exalted personages. "I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun," the Prophet said of his First Vision, and, "When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description." (Jos. Smith 2:16-17.)

Rev 1 1818. The keys of death and hell] Death is the separation of the body and spirit, the body returning to the dust from whence it was taken and the spirit entering the spirit world to await the day of the resurrection. Hell is that part of the spirit world where the wicked go to suffer the torments of the damned until they come forth to be assigned their place in the kingdoms that are prepared. Keys are the controlling power. Our Lord, therefore, governs death and hell. All men live or die at his will; they are cast down to hell or saved therefrom by his decree. All men are in his hands forever; he is supreme, because he holds the keys.
