Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Overcome and Sit on God's Throne

Rev 3 1414. The angel [I. V. servant] of the church] The presiding officer of the Church in Laodicea.

Rev 3 14The Amen] Christ is the Truth, "the God of truth" (Isa. 65:16); that is, he is the Amen, the God of Amen—titles signifying "that it is in and through him that the seal of divine affirmation is placed on all the promises of the Father." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 32.) His word is absolute; his promises are sure; when he speaks, all controversy ends; it is amen, or so be it, to whatever is involved.

Rev 3 14The faithful and true witness] Our Lord is a witness; he testifies of the truth; his voice is the voice of testimony—thus setting the perfect example for all his ministers. See Commentary I, pp. 197-200; Commentary II, pp. 102-104.

Rev 3 14The beginning of the creation of God] "The firstborn of every creature" (Col. 1:15), the first of all the spirit progeny of Him who could not be a Father unless he had children. "I was in the beginning with the Father, and am the Firstborn." (D. & C. 93:21.)

Rev 3 1515. I know thy works] See Rev. 2:1-7.

Rev 3 15Lukewarm] Good, upright, decent members of the Church who nonetheless do not put first in their lives the things of God's earthly kingdom. They have testimonies; they know the work is true; but they specialize, as it were, in the social gospel; that is, in that portion of the truth which seems to bless others on pretty much the same basis as people are bettered by any good concepts in any church. Their interests are largely centered in temporal things, in making a living, in the things of this world. They are not wicked and ungodly in the sense of being carnal and evil. But they are not devoting their energies to the spread of truth and the perfecting of the lives of their brethren. They are probably part tithepayers, and they likely go to sacrament meeting and perform church service when it is convenient. They seek the honors of men and the wealth of the world with more zeal than they do the honors of God and the riches of eternity. They are lukewarm and their souls will not be saved. "These are they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God." (D. & C. 76:79.)

Rev 3 1717. 'Lukewarm church members say: "We have testimonies, we have received the gospel, we belong to the Church; surely we shall be saved along with all the rest; what more do we need?" But the fact is (and they know it not!) they are no better off spiritually than many nonmembers of the Church; they are still poor in the things of the Spirit, are blind to the real blessings of the gospel, and have not in fact put on the robes of righteousness.'

Rev 3 17Temporal riches] See Jas. 5:1-6.

Rev 3 1818. I counsel thee] What counsel is like unto the counsel of God? The Lord Jehovah, now the Risen Christ, whose very name is Wonderful Counsellor (Isa. 9:6), issues that counsel which excels in importance all other: 'Come unto me and be saved!'

Rev 3 18Buy of me] "Salvation is free" (2 Ne. 2:4), but it must also be purchased; and the price is obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. Eternal life is available freely, "without money and without price" (Isa. 55:1; 2 Ne. 9:50), but it is gained only by those who buy it at the storehouse of the Great God who pleads with men to purchase his priceless possession.

Rev 3 18Gold tried in the fire] Salvation, gained by withstanding the fiery trials of mortality; an inheritance in that city whose streets are paved with "pure gold." (Rev. 21:21.)

Rev 3 18That thou mayest be rich] "Behold, he that hath eternal life is rich." (D. & C. 6:7.)

Rev 3 18White raiment] The garments of the holy priesthood; the robes of righteousness; the clothing worn by exalted beings. Of the appearance of Moroni to him, the Prophet said: "He had on a loose robe of most exquisite whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever seen; nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to appear so exceedingly white and brilliant." (Jos. Smith 2:31.)

Rev 3 18Anoint thine eyes with eyesalve] 'Receive the companionship of the Holy Spirit so that your spiritual eyes shall be opened and your whole body filled with light.' (Matt. 6:22.) "The Holy Spirit's unction, like the ancient eyesalve's, first smarts with conviction of sin, then heals." (Jamieson, p. 562.)

Rev 3 1919. See Heb. 12:1-8.

Rev 3 2020. 'The gospel is offered to all men; those who receive it find themselves on terms of friendly intimacy with Him whose saving truth it is.'

Rev 3 2121. To him that overcometh] See Rev. 2:1-7.

Rev 3 21Sit with me in my throne] In conversation with Deity, Enoch said: "Thou hast made me, and given unto me a right to thy throne." (Moses 7:59.) Thus: "Ye shall be even as I am." (3 Ne. 28:10.) 'Ye shall have eternal life; ye shall have exaltation; ye shall be gods; ye shall rule and reign forever on a heavenly throne.'

Rev 3 21I... am set down with my Father in his throne] "I am even as the Father." (3 Ne. 28:10.) Speaking of those who are "heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ," the Prophet asked, "What is it?" and then answered: "To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children. It is plain beyond disputation, and you thus learn some of the first principles of the gospel." (Teachings, pp. 347-348.) See Commentary II, pp. 530-533.

Rev 3 2222. He that hath an ear, let him hear] See Rev. 2:1-7.

Rev 3 22Unto the churches] This message is for all saints and all congregations everywhere in all ages. The faithful saints who gain eternal life shall sit with Christ on his throne, because they have like glory and exaltation with him, even as he sits on the throne of his Father, because the Father and the Son both possess the fulness of the glory of the Father and have all power, all might, and all dominion forever.
