Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

All Created Things Worship the Lord

I. V. 1. A door was opened into heaven] "The heavens were opened." (Ezek. 1:1.) John on earth was permitted to gaze into heaven.

Rev 4 1K. J. 1. The first voice which I heard] The voice of the angel (Rev. 1:1), upon whom the Lord had placed his own name, and who was thus commanded to speak in the first person as though he were the Son of God himself. See Rev. 19:9b-10.

Rev 4 1Things which must be hereafter] See Rev. 1:1-6.

Rev 4 22. One sat on the throne] God the Eternal Father, the Almighty Elohim.

Rev 4 33. In striving to record for mortal comprehension the grandeur, glory, and beauty of the Almighty of Almighties, John likens his appearance to precious and semi-precious stones. The jasper mentioned is believed by commentators to be a diamond.

Rev 4 3A rainbow round about the throne] Encircling the throne. (The author, flying above clouds and storm, has seen in the mists and clouds below, a rainbow forming a perfect circle.) Of the "visions of God" which he saw, Ezekiel wrote: "As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord." (Ezek. 1:28.)

Rev 4 3In seeking to describe the splendor of a similar scene, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "The heavens were opened upon us, and I beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof, whether in the body or out I cannot tell. I saw the transcendent beauty of the gate through which the heirs of that kingdom will enter, which was like unto circling flames of fire; also the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son. I saw the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold." (Teachings, p. 107.)

I. V. 4. In the midst of the throne were four and twenty seats] That is, those who sat thereon were sitting with God on his throne, or in other words, having eternal life they had become as he is. See Rev. 3:14-22.

Rev 4 4K. J. 4. Four and twenty elders] "Q. What are we to understand by the four and twenty elders, spoken of by John? A. We are to understand that these elders whom John saw, were elders who had been faithful in the work of the ministry and were dead; who belonged to the seven churches, and were then in the paradise of God." (D. & C. 77:5.) Thus John is seeing what is to be in the future; he is seeing certain elders in celestial splendor who at that time were in their disembodied state in paradise awaiting the day of their resurrection and the receipt of eternal life. In principle it is the same as when Joseph Smith, on January 21, 1836, saw his father and mother—who were then still living in mortality—in the celestial kingdom of heaven. (Teachings, p. 107.)

Rev 4 4It is worthy of note that these exalted persons who are sitting with God on his throne are elders: not seventies, not high priests, not patriarchs, not apostles, but elders—than which there is no more important priesthood in God's earthly kingdom. Indeed, every elder who magnifies his calling as an elder has the immutable promise of the Father, guaranteed by his personal oath, that he shall gain all that the Father hath, which is eternal life, which is godhood, which is to sit with him on his throne. (D. & C. 84:33-41.)

Rev 4 55. Out of the throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings and voices] How can mortal prophets find language to unveil to the view of their fellow mortals the splendor and transcendent beauty of that eternal world of celestial might and glory? They speak of rainbows and jewels, of circling flames of fires, of burning coals of fire with lightning flashing forth therefrom; they tell of thunders and voices, of the sound of the rushing of many waters, and of majestic displays of might and beauty—all in an attempt to record in mortal words that which can be seen and known only by the power of the Spirit. (Ezek. 1 and 1 0; Isa. 6.) But the Lord be praised that they have made such attempts so that those who have not seen and heard may gain some meager knowledge of those things hidden behind the windows of heaven.

I. V. 5. The seven servants of God] The presiding officers of each of the seven churches in Asia, to whom the counsel in chapters 3 and 4 was directed, would in due course—for the vision is of the future—join the celestial hosts in glorious exaltation.

Rev 4 6K. J. 6. A sea of glass like unto crystal] "Q. What is the sea of glass spoken of by John, 4th chapter, and 6th verse of the Revelation? A. It is the earth, in its sanctified, immortal, and eternal state." (D. & C. 77:1.) See Rev. 21:9-27.

Rev 4 6Four beasts] "Q. What are we to understand by the four beasts, spoken of in the same verse? A. They are figurative expressions, used by the Revelator, John, in describing heaven, the paradise of God, the happiness of man, and of beasts, and of creeping things, and of the fowls of the air; that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created. Q. Are the four beasts limited to individual beasts, or do they represent classes or orders? A. They are limited to four individual beasts, which were shown to John, to represent the glory of the classes of beings in their destined order or sphere of creation, in the enjoyment of their eternal felicity." (D. & C. 77:2-3.)

Rev 4 6In a great sermon about the resurrection and salvation of all forms of life, the Prophet expanded upon these inspired words from Section 77, saying among other things:

Rev 4 6"When God made use of the figure of a beast in visions to the prophets he did it to represent those kingdoms which had degenerated and become corrupt, savage and beast-like in their dispositions, even the degenerate kingdoms of the wicked world; but he never made use of the figure of a beast nor any of the brute kind to represent his kingdom."

Rev 4 6Then he referred to a statement made by Daniel: "I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this." (Dan 7:16-17.)

Rev 4 6Continuing his own explanations, the Prophet said: "The angel interpreted the vision to Daniel; but we find, by the interpretation that the figures of beasts had no allusion to the kingdom of God. You there see that the beasts are spoken of to represent the kingdoms of the world. .

Rev 4 6"There is a grand difference and distinction between the visions and figures spoken of by the ancient prophets, and those spoken of in the revelations of John . .

Rev 4 6"I am now going to take exceptions to the present translation of the Bible in relation to these matters. Our latitude and longitude can be determined in the original Hebrew with far greater accuracy than in the English version. There is a grand distinction between the actual meaning of the prophets and the present translation. The prophets do not declare that they saw a beast or beasts, but that they saw the image or figure of a beast. Daniel did not see an actual bear or a lion, but the images or figures of those beasts. The translation should have been rendered 'image' instead of 'beast,' in every instance where beasts are mentioned by the prophets. But John saw the actual beast in heaven, showing to John that beasts did actually exist there, and not to represent figures of things on the earth. When the prophets speak of seeing beasts in their visions, they mean that they saw the images, they being types to represent certain things. At the same time they received the interpretation as to what those images or types were designed to represent." (Teachings, pp. 289-291.)

Rev 4 8Rev 4 66. Full of eyes before and behind] 8. The four beasts had each of them six wings] "Q. What are we to understand by the eyes and wings, which the beasts had? A. Their eyes are a representation of light and knowledge, that is, they are full of knowledge; and their wings are a representation of power, to move, to act, etc." (D. & C. 77:4.) Similar descriptions of the eyes and wings of beasts in heaven were given by Isaiah and Ezekiel. (Isa. 6:2-3; Ezek. 1:18; 10:12.)

Rev 4 77. In the "visions of God" which he saw, Ezekiel also spoke of four beasts who had the faces of a man, a lion, an ox (John says a calf), and an eagle. (Ezek. 1:10.) The presumption is that both prophets were seeing some of the same things.

Rev 4 88. Holy] The Lord our God—meaning either the Father or the Son, as the case may be—is holy. Here it is the Father to whom this salutation of praise is made. When Isaiah "saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up," and heard the seraphims cry: "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory" (Isa. 6:1-4), the Deity involved was the Lord Jehovah; and the words of the Psalmist in acclaiming, "The Lord reigneth" and "is holy" (Psalm 99), have application to both the Father and the Son.

Rev 4 8Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come] Here and in Rev. 11:16-17 this praise is given to the Father; in Rev. 1:4 and 8 the same pronouncement is made relative to the Son.

SCRev 4 9Rev 4 10Rev 4 119-11. See Rev. 5:1-14.

Rev 4 1111. Why should all created things, whether men or beasts, give glory and honor to God? Joseph Smith said: "Everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages, according to Abraham's record, are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer; and God the third, the witness or Testator." (Teachings, p. 190.) Accordingly, we here find the four beasts and the four and twenty elders giving glory and honor to the Father—because he created them. Were it not for him, they would not be And in Rev. 5:8-14, we shall find these same creatures, coupled with an innumerable host of others, giving glory to the Son—because he redeemed them. And were it not for the redemption, the whole purposes of creation would have faded away into nothingness; there would be neither immortality nor eternal life. On the same basis, we should rejoice in the mission of the Holy Ghost, the mission of revealing to men the truths of salvation and of sanctifying their souls when they conform to the revealed word—for without such revelation and sanctifying power there could be no salvation.

Rev 4 11For thy pleasure they are and were created] The creative enterprises of Deity are past, present, and future; they go on everlastingly. But why? What is the purpose of creation? Speaking of man, of "the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created," Lehi said: "There is a God, and he hath created all things, both the heavens and the earth, and all things that in them are, both things to act and things to be acted upon. And bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man." (2 Ne. 2:14-15.) That is, the purpose of creation is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), to say nothing of the salvation of worlds without number and of all created things that on them are. See Rev. 5:1-14. But in its fullest signification, the purpose of creation is to enable men to gain eternal life, so that they being thus glorified and having gained for themselves eternal kingdoms patterned after the kingdom of their Eternal Father, may present their kingdoms to him, "so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory." (Teachings, pp. 347-348.)

Rev 4 11Resurrection] See Commentary II, pp. 388-404.

Rev 4 11Celestial earth] See Rev. 21:9-27.
