Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Enoch Ministers during First Seal

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2When the first seal was opened, what was shown forth of "the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God—the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth" during the first one thousand years of "its temporal existence"? (D. & C. 77:6.)

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2The period involved is from 4000 B. C. to 3000 B. C. It extends from (or rather, after) the fall of Adam, which according to Ussher's chronology was 4004 B. C., to shortly after the translation of Enoch and his city in 3017 B. C.

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2What are the events pertaining to the Lord's work on earth which occurred in that period of time and which we might expect to find recorded in the book held "in the right hand of him that sat on the throne." (Rev. 5:1.)

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2Such of these events as John saw pertained to someone on a white horse (the emblem of victory); who had a bow (weapons of war); wore a crown (the garland or wreath of a conqueror); and who went forth conquering and to conquer (that is, was victorious in war).

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2Insofar as we know, the actual events of this first millennium-long period included the following:

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 21. The creation of Adam and Eve; the fall of man, of the earth, and of all forms of life; and the beginning of the peopling of the earth—all of which, however, strictly and properly speaking, preceded the actual period covered by the seal and so may be excluded from our considerations. As set forth in Section 77, the period covered was part of the earth's "temporal existence" (Verse 5), that is the earth's existence after the edenic or paradisiacal state, its existence after the fall.

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 22. The revelation of the gospel to Adam and his posterity and the setting up of the initial earthly kingdom of God among men.

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 23. The murder of Abel, the cursing of Cain, and the beginning of apostasy by many of the sons and daughters of the first man.

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 24. The populating of the earth and the development of nations, kingdoms, and governments.

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 25. And finally, the temporal and spiritual ministry of Enoch, which included prophecies, visions, wars of a kind and nature never since duplicated, and the final translation and taking up into heaven of the whole city of Zion.

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2From the foregoing, excluding, as we necessarily must, the events surrounding the creation and the fall, it is clear that the most transcendent happenings involved Enoch and his ministry. And it is interesting to note that what John saw was not the establishment of Zion and its removal to heavenly spheres, but the unparalleled wars in which Enoch, as a general over the armies of the saints, "went forth conquering and to conquer." Of these wars our revelations recite:

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2"And so great was the faith of Enoch, that he led the people of God, and their enemies came to battle against them; and he spake the word of the Lord, and the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, even according to his command; and the rivers of water were turned out of their course; and the roar of the lions was heard out of the wilderness; and all nations feared greatly, so powerful was the word of Enoch, and so great was the power of the language which God had given him. There also came up a land out of the depth of the sea, and so great was the fear of the enemies of the people of God, that they fled and stood afar off and went upon the land which came up out of the depth of the sea. And the giants of the land, also, stood afar off; and there went forth a curse upon all people that fought against God; And from that time forth there were wars and bloodshed among them; but the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness. The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people." (Moses 7:13-17.)

SCRev 6 1Rev 6 2Truly, never was there a ministry such as Enoch's, and never a conqueror and general who was his equal! How appropriate that he should ride the white horse of victory in John's apocalyptic vision!
