Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Gospel Restored by Angelic Ministrants

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7This announcement of the restoration of the gospel—glorious in its import—testifies of at least eight great and wonderous realities:

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 71. There is to be revelation after the day of John, after New Testament times, after the gospel given by Jesus has been lost; the heavens once again shall rain down righteousness as in days of old. See Rev. 1:1-6.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 72. It is the gospel, the plan of salvation, the power of God unto salvation, the very thing preached by Jesus and John, by Peter and Paul and all the holy apostles, which shall be revealed by the angel. See Commentary II, pp. 213-216.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 73. This gospel is everlasting; it is without beginning of days or end of years; it is the same plan of salvation always and forever. It was had anciently; it shall continue to all eternity. Its terms and conditions apply on this earth and on all the creations of God. It saved Adam and Enoch; it guided Abraham and Moses; it was the standard heralded by John and Matthew; and its truths were to come again to Joseph Smith and latter-day Israel. See Commentary II, pp. 491-493.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 74. It shall come by angelic ministration. Holy beings shall come from God's presence to bring again his eternal truths, The heavens, long sealed, shall be opened. See Commentary II, pp. 96-98.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 75. There is to be absolute, total, complete apostasy after John's day and before the angelic ministrations commence. The falling away shall be complete, the apostasy universal. Gross darkness shall be everywhere. The gospel shall not be found in any nation, among any kindred; no tongue shall teach its truths, and no people rejoice in its blessings, for all these shall receive it as a result of the angelic ministrations. See 2 Thess. 2:1-12; 2 Tim. 3:1-13.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 76. The knowledge of God shall be restored so that men once again can worship their Creator, rather than the idols of the pagans, the ill-defined nothingness described in the creeds of Christendom, or the laws and forces of the universe. See Commentary II, pp. 154-162; Jas. 1:1-7.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 77. All this shall transpire after John's day and before the Second Coming of the Son of Man; it shall precede the hour of his judgment, the hour when he returns to assemble all nations before him, with the sheep on his right hand and the goats on his left. See Commentary I, pp. 689-695.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 78. And it shall result in the fall of Babylon (verse 8), for the onrush of truth cannot and will not be stayed. Truth will prevail! Such is an eternal verity. See Rev. 17:1-18.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7Now, as to the actual work of restoration—what angel performed this mighty deed, this work which involves the salvation of all men on earth in these latter-days? Who restored the everlasting gospel? Was it one angel or many?

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7It is traditional (and true!) to reply: 'Moroni, son of Mormon, the now resurrected Nephite prophet, who holds the keys of "the stick of Ephraim" ( D. & C. 27:5), the one through whose ministry the Book of Mormon was again brought to light.' The reasoning is that the Book of Mormon contains "the fulness of the everlasting gospel" (D. & C. 135:3); that therein is God's message of salvation for all of earth's inhabitants; and that this gospel message is now being taken by the Lord's witnesses to one nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people after another.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7The Book of Mormon, revealed to man by angelic ministration, was first published to the world in 1830; thereafter, on November 3, 1831, the Lord himself both confirmed and expanded the interpretation of the vision seen by John. On that day he revealed to Joseph Smith a number of great truths about his Second Coming which are not found in the Book of Mormon. (D. & C. 133:1-35.) Then came this pronouncement:

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7"And now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth. And this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people. And the servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come; And worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters—Calling upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying: O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence." (D. & C. 133:36-40.)

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7From this revelation we learn two things relative to the identity of the angel John saw "fly in the midst of heaven":

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 71. The angel (Moroni) had by that date already come, and the gospel message in the Book of Mormon was then on earth and would without fail go forth to all of its inhabitants; and

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 72. The angel of the restoration was yet, in the future, to "appear unto many that dwell on the earth."

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7Paul makes the apt statement that the gospel consists of two parts: the word and the power. (1 Thess. 1:5.) Thus Moroni brought the word, or at least that portion found in the Book of Mormon, for that record summarizes and teaches, in large part, what men must do to be saved. It records the terms and conditions of the plan of salvation. Also, before November 3, 1831, John the Baptist, and Peter, James, and John, as angelic ministrants, had brought keys and powers. But other angels were yet to come—Moses, Elias, Elijah, Gabriel, Raphael, and "divers angels,—all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little." (D. & C. 128:21.)

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7Thus the angel Moroni brought the message, that is, the word; but other angels brought the keys and priesthood, the power. And in the final analysis the fulness of the everlasting gospel consists of all of the truths and powers needed to enable men to gain a fulness of salvation in the celestial heaven.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7But one of the most interesting things about John's record of his vision is that it is one of those great prophetic utterances destined to have dual fulfillment. Just as many of the Messianic prophecies deal with both comings of the Lord, so this proclamation relative to an angel committing the everlasting gospel speaks of two widely separated occurrences. One is past, the other is future. The gospel has been restored both in word and in power. And yet there is a future day when the angel of the restoration shall fly again.

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7In a post-millennial setting; in a recitation of what is to be after the last man, including the sons of perdition, has been resurrected; in fact at the final great day when all things preceding the celestializing of the earth are past, then: "Another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which is the fifth angel who committeth the everlasting gospel—flying through the midst of heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people; And this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth—for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come." (D. & C. 88:103-104.)

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7And so, as we ponder upon the identity, mission and ministry of the angel appointed to commit the everlasting gospel to men in latter-days, we are led to exclaim—'What wonders of eternal truth are found in one short sentence of the revealed word!'

SCRev 14 6Rev 14 7Gospel restored during the sixth seal] See Rev. 7:1.
