Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

"Blessed Are the Dead Which Die in the Lord"

Rev 14 1212. The patience of the saints] See Jas. 5:7-11.

Rev 14 12They that keep the commandments of God] As the Lord lives, none else shall be saved! How can it be stated more plainly? It is not the grace of God standing alone; it is not confessing the Lord Jesus with our lips and stopping there; it is not mere belief; it is not church membership as such; it is not a position of prominence or dignity in the Church; it is not any one or all of the thousand winds of doctrine that blow through the sectarian world. It is plain, simple obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel. "Ye cannot be saved in your sins." (Alma 11:37.)

Rev 14 12The faith of Jesus] The gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ; the identical truths which he believed; the way of life that he lived—nothing short of this will save any man.

Rev 14 1313. A voice from heaven... Yea, saith the Spirit] Gods and angels speak from heaven; words of eternal truth flow from their lips; and the Holy Spirit of God, dwelling in the hearts of the saints, echoes and re-echoes the endless verity of their divine words.

Rev 14 13The dead which die in the Lord] The saints of God who have been true and faithful to every trust, who have kept the faith, who have endured to the end, who at their passing are prepared for an inheritance in the paradise of peace. In that revealed passage universally known as, "The Law of the Mourner," the Lord says of them: "Thou shalt live together in love, insomuch that thou shalt weep for the loss of them that die, and more especially for those that have not hope of a glorious resurrection. And it shall come to pass that those that die in me shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." (D. & C. 42:45-46.)

Rev 14 13They . . . rest from their labors] "And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow." (Alma 40:12.)

Rev 14 13Their works do follow them] Nothing else is ever taken by anyone when he departs this mortal sphere. "That same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world." (Alma 34:34.)

Rev 14 13Resurrection] See Commentary II, pp. 388-390.
