Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Earth Attains Its Celestial Glory

Rev 21 1010. He carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain] This is literal; John was transported bodily to the appointed vantage point from which the vision was to be seen. Nephi had a similar experience. "I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord," he said, "yea, into an exceeding high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I never had before set my foot." (1 Ne. 11:1.) And a similar thing occurred to Ezekiel. (Ezek. 40:1-2.)

Rev 21 10The holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God] The earth becomes a celestial sphere, with its capital city coming down from celestial spheres, to stand as a type of life and conditions everywhere on the new heaven, for such this earth will then be.

Rev 21 1111. Having the glory of God] This earth is now in its fallen or telestial state, in which condition wickedness prevails on its surface. When our Lord comes to usher in the millennial era, there will be a new heaven and a new earth. See Rev. 21:1-6a. The earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory; it will return to that edenic state which prevailed before the fall. The wicked, meaning those who live a telestial law, shall either be destroyed before the Second Coming or be burned at that time. None will remain who do not live at least a terrestrial law.

Rev 21 11Then at the end of the millennium, plus the appointed little season, this planet will change again. Once more there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, but this time our globe will become a celestial sphere, and none shall remain on its surface unless they are living a celestial law. In that day, "the poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it" (D. & C. 88:17), meaning that the godfearing and the righteous, those who have lived a celestial law, the law of the gospel, shall be the sole inhabitants of this planet.

Rev 21 11To prepare the earth itself for that glorious day, the Lord says of our planet, of the very elements which compose it: "Therefore, it must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory; For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; That bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever; for, for this intent was it made and created, and for this intent are they sanctified.... And again, verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of its creation, and transgresseth not the law—Wherefore, it shall be sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the righteous shall inherit it." (D. & C. 88:18-26.)

Rev 21 11Her light was like unto a stone most precious, . . clear as crystal] Descriptive of conditions in the holy Jerusalem, which is now in heaven, where God is, our revelation recites: "The angels do not reside on a planet like this earth; But they reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord. The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim." Then, as to conditions on this planet as they shall be after the holy city descends out of heaven from God, the record continues: "This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's." (D. & C. 130:6-9.)

Rev 21 1212. A wall great and high] Signifying the perfect security and peace enjoyed by all who dwell therein, and also that "there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie." (Verse 27.)

Rev 21 12The names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel] Signifying that those who dwell in Israel's capital city shall be the saved and exalted remnant of that chosen people, those who as the 144,000 high priests "follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth." (Rev. 14:4.)

Rev 21 1414. The names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb] Signifying that their names—as well as those of all who endure valiantly in the cause of truth and righteousness—shall be had in honorable and everlasting remembrance in the presence of God and his saints.

SCRev 21 15Rev 21 16Rev 21 17Rev 21 18Rev 21 19Rev 21 20Rev 21 2115-21. Here is a city, in size and dimensions, in splendor and glory, which is so far beyond human experience or comprehension that there is no way to convey to the finite mind what the eternal reality is. Hence, expressions relative to precious stones, to streets of gold, and to pearly gates. It is noteworthy that the city is cubic in shape. Calculated on the basis of 606 feet, 9 inches to the furlong, its outer limits will stretch nearly 1400 miles in length and breadth and height. This means there will be approaching 2,744,000,000 cubic miles of dwelling space within its sacred portals.

Rev 21 1818. Clear glass] 21. Transparent glass] See Rev. 4:1-11.

Rev 21 2222. Temples, now and during the millennium, are to prepare men for a celestial inheritance. When that glorious goal is gained, heaven itself becomes a temple. The holy of holies in the Lord's earthly houses are symbols and types of the Eternal Holy of Holies which is the highest heaven of the celestial world.

Rev 21 2727. The Lamb's book of life] See Rev. 3:1-6; 20:11-15.
