Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Paul Speaketh of Bishops

1 Tim 3 11. Bishop] "One of the ordained offices in the Aaronic Priesthood is that of bishop. (D. & C. 20:67.) Those so ordained and set apart to serve either in the Presiding Bishopric or as ward bishops are called to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood. A ward bishop is the president of the Aaronic Priesthood in his ward and is also the president of the priests quorum. (D. & C. 107:87-88.) The office of a bishop is also an appendage 'belonging unto the high priesthood.' (D. & C. 84:29.)

1 Tim 3 1"In his Aaronic Priesthood capacity a bishop deals primarily with temporal concerns (D. & C. 107:68); as the presiding high priest in his ward, however, he presides over all ward affairs and members. A bishop is a common judge in Israel (D. & C. 107:74); it is his right to have the gift of discernment, the power to discern all other spiritual gifts, 'lest there shall be any among you professing and yet be not God.' (D. & C. 46:27.)" (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 89-90.)

1 Tim 3 22. Husband of one wife] From the day of Adam to the present, and from this hour to the end of the peopling of the world, the law of God has been, is, and shall be that man should have one wife at a time and one wife only, except when God by revelation specifically directs otherwise. Thus in March of 1831, the Lord said to Joseph Smith: "It is lawful that he should have one wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made." (D. & C. 49:16-17.) Thus also "the word of the Lord" in the day of Nephi was: "There shall not any man among you have save it be one wife; and concubines he shall have none; For I, the Lord God, delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts . . . For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, raise up seed unto me, I will command my people; otherwise they shall hearken unto these things." (Jac. 2:27-30.) At proper and appointed times the Lord has, of course, given the revelation and issued the command directing certain persons to enter plural marriage in the new and everlasting covenant. (D. & C. 132.)

1 Tim 3 2Hospitality] See 1 Pet. 4:7-11.
