Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Paul Gives Signs of Latter-Day Apostasy

1 Tim 4 11. The Spirit speaketh expressly] Revelation does not always come with the same force and power. In recording an express and powerful impression from the Spirit, for instance, Joseph Smith wrote: "Thus saith the still small voice, which whispereth through and pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake while it maketh manifest." (D. & C. 85:6.)

1 Tim 4 1In the latter times] In later times, in a day then future, in the whole era of spiritual darkness which covered the earth from the loss of primitive Christianity to the restoration of the gospel, and also in the period of restoration itself, as far as most of the inhabitants of the earth are concerned.

1 Tim 4 1Some shall depart from the faith] Some shall fall away beginning in Timothy's day; some other shall forsake the truth after it has been restored in our day, with this difference: The apostasy from the primitive Church shall, in due course, be universal; spiritual darkness will cover the earth and envelop all peoples; but in the day of restoration, though individuals and groups shall fall away, the Church itself shall remain to prepare a people for the Second Coming of the Son of Man. Apostasy] See 2 Tim. 3:1-13.

1 Tim 4 1Seducing spirits] Devils, evil spirits who lead men astray; also, the fanatical crazes and false spirits which sweep through whole nations and peoples, as the spirit of false zeal which led to the Crusades, or the spirit which unites and impels a whole nation to invade and plunder its neighbor.

1 Tim 4 1Doctrines of devils] False doctrines in which there is no salvation; doctrines that lead men away from the truths of salvation; doctrines which are contrary to the mind and will of God and which are encouraged and sponsored by Satan, as for instance: That God is an immaterial Spirit essence filling all immensity; that revelation, gifts, and miracles ceased with the apostles; that infants must be baptized to be saved.

1 Tim 4 33. Forbidding to marry] The practice of celibacy is an illustration of this. Since eternal life grows out of marriage, anything Satan can do to pervert or prevent the creation and continuance of this holy union is in his interest. "Whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is ordained of God unto man." (D. & C. 49:15.)

1 Tim 4 3Commanding to abstain from meats] "Whoso forbiddeth to abstain from meats, that man should not eat the same, is not ordained of God; For, behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment, and that he might have in abundance." (D. & C. 49:18-19.)

1 Tim 4 55. God has removed the Mosaic restrictions where the eating of certain meats and foods are concerned. These are now clean (sanctified, as it were); there are no longer any ceremonially unclean or forbidden foods.
