Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The Second Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Timothy

In the four short chapters of Second Timothy, our friend Paul—literary craftsman and master theologian that he is—teaches, exhorts, prophesies and testifies as few but he have ever done.

Here we find him making the announcement that He who is the Resurrection and the Life hath abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel.

Here we read the comforting assurances that Christ hath called his saints with an holy calling, and shall yet call them to reign with him in eternal glory.

Here we find persuasive pleas to be strong in the faith, to keep the commandments, to shun contention, to seek godliness, to come off victorious in the war with the world.

And as to apostate Christendom, who but Paul could have summarized, in words as few, the great spiritual desolation that covers the earth in the dispensation of the fulness of times?

Plain words are also found as to the need and purpose of holy writ, together with a solemn charge that God's ministers teach therefrom.

And then the Apostle testifies that he himself shall have eternal life, as well as all saints who believe and obey.

Truly the word of God "is quick and powerful, sharper than a two-edged sword" (D. & C. 6:2)—all to the end that men shall give proper heed thereto.

Christ Brought Immortality and Eternal Life

2 Tim 1 11. Apostle] See Commentary II, pp. 130-131, 328-333.

2 Tim 1 1The promise of life which is in Christ Jesus] The promise of eternal life, given in pre-existence, that the obedient saints shall be saved because of our Lord's atoning sacrifice.

2 Tim 1 22. My dearly beloved son] See 1 Tim. 1:1-11.

2 Tim 1 33. God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience] Paul had always served God according to the best light and knowledge he had. In this sense his conscience was clear. Unlike those who believe the false creeds of modern Christendom, he did not have to change his allegiance from a spirit essence that fills the immensity of space to a personal God when he received the gospel. He had inherited from his fathers the knowledge that God was his Father and that Israel was the Lord's chosen people. His problem was to learn and to do the will of God. First he falsely assumed this meant persecuting Christ and the Christians. On the Damascus Road the Lord called him to defend those whom he had persecuted. But he had always been zealous; he was religiously inclined by instinct. And as with all misguided zealots his problem was one of finding the truth and directing his zeal where the Lord of Heaven would have it centered.

2 Tim 1 55. Faith runs in families. In general, though not invariably, the Lord sends a faith-endowed spirit into a household of faith.

2 Tim 1 66. Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee] It is not enough to have hands laid on our heads for the gift of the Holy Ghost; thereafter we must seek the Spirit until we actually enjoy the companionship and guidance of that member of the Godhead. See 1 Tim. 4:12-16.

2 Tim 1 77. The spirit of fear] See 1 John 4:7-21.

2 Tim 1 88. The testimony of our Lord] The knowledge, received by revelation from the Holy Ghost, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. Those endowed with this heaven-born knowledge are witnesses, appointed to testify and warn the world. Salvation is for those who are valiant in the testimony of Jesus.

2 Tim 1 8The afflictions of the gospel] Afflictions imposed upon the saints by wicked, worldly, and ungodly people. These were exceedingly severe in Paul's dispensation—a dispensation of persecution and martyrdom.

2 Tim 1 99. God's saints have the promise of eternal life, not because of great achievements in mortality, but because of what they did before the world began. That is, while they yet dwelt in God's presence as spirits, he foreordained them to receive the gospel and all its blessings including eternal life.

2 Tim 1 1010. Jesus Christ hath abolished death! What wonder, what miracle, what inconceivable glory attends this transcendent truth! Death ceaseth because Christ liveth! There are two deaths and Adam is father of them both—first, the temporal or natural death, which consists in the separation of body and spirit and the return of the body to the dust from whence it came; second, the spiritual death, which consists in being cast out of the presence of the Lord and of dying as pertaining to the things of righteousness or the things of the Spirit. In spiritual death existence continues, but the awareness of spiritual realities ceases. Our Lord's atoning sacrifice redeems men from the effects of both deaths. Temporal death is replaced with temporal life, and spiritual death with spiritual life. That is, all men are raised from the natural death to a state of immortality, and those who believe and obey the fulness of gospel law attain eternal life also.

2 Tim 1 10Jesus said: "I am the resurrection, and the life." (John 11:25.) That is: 'By me immortality and eternal life come, for I have abolished death.' But resurrection and life are not one and the same thing; immortality and eternal life are distinct but associated states. "Immortality is to live forever in the resurrected state with body and spirit inseparably connected. The Lord's work and glory is to bring to pass both the immortality and the eternal life of man (Moses 1:39): all are resurrected to a state of immortality, those who believe and obey the gospel plan go on 'in immortality unto eternal life.' (D. & C. 29:42-43.) Immortality is a free gift which comes by grace alone without works on man's part; eternal life, 'the greatest of all the gifts of God' (D. & C. 14:7), results from 'obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel.' (Third Article of Faith; 1 Cor. 15:42-54; 2 Tim. 1:10; Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 2, pp. 4-10, 24, 309-310.)" (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 376-377.)

2 Tim 1 10"Eternal life is the name given to the kind of life that our Eternal Father lives. The word eternal, as used in the name eternal life, is a noun and not an adjective. It is one of the formal names of Deity (Moses 1:3; 7:35; D. & C. 19:11) and has been chosen by him as the particular name to identify the kind of life that he lives. He being God, the life he lives is God's life; and his name (in the noun sense) being Eternal, the kind of life he lives is eternal life. Thus: God's life is eternal life; eternal life is God's life—the expressions are synonymous.

2 Tim 1 10"Accordingly, eternal life is not a name that has reference only to the unending duration of a future life; immortality is to live forever in the resurrected state, and by the grace of God all men will gain this unending continuance of life. But only those who obey the fulness of the gospel law will inherit eternal life. (D. & C. 29:43-44.) It is 'the greatest of all gifts of God' (D. & C. 14:7), for it is the kind, status, type, and quality of life that God himself enjoys. Thus those who gain eternal life receive exaltation; they are sons of God, joint-heirs with Christ, members of the Church of the Firstborn; they overcome all things, have all power, and receive the fulness of the Father. They are gods." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 237.)

2 Tim 1 1212. That day] The Second Coming, the day of judgment, the day of vengeance, the day when every man's works shall be tried by fire.

2 Tim 1 12Jesus gained power over death from his Father] See Commentary I, pp. 486-487.

2 Tim 1 12Jesus glorified by gaining eternal life] See Commentary I, pp. 759-762.
