Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

The Epistle of Paul to Titus

Titus is the epistle of obedience. Writing in his old age, Paul seems increasingly impressed by the Spirit to counsel his beloved Titus, and through him all the saints, of the overpowering need to walk in paths of truth and righteousness.

True, he affirms, as everlastingly he must in a day when the doctrine of Christ is being introduced anew to a pagan world, that salvation comes by God's grace. But his emphasis is upon what the saints must do after baptism to gain the glory that comes by grace.

Titus is written to and for the saints. It is a sermon of practical exhortation to those in the fold, a common sense approach to the problem of living in the world without being of the world. Paul is thus writing, in effect, to the saints today, and as is the never failing effect of the words of the great theologian-apostle, his words are as new and living now as when first recorded on the parchments of antiquity.

Paul Foreordained to Gain Eternal Life

Titus 1 11. An apostle of Jesus Christ] See Commentary II, pp. 130-131, 328-333.

Titus 1 1The faith of God's elect] The gospel of Jesus Christ.

Titus 1 22. As one of a host of faithful spirits in pre-existence, all of whom received a like blessing, Paul was foreordained to gain eternal life, included within which is the fact he was foreordained to believe the gospel, to be baptized, to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, to be married for eternity, and to make his calling and election sure—all of which he did.

Titus 1 2Foreordination] See Commentary II, pp. 267-269, 490-491.

Titus 1 2Election] See Commentary II, pp. 271-278.

Titus 1 2Foreordination of Israel] See Commentary 11, pp. 283-285.

Titus 1 22. Manifested his word through preaching] God offers salvation to man through "the foolishness of preaching." (1 Cor. 1:21.) Those who respond to this seeming "foolishness" are saved; those who reject it are damned.

Titus 1 2God our Saviour] Jesus Christ. "The Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior." (D. & C. 76:1.)

Titus 1 44. Mine own son] 'My convert, my disciple, my follower, my pupil.'

Titus 1 4The common faith] The gospel of Jesus Christ, the faith shared equally by all believers—a faith, with its attendant rewards, which is not reserved for apostles and prophets only, but which blesses equally the lives of all who believe and obey.
