Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

God Has a Body of Flesh and Bones

SCHeb 1 1Heb 1 2Heb 1 3Heb 1 4Seldom, in words as few, and with logic as persuasive, does Holy Writ set forth so clearly the nature and kind of Being that God is. As all the meridian saints knew, the Lord Jesus rose from the dead with a body of flesh and bones. "Handle me, and see," he said to his affrighted disciples after his resurrection, "for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:39.) To show the material nature of his resurrected body, he ate and drank with them, as a resurrected Man, and they felt the nail marks in his hands and feet and thrust their hands into his wounded side. (Luke 24:36-43; John 20:24-29; Acts 10:39-41.)

SCHeb 1 1Heb 1 2Heb 1 3Heb 1 4Now Paul is saying that the resurrected Christ is in the express image of his Father's person, which is to say that the Father also has a body of flesh and bones; or, as latter-day revelation—equally blunt, equally succinct, equally plain—says simply: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit." (D. & C. 130:22.) See Commentary II, pp. 154-162.

Heb 1 2Heb 1 11. God . . . 2. His Son] Two personages of tabernacle, and a third personage of Spirit, constitute the Eternal Godhead. God the Eternal Father is here separated from his Son as a personage, an entity, a holy and exalted man. Indeed, "in the language of Adam, Man of Holiness is his name, and the name of his Only Begotten is the Son of Man, even Jesus Christ, a righteous Judge, who shall come in the meridian of time." (Moses 6:57.)

Heb 1 11. At sundry times] 'At various times.' God does not reveal himself at all times to all peoples in the literal sense of the word. He is or should be known to all people in all ages through the workmanship of his hands, but the actual revelation of himself and his laws is reserved for those who live by faith and seek him with all their hearts.

Heb 1 1In divers manners] How does God reveal himself? Though the ways may be infinite, the perfect and crowning way is by direct revelation, by visions, by personal visitations. According to the laws of mediation and intercession which the Father himself ordained, he has chosen to reveal himself through the Son, ordaining that all revelation shall come through the Son, though that holy personage frequently speaks in the Father's name by divine investiture of authority; that is, he speaks in the first person as though he were the Father, because the Father has placed his name upon the Son. The sole reason for the personal appearance of the Father is to introduce the Son, as is illustrated by the appearance of the Father and the Son at the commencement of this dispensation. (Jos. Smith 2:12-20.) And hence the Biblical statement: "No man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son." (Inspired Version, John 1:19.) Christ the Son is, of course, the God of Israel through whom the will of the Father was manifest to that chosen people.

Heb 1 22. Spoken unto us by his Son] The perfect revelation of God came in the meridian of time. Whereas in previous ages he had been known by revelation to the holy prophets, in time's meridian he sent his Son into the world so that all men, seeing the Son, could envision perfectly who and what the Father is. The four Gospels contain the most comprehensive revelation of God the Father of any scriptures because they show forth what kind of a being the Son is, and men knowing the Son thereby know the Father. Our Lord said: "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (John 14:9), for God was in Christ revealing himself to the world.

Heb 1 2Heir of all things] As his Son, Christ is the natural heir of the Father. "All things that the Father hath are mine," he said. (John 16:15.) In similar vein, those who through faith are adopted into the Family of God the Father become "joint-heirs with Christ" (Rom. 8:17), and receive our Lord's promise, "all that my Father hath shall be given" unto them. (D. & C. 84:38.)

Heb 1 2By whom also he made the worlds] Christ, under the Father, is the Creator of all things. The word of the Father, spoken to Moses by the Son in accordance with the principle of divine investiture of authority, states: "Worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:33.)

Heb 1 33. The brightness of his glory... his power] In pre-existence Christ was "like unto God" (Abra. 3:24), thus possessing the power and glory of the Father. While yet dwelling in his pre-mortal sphere, he was "the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity." (Mosiah 3:5.) And now, raised in glorious immortality, he has attained the state for which he prayed in the great Intercessory Prayer: "O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was" (John 17:5), thus being able to affirm anew, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." (Matt. 28:18.)

Heb 1 3The express image of his person] What more need be said? God the Eternal Father is the Father; the Son of God is the Son. A father is a father, and a son is a son. The Father begets; the Son is begotten; they are Parent and Child; Sire and Son look alike, so much so that they are the express image of each other's persons. The substance composing the body of one is identical in appearance to that composing the body of the other. What could be plainer?

Heb 1 3Purged our sins] Through his atoning sacrifice, coupled with repentance and baptism on our part. That is to say: "The Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son, as it is written in those scriptures which have been given of him. He suffered temptations but gave no heed unto them. He was crucified, died, and rose again the third day; And ascended into heaven, to sit down on the right hand of the Father, to reign with almighty power according to the will of the Father; That as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved." (D. & C. 20:21-25.)

Heb 1 3Sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high] Stephen, "being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, And said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God." (Acts 7:55-56.) Joseph Smith said: "I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" (Jos. Smith 2:17.)

Heb 1 44. The angels] Other members of the family of God the Father who have a lower status and a lesser rank than Christ. They include the spirits in pre-existence, translated beings, and resurrected personages. See Commentary II, pp. 96-98.
