Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Gospel Offered to Ancient Israel

SCHeb 4 1Heb 4 2God gave the fulness of the gospel to Israel, but they rejected this perfect law of liberty and progression and were left with the preparatory gospel only. Moses in righteous anger at the false worship of Israel broke the first "tables of testimony" which were "written with the finger of God." (Ex. 31:18; 32:19.) Thereafter, "the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tablets of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; therefore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them. But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage." (Inspired Version, Ex. 34:1-2.)

SCHeb 4 1Heb 4 2From latter-day revelation we learn that Moses taught Israel "plainly" the things they must do to sanctify themselves, to gain the full blessings of the gospel, and to see the face of God. "But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory. Therefore, he took Moses out their midst, and the Holy Priesthood also; And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel; Which gospel is the gospel of repentance and of baptism, and the remission of sins, and law of carnal commandments, which the Lord in his wrath caused to continue with the house of Aaron among the children of Israel until John." (D. & C. 84:24-27.)

Heb 4 22. The gospel] See Commentary II, pp. 213-216. Dispensations] See Commentary II, pp. 491-493.
