Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Both Gospel and Mosaic Law Require Tithes

SCHeb 7 4Heb 7 5Heb 7 6Heb 7 7Heb 7 8Heb 7 9Heb 7 10Melchizedek was the presiding authority of God on earth in the day of Abraham, and as such the great patriarch paid tithes to and was blessed by Melchizedek. This fact and apparently a good many other things involving Melchizedek, which are unknown to us, seem to have been well known to the Hebrew Saints. Hence, without amplifying his concepts, but simply by way of analogy and symbolism, Paul is able to set forth for his initial readers some historical allusions which will remind them everlastingly that Melchizedek's authority was superior to Aaron's. The argument used is far more meaningful to a people indoctrinated with the concept of a hereditary priesthood than it is for us today who think only of personal worthiness, without reference to lineage, where both Aaronic and Melchizedek authority are concerned.

SCHeb 7 4Heb 7 5Heb 7 6Heb 7 74-7. "And he lifted up his voice, and he blessed Abram, being the high priest, and the keeper of the storehouse of God; Him whom God had appointed to receive tithes for the poor. Wherefore, Abram paid unto him tithes of all that he had, of all the riches which he possessed, which God had given him more than that which he had need. And it came to pass, that God blessed Abram, and gave unto him riches, and honor, and lands for an everlasting possession; according to the covenant which he had made and according to the blessing wherewith Melchisedek had blessed him." (Inspired Version, Gen. 14:37-40.)

Heb 7 55. Tithes] Whenever the Lord has had a people on earth, he has commanded them to keep the law of tithing, unless as in Enoch's day they were called upon to consecrate their all to the Lord's purposes. See Commentary I, pp. 618-619.

Heb 7 88. The Lord receives the tithes paid to the Church by the saints. It is as though the monies or properties were given to him personally, rather than to his agents, the bishops.
