Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Melchizedek Priesthood Administereth Gospel

SCHeb 7 11Heb 7 1211-12. "Without the Melchizedek Priesthood salvation in the kingdom of God would not be available for men on earth, for the ordinances of salvation—the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, for instance—could not be authoritatively performed. Thus, as far as all religious organizations now existing are concerned, the presence or the absence of this priesthood establishes the divinity or falsity of a professing church. It 'continueth in the church of God in all generations,' and it 'administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God' (D. & C. 84:17-19), whom to know is eternal life. (John 17:3.) If there is no Melchizedek Priesthood on earth, the true Church is not here and the gospel of Christ is not available to men. But where the Melchizedek Priesthood is, there is the kingdom, the Church, and the fulness of the gospel." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., pp. 479-480.)

Heb 7 1111. 'If a man could gain eternal life through the power of the Aaronic Priesthood, why did God promise to send the Melchizedek Priesthood?' To the Hebrew Saints this argument was absolute and conclusive; for them there could be no turning back to their old law.

Heb 7 11Order of Melchisedec] The Melchizedek Priesthood. See Heb. 7:1-3.

Heb 7 11Order of Aaron] The Aaronic Priesthood; the Levitical Priesthood. "And the Lord confirmed a priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the priesthood which is after the holiest order of God." (D. & C. 84:18.) See Heb. 5:4-14.

Heb 7 1212. 'A change in priesthood changes the laws and ordinances.' The Aaronic Priesthood administered the law of carnal commandments or preparatory gospel; the Melchizedek Priesthood administers the fulness of the gospel. "All men are liars," the Prophet said, "who say they are of the true Church without the revelations of Jesus Christ and the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which is after the order of the Son of God." (Teachings, p. 375.)

Heb 7 12Also: "If there is no change of ordinances, there is no change of priesthood. Wherever the ordinances of the gospel are administered, there is the priesthood." (Teachings, p. 158.) This matter of changing gospel ordinances is conclusive proof of the universal apostasy which necessitated the restoration of the gospel with the original ordinances. Since the ordinances of the sectarian world are different from those described in the Bible, Joseph Smith used this change to establish the fact of an apostasy in these words: "Where there is no change of priesthood, there is no change of ordinances, Paul says. If God has not changed the ordinances and the priesthood, [then] howl, ye sectarians! If he has, when and where has he revealed it? Have ye turned revelators? Then why deny revelation?" (Teachings, p. 308).
