Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Melchizedek Priesthood Given with Oath and Covenant

Heb 7 1818. 'The law of carnal commandments is abolished because it did not have the power to enable men to gain eternal life.'

Heb 7 1919. 'Perfection comes, not through the law, but through the gospel.'

Heb 7 2020. 'Callings in the Aaronic Priesthood are conferred without an oath.'

Heb 7 2121. God swore an oath that Christ should be a priest forever; that is, though our Lord had possessed the priesthood in pre-existence, he would receive it anew in mortality and would have it forever—in time and in eternity. And this sets the pattern for all who become sons of God and joint-heirs with Christ.

Heb 7 21"Every person upon whom the Melchizedek Priesthood is conferred receives his office and calling in this higher priesthood with an oath and a covenant. The covenant is to this effect:1. Man on his part solemnly agree to magnify his calling in the priesthood, to keep the commandments of God, to live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of Deity, and to walk in paths of righteousness and virtue; and 2. God on his part agrees to give such persons an inheritance of exaltation and godhood in his everlasting presence. The oath is the solemn attestation of Deity, his sworn promise, that those who keep their part of the covenant shall come forth and inherit all things according to the promise." (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 480.)

Heb 7 21In revealing the terms and conditions of the oath and covenant of the priesthood in this dispensation, the Lord said: "For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the church and kingdom, and the elect of God. And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; And he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; And he that receiveth my Father receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him. And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood. Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved. But whoso breaketh this covenant after he hath received it, and altogether turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the word to come. And wo unto all those who come not unto this priesthood which ye have received, which I now confirm upon you who are present this day, by mine own voice out of the heavens; and even I have given the heavenly hosts and mine angels charge concerning you. And I now give unto you a commendment to beware concerning yourselves, to give diligent heed to the words of eternal life. For you shall live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God." (D. & C. 84:33-44.)

Heb 7 2222. Testament] See Heb. 9:15-28.
