Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

Patriarchal Blessings Come by Faith

SCHeb 11 20Heb 11 21Heb 11 22Priesthood is the power and authority of God delegated toman on earth to act in all things for the salvation of men. And since salvation is a family affair and consists, in its fullest signification, in the continuation of the family unit in eternity, it follows that the priesthood is especially designed to bless families.

SCHeb 11 20Heb 11 21Heb 11 22When the priesthood organization is in perfect operation, it functions on a family or patriarchal basis; it operates as a patriarchal order. It is the power to bless, to bless mankind generally and to bless the household of faith specifically. Hence, formal provision is made in the gospel for patriarchal blessings—blessings given by a patriarch to his family in the power and authority of the holy priesthood.

SCHeb 11 20Heb 11 21Heb 11 22Patriarchal blessings began with Father Adam. He gave his descendants blessings which included prophetic utterances of "whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation." (D. & C. 107:39-57.) And when Jacob blessed all his sons, along with Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph, he was but following the pattern of the past. (Gen. 48 and 4 9.) "As inheritors of the blessings of Jacob, it is the privilege of the gathered remnant of Jacob to receive their own patriarchal blessings and, by faith, to be blessed equally with the ancients. Patriarchal blessings may be given by natural patriarchs, that is by fathers in Israel who enjoy the blessings of the patriarchal order, or they may be given by ordained patriarchs, specially selected brethren who are appointed to bless worthy church members. (Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 3, pp. 169-172; Gospel Kingdom, p. 146.)

SCHeb 11 20Heb 11 21Heb 11 22"The First Presidency (David O. McKay, Stephen L. Richards, J. Reuben Clark, Jr.), in a letter to all stake presidents, dated June 28, 1957, gave the following definition and explanation: 'Patriarchal blessings contemplate an inspired declaration of the lineage of the recipient, and also where so moved upon by the Spirit, an inspired and prophetic statement of the life mission of the recipient, together with such blessings, cautions, and admonitions as the patriarch may be prompted to give for the accomplishment of such life's mission, it being always made clear that the realization of all promised blessings is conditioned upon faithfulness to the gospel of our Lord, whose servant the patriarch is. All such blessings are recorded and generally only one such blessing should be adequate for each person's life. The sacred nature of the patriarchal blessing must of necessity urge all patriarchs to most earnest solicitation of divine guidance for their prophetic utterances and superior wisdom for cautions and admonitions.' " (Mormon Doctrine, 2nd ed., p. 558.)

Heb 11 2020. Isaac blessed Jacob] Jacob's blessing—for himself personally and for his posterity after him, as a nation and as a people—included this inspired utterance: "Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee." (Gen. 27:29.)

Heb 11 2121. Jacob . . . blessed . . . the sons of Joseph] In doing so, Jacob adopted them as his own, elevated them to the status of separate tribes in Israel, promised that a multitude of nations should flow from them, and set Ephraim (the younger) before Manasseh (the older). (Gen. 48.)

Heb 11 2222. The fact that Joseph elicited a promise from his posterity that they would carry his bones to Canaan, kept dramatically before them, generation after generation, the fact that they as a people would yet return to and inherit their promised land. And when they went out of Egyptian bondage, "Moses took the bones of Joseph with him." (Ex. 13:19.)
