Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

"Some Have Entertained Angels Unawares"

Heb 13 22. Strangers] Church members from other places, of whom Paul had already spoken, saying that the Lord blesses those who "have ministered to the saints, and do minister." (Heb. 6:10.)

Heb 13 2Some have entertained angels unawares] Does this mean that the saints may unknowingly entertain—that is, provide food, clothing, lodging and sociality—for the angels of God in heaven, for spirit beings, or for immortal or translated personages? Such a thought scarcely seems logical, although the disciples did provide food for the resurrected Lord (Luke 24), and according to Genesis 18 and 1 9, angels ministered to both Abraham and Lot and were banqueted and otherwise cared for by them.

Heb 13 2However the Inspired Version marvelously clarifies the experiences of Abraham and of Lot. It appears that as Abraham "sat in his tent door, . . . three men stood by him"; he addressed them as, "My brethren," provided them with food and drink, and was blessed by one of them. They are specifically called "angels," and they spoke of the journey upon which the Lord had sent them. They said they had a message for Sodom and that the Lord had told them that unless they delivered it the sins of that city would be upon their "heads." Then the record says: "And the angels which were holy men, and were sent forth after the order of God, turned their faces from thence and went toward Sodom." (Inspired Version, Gen. 18.)

Heb 13 2As to Lot's experience, these "three angels" came to Sodom where Lot "made them a feast," and they became the cause of great contention between Lot and the wicked inhabitants of the city. In due course "the angels called upon the name of the Lord for brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven. And thus they overthrew those cities [Sodom and Gomorrah] and all the plain." And again the record says that "the angels of God . . . were holy men." (Inspired Version, Gen. 19.)

Heb 13 2Thus, among those who serve God as angels, that is as his ministers and messengers, are righteous mortal men. And so Paul, with perfect propriety, counsels the Hebrew Saints to entertain other saints who may be serving on the Lord's errand as his messengers, his ministers, his angels.

Heb 13 2It would be interesting to know who the angels were who ministered to Abraham and then to Lot and who were in turn entertained by these brethren. Obviously they were great and mighty men for the Lord himself was personally present in connection with their appearance to Abraham. We know that "one of them blessed Abraham" (Inspired Version, Gen. 18:9), and also from other sources that Abraham was blessed by and received the priesthood from Melchizedek. (Gen. 14:17-20; Heb. 7:6-10; D. & C. 84:14.) Could it be that one of these angels was Melchizedek and that the three of them together comprised the First Presidency of the Church in their day?

Heb 13 2Ministering of angels] See Commentary II, pp. 96-98.
