Bruce R. McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, vol. 3 ( 1973)

How Christians Offer Sacrifices

SCHeb 13 9Heb 13 10Heb 13 11Heb 13 12Heb 13 13Heb 13 14Heb 13 15Heb 13 169-16. Paul now exhorts the Hebrew Saints to leave completely the dead letter of Mosaic performances and come to the living power that is in Christ. Verses 9 to 16 condense, summarize, and allude to a wealth of gospel knowledge and have the following sense and meaning:

Heb 13 99. 'Do not be deceived; there is no salvation in the sacrifices offered upon the altars of Israel; what counts is not the eating of the meat of sacrificial animals, but the sacrifice of a broken heart and a contrite spirit.'

Heb 13 1010. 'However, we Christians have an altar, the cross of Christ, whereon he offered himself for the sins of the world; but the full blessings of this atoning sacrifice are reserved for members of the Church; they do not come to those without the fold, those who serve the tabernacle, those who put their trust in the dead ordinances of the Mosaic Law; such persons do not, as it were, partake of the meat sacrificed on the Christian Altar; they do not partake of the sacrament of the Lord's Supper to renew the covenants made in the waters of baptism.'

SCHeb 13 11Heb 13 1211-12. 'Even as the high priests in Israel on the Day of Atonement burned the bodies of the sacrificial animals without the camp and brought only their blood into the holy of holies, that thereby the people might be freed from sin (Lev. 16), so Christ our Lord was sacrificed without the gate of Jerusalem, that through the shedding of his blood he might cleanse and perfect his people and admit them to celestial exaltation in the heavenly holy of holies.'

Heb 13 1313. 'Let us therefore leave the camp of Judaism, the camp peopled with nonmembers of the kingdom, the camp where trust is placed in animal sacrifices, and come unto Christ and the blessings of his blood, even though by so doing we bear the same reproach placed upon him.'

Heb 13 1414. 'And why should we worry about any temporal loss entailed by such a course; the things of this world are fleeting and transitory anyway; what we seek, through Christ, is eternal and enduring; it is an inheritance in the heavenly city.'

SCHeb 13 15Heb 13 1615-16. 'What then are the sacrifices of the true Christian? They are unending praise and thanksgiving to the Father who gave his Only Begotten Son as a ransom for our sins; they are everlasting praise to the Son for the merits and mercies and grace of his atoning sacrifice; they are obedience to the laws of the Lord; these are the sacrifices that please God. Or as it was said by the Lord himself to his other sheep: "Ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of blood; yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt offerings. And ye shall offer for a sacrifice unto me a broken heart and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto—me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy Ghost." ' (3 Ne. 9:19-20.)

SCHeb 13 15Heb 13 16Law of sacrifice] See Heb. 8:1-5.

Heb 13 1717. They that must give account] Christ's ministers are accountable for the sins of those over whom they preside and to whom they are sent. "I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel," the Lord said to Ezekiel; "therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul." (Ezek. 33:7-9.)

SCHeb 13 20Heb 13 2120-21. Perfection and salvation are available "by the grace of God, through the shedding of the blood of Christ, which is in the covenant of the Father unto the remission of your sins, that ye become holy, without spot." (Moro. 10:33.)
