Janne M. Sjodahl, Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1927)

A Foreword

This little volume owes its existence chiefly to the desire of the author to add his testimony, at this time, to that of numerous others, bearing the holy Priesthood, of the truths revealed in the Book of Mormon for the salvation of man.

III But the responsibility is not entirely the author's. Some of the contents of the book has appeared in the Improvement Era and other Church publications during the last ten years, and friends have been good enough to say, repeatedly, that they would be glad to have those contributions in some form more convenient for reference. Acting on their suggestion, I have collected some papers previously published and others that now appear for the first time, and respectfully submit them in this form to the public. In doing so, it is my sincere prayer that the testimony here offered may be of benefit to the reader, and especially to honest seekers after truth.

III The portrait of the Prophet Joseph Smith, a reproduction of which is printed as the frontispiece, by the courtesy of Elder Junius F. Wells, is thought to be a very good likeness. Elder Wells writes concerning this portrait and others in his valuable collection, as follows:

III "There were two portraits of Joseph Smith made in his lifetime. All others are, I believe, derived from these.

III "The one most widely published is the profile bust which came into general circulation after a steel engraving of it was made in England about 1854. This engraving was copied from a lithograph plate of Joseph and Hyrum standing and facing each other. The lithograph was made by Sarony of New York in 1852.

IV "It has not been fully established yet whence the portraits for this lithograph came. I, however, believe that it was from a Daguerro-type made in 1844 by Lucien R. Foster, and that I am in possession of a copy, which it is my intention to prove was made from life, if it can be so proved.

IV "The other portrait of the Prophet, an oil painting, was executed in 1842 by an artist from New York named Rogers. He also painted a corresponding portrait of Emma Smith, the Prophet's wife. These two paintings were hung usually in the bedroom of the mansion, and afterwards in the Nauvoo House, where it was my privilege to see them in 1875 and again in 1876.

IV "Mrs. Emma Smith Bidamon--formerly the Prophet's wife,--showed them to me. I asked her if she considered them good likenesses. She replied that she did not, and that she did not suppose a good portrait of Joseph could have been made, for the reason that his countenance and expression were always changing. I asked her, what Joseph himself thought of it, and she replied: 'I can tell you that, for I asked him, and this is what he said: "'It is a pretty good likeness of a silly boy, but not much like the Prophet of the Lord.'"

IV "It was, I think, after her death that the first photograph of the painting was made and from it a steel-engraving was produced, which was far from satisfactory. It represented the original as having stiff black hair and dark eyes, but it was for seven years the only front face portrait available for artists and photographers to use. It was extensively, and, in some cases, atrociously employed by them to meet the demand for a full face likeness.

IV "Desiring, if possible, to gratify this demand with some measure of satisfaction, I had the artist Dan Weggeland make a pen and ink drawing from the steel engraving, modifying it by an actual study of the Prophet's hair, of which I had a lock cut from his head by Sister Eliza R. Snow and lent to me for the purpose. I have also a cleverly made crayon sketch taken from the oil painting by a French artist--one of the Icarians named Charles DeBault, in 1853. I believe this sketch reveals much of the strength of the Prophet's character not so well shown either in the painting or in other copies of it.

IV "A recent photograph (1925) has been made of the painting, which has been skilfully retouched by the photographer and presents a very refined and pleasant portrait. A copy of this photograph was sent by President Frederick M. Smith to Elder George Albert Smith, and a copy may be seen in my collection of portraits at the Historian's Office."

VIIThe Lord reproved this Church some years ago, and said that the whole Church was under condemnation, because they had neglected the Book of Mormon.--Orson Pratt, April 13, 1956; Jour. of Dis., Vol. 3, p. 346.

VIIITHE Book of Mormon holds that the same Semitic institutions which the forefathers of the Indians had in their native country in Asia were transplanted to America, and under new environment and conditions, were developed in the new land. Like the Bible, the Book of Mormon makes God and immortality subjects of faith; and it makes public and private righteousness matters of practice. It identifies God with the principle of morality, and goes farther by identifying God with the story of human progress and life, in which mankind is redeemed from evil. It teaches the deeper consciousness between the Almighty and the individual soul, and attempts to unfold the divine purpose in the rise, fall, and progress of nations.

VIIIThe Book of Mormon tells how the ancient peoples of America built cities and developed a rich political life, and in time how Jesus the Christ gave His teachings to the people, just as He gave His message of salvation to the Jews, Greeks, and Romans. The Church of Christ was established, and His Holy priesthood given to those who were chosen for His work. Prophets wrote the history of their people, and their most important message is that God is the Father and Creator of the world and mankind. The religion of the Book of Mormon is monotheistic, and embodies the revelations of God to His people on this the American continent.

VIIILikeness to God is its supreme aim, and the highest duty of man. "Ye shall be perfect, even as your Heavenly Father is perfect." Anthropologists have agreed to some points that the Book of Mormon is clear on: First, that there was a single race in ancient America; that their forefathers came from Asia, and that they developed a monotheistic religion. Crane holds that the Indians show marked resemblances to the Hebrew race, and many of the most noted writers on Ancient America such as Cavallo, De Solis, Clavigero, and others hold to the view that the American race came of Hebrew origin. As the Holy Bible is now being proved and its beauties and truths shown by scholars of anthropology who are pursuing their work in Palestine and ancient Babylon, so the Book of Mormon in time will come to have the searching analysis of the scientist, who will do much to show its worth as Holy Scripture.

VIIILEVI EDGAR YOUNG, Professor of Western History, University of Utah.

XTHE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH "The portrait of the Prophet Joseph from which this copy is taken was painted in Nauvoo. His family regard it as his best likeness."--George Albert Smith. [Graphic omitted. See source document.]
