Janne M. Sjodahl, Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1927)

Chapter Six

Book of Mormon Names in American Geography

IN THE list of Book of Mormon proper names, appended to the American edition published in 1920, there are about two hundred in all. Are any of these found among the Indian names that have become known since the discovery of the western continents?

113This is a pertinent question.

113Proper Names as Evidence. The Bible student knows the value of proper names as evidence of the truth of a sacred record. He knows that, while Bible names have been lost, some possibly for ever, others, such as Carreel, Jordan, Bethlehem, Ephesus, Smyrna, Egypt, Palestine, Persia, are still familiar to travelers and students, and they are unimpeachable witnesses to the authenticity of Scripture history.

113The same may be said of Book of Mormon names. Many of them may be lost, or distorted beyond recognition. But others are still found in easily recognized forms.

113Difficult to Identify. The difficulty of identifying a great many of them is obvious. The Indians, when first met by Europeans, did not have a literature, properly speaking, and no standards of spelling and pronunciation fixed by grammars and dictionaries, as we have. The learned missionaries and explorers who took up the study of the native vernaculars did that work. They reduced the words and sentences they heard to writing, and used whatever combination of letters of some European alphabet that seemed to them to represent best the sounds the natives uttered when speaking. But the European letters were but imperfect media by which to visualize the perceptions of the ear. Some of the sounds used by the Indians had no equivalent in the European languages, and no letter could represent them. In such cases each individual adopted his own spelling, with the result that, in numerous instances, the same Indian name is spelled differently by different authors. In other instances different words were represented by the same letters. In either case, the spelling was misleading, and the comparison between the Indian words and those of other languages is rendered exceedingly difficult.

114One who studies Indian names, as generally written, for the purpose of comparing them with words from other sources is in about the same predicament as he would be in, were he to read French in some ingenious, simplified system of pronunciation and try to identify its relationship with other languages. How could he for instance ever recognize the linguistic affinity of a string of words like these:

114"Noo z'ahvong z'ehkree ah noh z'ahmee ohshoohrdwee."

114A German might, perhaps, write the same sentence something like this:

114"Nu-savong-sekri a nosami aschurdwi."

114and that would not help us out.

114It is just that kind of difficulty that confronts us when we try to recognize old acquaintances among Indian names that have been made to masquerade in European costumes, be they Spanish, Italian, French, German, or American-English.

115Modern writers have tried to obviate this difficulty by adopting a system of arbitrary signs to represent the peculiarly Indian sounds.

115There is another difficulty. Some Indian languages are, to a large extent, polysynthetic. A word often consists of several words strung together, to represent one complex idea. Thus, an Eskimo may make one long word of this sentence: "Do you think he really intends to go to look after it?" But during this process of polysynthesis prefix

es and suffixes are dropped, and the words are otherwise modified and rendered difficult to recognize.

115We use polysynthesis when we say "haporth" instead of "a half-penny worth;" or, the more common "goodbye" for "God be with ye," which was the original form of that parting word. The difficulty of analyzing such expressions, but for the fact that they are well known, is apparent. But it is just as great with regard to many Indian words, owing to the changes they have passed through.

115Rules Whereby Words Can be Recognized. However, these difficulties do not, fortunately, attach to all Indian names. Some are easily recognized, if a few obvious rules are remembered.

115In the first place, too much importance must not be placed on the letters representing vowel sounds. In the early part of the history of languages the vowels were of so little consequence that they were not even written. They were left to the reader to supply. Even today they are very uncertain quantities. For instance, the sound represented by "a" may vary all the way from the London "a-i" (almost a diphthong) to the delicate "e" of the Glasgowites; not to mention what seems to be almost a short "i"-sound in "orange." It is the same with "o" in "go." Its pronunciation varies all the way from "gow" to "goo." That shows how unreliable the vowels are for comparative purposes, taken by themselves.

116In the second place, the consonants, too, are interchangeable, to a certain extent, in all languages. "L" and "r" merge into each other and some other consonants. "M" readily interchanges with "b," and "d" with "t," etc. "R" is, on the whole, so weak in the Indian languages that it merges into "d," "n," "l," or even "y." This is important to remember. [^1]

116In the third place, similarity of sound is not always conclusive proof of the identity of origin of two words. It may be accidental. Therefore the meaning of the words must be given due weight. The meaning sometimes is a safer guide than the letters by which the word happens to be represented. When both letters and meaning point to the same origin of a word, the question may be considered settled, for there is very little chance that such an agreement would be mere accident.

116As an illustration of the changes names undergo, the Hebrew peleshet (from palash, "to go," "to rove," "to wander"), may be mentioned. It has become Philistia and then Palestine. The Arabian Djebel-al Tarik, "the mountain on the road," has become Gibraltar. According to Mr. Fiske in Myths and Myth-makers, the name Odin, the chief god of the Teutonic races, which name was originally Gundan, has become God in English, the same as Gott in German and Gud in the Scandinavian languages. Mr. Fiske also shows that the English words Divinity and Devil may be traced from the same origin, the Zend dev, and the Sanskrit deva. In some languages this became devil, teufel, djevul, dj, etc. In others it became Deus, Theos, Diewas, Dieu, Dios, etc., and our divinity, divine, etc.

117The following list of Book of Mormon names is submitted, not as an infallible product of scientific research, but rather as a suggestion indicating what such research may be expected to yield.

117ANGOLA was the name of a city which the Nephites occupied and fortified, under the leadership of Mormon, about the year 326, A. D., when Lamanites gradually drove them northward. (Morm. 2:4.)

117The word occurs in the Lenape annals on creation, and is, consequently, a genuine Indian word. In those legends God is said to have made "the first beings," and also the angelatawiwak--the angels--before jinwis, the first man, came into being on earth. Rafinesque [^2] observes:

117"This account of the creation is strikingly similar to the Mosaic and Oriental accounts, although it does not speak of days or yoms. The word for 'angels,' angelalawiwak, is not borrowed but real Lenape, put in plural; thus, the same as the Greek angelos."

118Rafinesque is of the opinion that the angelatawi-wak are the Elohim, of the Hebrews, the ang-elos of the Pelasgians and the h'ello ("old men") of the Egyptians.

118But how did the word get into the old Indian annals? And how does it happen that it appears in the Book of Mormon as the name of a city? Is it all chance? We have a flourishing city in California which, when first founded, in 1781, was called Pueblo de la Reina de los Angeles. We might as well say that name does not prove that Spaniards settled there, but that it is merely by chance that the name sounds as if it were Spanish.

118ANTI. There are several words in the Book of Mormon in which "anti" is one of the component parts, as for instance, Ani-Anti, the name of an Amalekite village in which Aaron, Muloki, and Amnah preached the gospel. (Alma 21:11.) Anti-Nephi-Lehi, the name of a king and also of a people (Alma 24:1-5) antion, a piece of gold used as money (Alma 11:19) Antipas, the name of a mountain (Alma 47:7) Antum, the name of the country in which the hill Shim was situated (Mormon 1: 3), and onti, the name of a piece of silver used as money (Alma 11:6), are instances of the use of the word anti in the Book of Mormon.

119The Indian word (Quichua) corresponding to anti is, I believe, anta, which Garcilasso de la Vega [^3] tells us means "copper." From anta the magnificent mountain chain that forms the backbone of South America was called the Andes, possibly because of the abundance of metal, especially copper, found in those mountains.

119In the Book of Mormon, anti means a mountain, or a hill. When it is used to denote a country it probably means a hilly, or mountain country, and when the name is applied to a city it may indicate location in a mountain region. In the same way the Anti-Nephi-Lehis may have been located in a hill country. As applied to pieces of money, the word would indicate that they were made of an alloy in which copper formed a considerable part.

119Rafinesque traces the word anta to a root, ante, which, he says, means "ancient," and from which, he believes, the Greeks made the word Atlantoi by pre-fixing an abbreviated form of atala, "high," "eminent." The Romans adopted the word in their Atlantes, from which we still have our Atlantic, as the name of the great ocean to the east.

119Anti appears in Antisuyu, the name given by the Peruvians to the eastern part of their vast domain; that is, to the part that was traversed by the loftiest ridges of the Andes mountains. That proves, beyond question, that the Peruvians used the word exactly as we find it used in the Book of Mormon.

119ANTIPAS was the name of a mount or hill on the summit of which Lamanite armies on one occasion had gathered themselves for battle. (Alma 47:7.)

119This is a genuine Indian word. On the mountain slope of the Cordillera, in the upper Amazon basin, there is, according to Dr. Brinton, [^4] a tribe of Indians, of the Jivaro linguistic stock, known as the Antipas. They are described as "rather tall, of light color, with thin lips, aquiline noses, straight eyes, prognatic jaws, hair black or with reddish tinge."

120DESOLATION is the name of the country where the people of Zarahemla first landed. It was so called because it was, as it were, a vast grave yard, covered with bones of men and beasts, and many ruins. [^5]

120What the original was we cannot even surmise. But it seems to have been customary among some prehistoric Americans to call desolated places Desolation. In the Yucay valley in Peru the almost inaccessible mountain sides are full of caves, often serving as burial places. They are called Tantama Marca, "Precipices of Desolation." [^6] The Ute Indians have given the name Surouaro to a cluster of mounds, also known as the Yellow Jacket Spring Ruin, near the head of a canyon of the same name, fourteen miles west of Dolores, Colorado. That name is said to mean "Desolation."

121"Surouaro was one of the first ruins in this region described by American explorers, attention having been first called to it by Prof. Newberry, whose description follows: 'Surouaro is the name of a ruined town which must have oncecontained a population of several thousands. The name is said to be of Indian (Utah) origin, and to signify Desolation." [^7]

121HAGOTH. In the Book of Mormon, Hagoth, we are told, built an exceedingly large ship on the borders of the land Bountiful, by the land Desolation, and launched it forth into the West Sea, by the narrow neck which led into the land northward. Afterwards other expeditions to the land northward were undertaken. This was about the year 55, B. C.

121California Indians attribute a large artificial mound formed of mussel shells and bones of animals, on Point St. George, near San Francisco, to a prehistoric people which they call Hohgates. Whether this name is the Book of Mormon Hagoth is a question which seems to be pertinent.

121According to the traditions, the Hohgates were seven strangers, who arrived from the sea and who were the first to build houses to live in in that part of the country. [^8] They hunted deer, sea lions, and seals. They gathered mussels on the near-by rocks, and the refuse from their meals was piled up around their dwellings. One day--so the tradition runs--they saw a gigantic seal into which they managed to drive a harpoon. The wounded animal fled seaward, dragging the boat with it, towards the unknown world. At the moment when the mariners were about to be engulfed, the seal disappeared and the boat was flung up into the air. Since then, the Hohgates, changed into stars, return no more.

122It is more than probable that there is an historic basis for this beautiful legend.

122That sea voyages were not entirely unheard of in prehistoric America is evident from the story told of Inca Tupac Yupanqui, which Sir Clements Markham accepts as historically true. This Inca is said to have constructed, about the year 1439, A. D., a number of balsas and embarked from Tumbez in full view of the army. He was gone about nine months. Sarmiento believed that he reached the Solomon Islands, but Sir Clements thinks he landed on the Galapagos Islands. At all events, "he brought back gold, a chair of brass, and the skin and jawbone of a horse, which were preserved in the fortress of Cuzco." [^9]

122That there has been, at some time, communication by water between Easter Island and the American main land is also probable.

122JACOBUGATH was the name of a great city mentioned in 3 Ne. 9:9. It was inhabited by the people of King Jacob, and, as gath means a wine press, it may have received its name from the fact that wine was made there, causing the wickedness for which it was, finally, destroyed.

122The word should be compared with Intibucat, the name of an Indian dialect of the Lenca stock, spoken in Central Honduras in and about the pueblo of the same name, [^10] not because the two are identical, but because their construction is the same.

122LABAN was the name of a prominent resident of Jerusalem, a contemporary of Lehi, and the owner of certain brass plates containing historical and genealogical data of the greatest importance. (1 Ne. 3:5.)

123Laman, the name of the eldest son of Lehi (1 Ne. 2:5), and also of a king mentioned in Mosiah 7: 21, is the same name as Laban. Lamoni is formed from this word by the addition of the suffix "i."

123The word is Hebrew and means "white." Several forms of it are found in the Old Testament, such as "Laban," the father-in-law of Jacob; "lebanah," the "moon," because of its whiteness; "Libnah," a place name (Num. 33:20) "Libni the name of a person (Ex. 6:17) "Lebanon the well-known name of a mountain, and "Libnites," as the descendants of Libni were called (Num. 3:21.)

123Nor is the word confined to the Semitic group of languages. Compare the Greek "alphos" and "Olympos;" also the Latin "albus," from which we have a number of words, such as "albino," "Albion," "Albany," "album," the latter being originally white tablets for writing. Some derive even "Alps" from the same root, while others claim that this name is from a Gaelic source meaning "height."

123It would, indeed, be a surprise if we should not find that word, so common in the Old World anciently, in use among the prehistoric Indians. But it seems to have been just as common on this side of the world.

123Dr. Brinton tells us that the Yameos Indians on the Maraon are also called Llameos, Lamas, and Lamistas. In the Lama linguistic stock he places the Alabonos, the Nahuapos, and the Napeanos. [^11] In A-labono we can easily recognize Laban, and in Nahuapos and Napeanos we seem to have the name of Nephi preserved, just as we have the name of Laban, or Laman, preserved in Lamas and Lamistas. Near Truxillo, in South America, there are also the Laman-os or Lamistas, of the Quichua linguistic stock. [^12]

124According to Reclus, quoted by Dr. Cyrus Thomas [^13] there is, or was, a tribe of Indians, of the Ulva stock, near Blewfields, called Lamans. The Blewfields river was also called the Lama river. Dr. Brinton does not classify the Lamans, but he mentions the Ramas as living on a small island in the Blew-fields Lagoon, and the Lamans and the Ramas may be the same name, since "l" and "r" interchange in all languages. [^14]

124In Yucatan we have the ancient city of Labna, which name certainly seems to be the same as Laban.

124I am aware of the fact that Lab-na is said to mean "old house." But that does not say that the root of the word is not the same as the Hebrew "white." For white is often a sign of old age.

125The word laban means the same in the Indian, as in the Old World languages. In the Lenape, Rafinesque says, lapan-ibi means "white water." [^15] Lumonaki, according to the same authority, "white

124land." This word is also spelled abnaki, with the initial "l" dropped. Dr. Brinton [^16] says the Algonquins used to call their eastern kindred Abnakis, "our white ancestors," an expression which, since [l]abn means "white," would be the same as "our Lamanite ancestors;" aki, however, means "land," and "white land" is, therefore, a better translation. [^17]

125Charles Christian Ravn, the Danish scholar, is authority for the statement that the Indians whom the Icelanders met when exploring the North American coast in the early part of the eleventh century, had a tradition concerning a country called, in Icelandic, Hvitramannaland, "White-men's-land." That would be identically the same name as Lumon-aki, or the land of Laman. Conjecture has located Hvitramannaland along the Chesapeake Bay, extending down into the Carolinas, and peopled it with "white" colonists, but it is more probable that it is the Lumonaki of the Algonquins and the Lamoni of the Book of Mormon.

125LEHI. In the Hebrew this word is Lechi, the "ch" being practically the same as our "h." In Palestine a hilly district in Judea, near Jerusalem, was known as Lehi (Judges 15:19.) Samson, after his battle with the Philistines, threw away his unique weapon, the jawbone of an ass, and called the place of combat Ramath-Lehi, "the Hill of Lehi." Then he was thirsty, and the Lord, in answer to his prayer, opened a crevice in the hill, [^18] and "there came water thereout." So he called the spring, En-hakkore," the spring of him that called" (in answer to prayer), "which," we read, "is in Lehi unto this day." This incident is recalled by the name of the father of Nephi.

126In the Lenape language the word is lechau, which is identical with the Hebrew lechi. In the Indian tongue it means a "fork of a river," and that may well have been suggested by the form of a jawbone of a donkey.

126T. A. Joyce [^19] mentions an Indian tribe in Colombia, located to the north of the Chibchas, which he calls the Laches, a name which seems to be identical with the Hebrew Lechi and the Book of Mormon Lehi.

126In North America there are several places named Lehigh. The Lehigh river in Pennsylvania, which flows into the Delaware at Easton, Northampton Co., is well known. The one-hundred mile channel through which it winds its way is called Lehigh Valley, and there is a good-sized county having the same name.

126I have noticed that the name is known far away in the Hawaiian islands. In the November number, 1921, of The Paradise of the Pacific, a magazine published in Honolulu, the statement occurs that the ancient name for Diamond Head, a prominent volcanic mountain, was Leahi. This is but a very slight variation in spelling, from the name, as it is given in the Book of Mormon.

127LIAHONA. This interesting word is Hebrew with an Egyptian ending. It is the name which Lehi gave to the ball or director he found outside his tent the very day he began his long journey through the "wilderness," after his little company had rested for some time in the Valley of Lemuel. (1 Nephi 16: 10; Alma 37:38.)

127L is a Hebrew preposition meaning "to," and sometimes used to express the possessive case. Iah is a Hebrew abbreviated form of "Jehovah," common in Hebrew names. On is the Hebrew name of the Egyptian "City of the Sun," also known as Memphis and Heliopolis. L-iah-on means, therefore, literally, "To God is Light;" or, "of God is Light." That is to say, God gives light, as does the Sun. The final a reminds us that the Egyptian form of the Hebrew name On is Anmu, [^20] and that seems to be the form Lehi used.

127Lehi had just received the divine command to begin his perilous journey. The question uppermost in his mind, after having received that call, must have been how to find the way. That must have been quite a problem. But he arose early in the morning, determined to carry out the command given. Undoubtedly he had prayed all night for light and guidance. And now, standing in the opening of the tent, perhaps as the first rays of the sun broke through the morning mists, his attention is attracted by a metal ball "of curious workmanship." He picks it up and examines it. And then, as he realizes that it is the guide for which he had been praying, he exclaims in ecstasy, L-iah-on-a! Which is as much as to say, This is God's light; it has come from him! And that became the name of the curious instrument. This was not a compass. It was a miraculously formed instrument which served both as compass and octant.

128Now, the fact is that this manner of giving names was an ancient Semitic custom. Hagar, when her son was perishing in the wilderness and she beheld the angel by the life-giving spring, exclaimed, Beer-lachai-roi! which means, literally, "Well, to live, to see." That is to say, "the well of him that liveth and seeth me," for that was the thought that came to her mind. (Gen. 16:13, 14.) And that became the name of the well. In the same way, Abraham called the place where he had offered Isaac on the altar, Jehovah-jireh, "the Lord will provide;" because the Lord did provide for himself a ram instead of Isaac, as Abraham had assured his son the Lord would do. (Gen. 22:7-14.) And that became the name of the Mount "to this day."

128Lehi gave the metal ball a name commemorative of one of the great experiences of his life, just as these Old-Testament worthies had done. And, furthermore, be gave it a name that no one but a devout Hebrew influenced by Egyptian culture would have thought of. Is that not the strongest possible evidence of the truth of the historic part of the Book of Mormon?

128MANTI. In the Book of Mormon this word occurs as the name of the hill upon which Nehor, the murderer, was executed. (Alma 1:15.) It was also the name of a Nephite soldier (Alma 2:22), and there was a Land of Manti, on the head waters of the river Sidon (Alma 16:6, 7) and a city of the same name (Alma 57:22.)

129The name is very ancient. It is mentioned in the earliest Egyptian inscriptions as the name of an Asiatic people, probably the same as the Hyksos, or Shepherds, [^21] or, perhaps, rather a tribe of that people.

129In this country there was at one time, in South America, the Manta Indians, on the coast north of the Gulf of Guayaquil. In Stanford's Compendium of Geography and Travel, the Mantas are referred to as an extinct Quito race of ten tribes. [^22] There was also a city of Manta and a district of the same name, as in the Book of Mormon.

129Another Manti. In 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, and others, found it best, on account of apostasy and bitterness, to leave Kirtland and go to Far West, Mo., where the Saints were endeavoring to establish themselves. On September 25, they passed through Huntsville, Randolph Co., and the prophet is said to have told the brethren that that place, where a stake of Zion had been established, was "the ancient site of the city of Manti." (Andrew Jenson, Hist. Rec., p. 601.)

129Whether "the ancient site of Manti" refers to the Manti in the Book of Mormon is a question that has been debated. Some prefer to regard it as a reference to a later City of Manti, built by descendants of Nephi in Missouri. [^23] In either case, the information is both important and interesting.

130According to Garcilasso de la Vega, the Mantas worshiped the ocean, fishes, lions, tigers, serpents, etc., but special veneration was paid to an emerald which was large as an ostrich egg. At their principal festival they exhibited this jewel, and people from near and far came to see it and to offer presents, especially emeralds, which the Indians regarded as the children of the big stone. An incredible number of emeralds were thus accumulated in the sanctuary in the Manta valley. Many of these gems fell into the hands of the Spaniards, and some were destroyed because the conquerors did not know their value, but the large stone was hidden, and has never been found.

130The word is found all over America. It is the familiar world manito. In the Lenape annals on the creation we read : [^24]

130"It was then when the God-Creator made the makers or spirits--Manito--Manitoak; and also the angels, angelatawiwak. And afterwards he made the man-being, Jinwis, ancestor of the men. He gave him the first mother, Netamigaho, mother of the first beings."

130The manitos in this legend were spirits who had an existence before the first man appeared on earth.

130In the Algonquin language the word is said to express divinity in its broadest sense. Schoolcraft [^25] spells it monedo, and translates it "spirit," or whatever is mysterious. A monedo, or manitou, may be the Great Spirit, a witch or a wizard, a glass bead, a jewel, an insect, a reptile, or a place haunted by a spirit. It has frequently been translated "medicine," which may seem absurd, until we recall the fact that in early days all medicine was supposed to be "charms" and pharmacists were considered wizards. In Gal. 5:20 the word Pharmakei is translated "witchcraft," showing how the Bible translators regarded pharmacy.

131In the Haytian language, Rafinesque tells us, the word manati, evidently the same as manta and manito, means a great and eminent thing, and this would account for the naming of a hill Manti, as in the Book of Mormon. [^26]

131In Hebrew we have the word man, which means something mysterious, for the Children of Israel gave that name to the mysterious bread that came from heaven; for, they said, We "wist not what it was." That word Gesenius connects with manah, to "divide," to "portion out," to "count." There is where we have obtained our word "money." If it is thought that manti and manito cannot be related to manah and money, because these words lack the "t," it should be remembered that the "t" re-appears in "mint," which also has something to do with "money." Manti should be compared with the English mantic, and the Greek mantikos.

131MORMON. The Prophet Joseph, in a letter published in the Times and Seasons, Nauvoo, May 15, 1843, [^27] furnished the following explanation concerning the meaning of this word:

132"It has been stated that this word was derived from the Greek word mormo. This is not the case. There was no Greek or Latin upon the plates from which I, through the grace of the Lord, translated the Book of Mormon."

132Then he quotes from the Book of Mormon (Mormon 9:32-34), where we are told that the characters used were the "reformed Egyptian." He continues:

132"Here, then the subject is put to silence, for 'none other people knoweth our language;' therefore, the Lord, and not man, had to interpret, after the people were all dead. And as Paul said, 'The world by wisdom know not God;' so the world by speculation are destitute of revelation; and as God, in his superior wisdom, has always given his Saints, whenever he had any on the earth, the same spirit, and that spirit, as John says, is the true spirit of prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, I may safely say that the word Mormon stands independent of the learning and wisdom of this generation.

132"Before I give a definition, however, of the word, let me say that the Bible, in its widest sense, means good; for the Savior says, according to the Gospel of John, "I am the Good Shepherd;' and it will not be beyond the common use of terms to say that Good is among the most important in use, and, though known by various names in different languages, still its meaning is the same, and is ever in opposition to bad."

132The prophet, further says:

132"We say, from the Saxon, good; from the Dane, god; the Goth, goda; the German, gut; the Dutch, goed; the Latin, bonus; the Greek, kalos; the Hebrew, tob, and the Egyptian, mon. Hence, with the addition of more, or the contraction, mor, we have the word Mormon, which means literally, more good."

133Here we have the interesting information that the first part of the word is an abbreviation of the English adverb "more," and that the second part is the Egyptian adjective "mon." In other words, the prophet found, on the plates, as a proper noun, a compound word meaning, literally, "better," and, under the influence of the Holy Spirit, he solved the problem of transliterating it, by translating the first part into English and copying the second part, and making of the two, one word, half English and half Egyptian. This, I admit, is an unusual literary procedure, but we have an instance of it in our Bible, where a place called Maaleh-acrabbim (Josh. 15:3) is also called "The Ascent of Akrabbim," (Num. 34:4.) Here half of the name is translated into English and the other half is a foreign word. See also Gen. 23:2 and 35:27, where Hebron is called, in the first passage, Kirjath-Arba, and in the second, "The City of Arbah," the first half of the name being translated into English and the second being left untranslated. [^28]

133And it means "more good;" that is, "better."

133The reference of the prophet, in this connection, to the Bible would indicate that the good expressed in the word is the same as that which we call "good news," or "gospel," and that "Mormon," therefore, means one who is the bearer of "good tidings."

134It is probable that the mon in "Mormon" is akin to the mon or men in the Egyptian Amon or Amen. Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge, (The Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. 2, p. 2) says that Amen is from a root men "to abide, to be permanent, eternal." Mon or men (the vowel is indifferent) would, then, mean "good" in the sense of permanency," just as nefer means "good" in the sense of physical beauty. I gather this from what Champollion (Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens, p. 91) on the authority of Eusebius says, viz., that the divinity which takes the name Amen and Kneph or Noub, alternatively, was by the Greeks called Agathodaimon, and that Nero, when assuming a divine title, called himself Neo-agathodaimon. Agathos is, of course, the Greek word for "good," and it must have been suggested by the Egyptian men or mon.

134It is a very interesting fact that many American languages, perhaps most of them, form their comparatives and superlatives by the use of the adverbs "more" and "most." In the Aztec, "better" is ocachiqualli, which means, literally, "more good." In the Otomi language "better" is nra nho, which means "more good." In the Maya, the comparative is formed by affixing the last vowel of the adjective with an "l" added or by simply affixing the particle il. For instance, from tibil, a "good thing," u tibil-il, a "better thing" is formed. [^29]

134May we not ask, "What is the explanation of thesingular fact that the Prophet Joseph seems to have had knowledge of how comparatives are formed in some of the principal American languages?

135MORONI. This is, as is well known, the name of the last of the Book of Mormon prophets, who finished the records of his father, Mormon, added his own abridgement of the plates of the Jaredites, and deposited the completed volume in the hill, Cumorah, about 421, A.D. (Morm. 8:14; Moro. 10:2), in the same hill, where Mormon had deposited the original plates entrusted to his care, from which he had compiled his briefer history. (Morm. 6:6.)

135 Moroni was also the name of the great Nephite general who was the first to proclaim the American continents the Land of Liberty, or, as we should say, "The Land of the Free." (Alma 46:11-17.)

135There was a City of Moroni on the East Sea, "on the south by the line of the possessions of the Lamanites" (Alma 50:13) and a Land of Moroni, "on the borders by the sea shore." (Alma 51:22;62:25.)

135The word is Semitic. At the beginning of our era it had found its way into the Syriac spoken in Palestine, and was so generally understood that Paul used it in his first letter to the Corinthians (16:22), although that document was written in Greek, when he says: "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha."

135These words, Maranatha, have puzzled commentators, and various interpretations have been suggested, such as "In the coming of our Lord;" or, "Our Lord has come;" or, "Our Lord will come." Some read the word as two words, Marana tha, which would mean, "Come, Lord," and which is the very prayer that closes the Revelation by John, erchou, Kyvie Iesou. (Revelation 22:20.) It was, in all probability, a conventionalized expression of pious sentiment, something similar to the old, "Peace be with thee," or our own "adieu," or "goodbye," which, if spelled out, would, of course, be, "God be with you." But all agree that Marana, or as the word is transliterated in the Book of Mormon, Moroni, means "our Lord." We have also, in the Book of Mormon, a longer form of the same word, Moronihah, which I take to mean, "Jehovah is my Lord," which gives us a meaning almost identical with that of the name El-i-jah, "Jehovah is my God."

136This name, Marana, or Moroni, has been preserved in the name Maraon, which is the name by which the mighty Amazon river is known when it first begins its course towards the Ocean. [^30] In the valley of the Marafion remains of cyclopean buildings have been found, proving that the region was inhabited in prehistoric times. In 1840 a remarkable sculptured stone was found there, now known as the Chavin stone, from the locality where it was discovered. It is 25 feet long by 2 feet 4 inches, and represents either some mighty ruler or some divine personage, standing under a number of rays, each ending in a serpent head, reminding one of an Egyptian pharaoh under the so-called aten rays.

137Dr. Brinton gives the name of a Morona tribe of Indians among the Zaparo linguistic stock, in the upper Amazon valley. [^31]

137On the east coast there is also a river named after the great prophet. The Maroni river.

Archeology.32ë flows from the Tumakurak range and forms the frontier line between French and Dutch Guiana, and, after a course of about 380 miles, reaches the Atlantic.

137The name Moroni is found even in Peruvian literature. The Peruvians had a drama, called Apu Ollantay, composed about the year 1470, long before the arrival of the Spaniards, [^32] and first committed to writing in 1770. Sir Clements Markham has published an elegant translation of it. Von Tschudi, in his work on the Quichua language, also gives it in full.

137The first act is supposed to depict something that happened at the end of the 14th century of our era. The other two acts cover the first ten or twelve years of the 15th century. The hero is the great chief Ollanta, and the story is about his love for Cusi Coyllur, a daughter of the proud Inca Pachacutec at a time when such a venture might have cost the lives of both. The first scene of the third act of this drama is laid in a street in Cuzco called Pampa Moroni. [^33]

138I know not how far back this name as a street name in Cuzco goes. Montesinos [^34] says the fifth king, Inti Capac Yupanqui, divided Cuzco into two districts, Upper and Lower, and divided the first into streets to which he gave names. If it was this Inca who gave the street or square referred to, the name of Moroni, that name must have been so well known in Indian tradition, in the first half of the fifth century, A. D., as to suggest the propriety of naming a public place in the "holy city" of the Peruvians in his honor.

138MULEK is one of the very interesting words in the Book of Mormon. It was the name, or the title, of the young son of Zedekiah, who, with his attendants, as stated in a previous chapter, escaped from the Babylonians, when Nebuchadnezzar had captured Jerusalem, about 599 B.C., and came to the western hemisphere, part of which became the "land north" (Hel. 6:10), "for the Lord did bring Mulek into the land north and Lehi into the land south." It was also the name of a city on "the east borders by the sea shore" (Alma 51:26.) There was a land called Melek "on the west of the river Sidon" (Alma 8:3), which name is, clearly, but a variant of Mulek. From these words others are formed, such as Muloki (Alma 20:.2), Amulek (Alma 8:21), and Amaleki and Amalickiah (Omni 30, Alma 46:3.)

139There is, according to Mr. T. S. Denison [^35] an Aryan root mol, Sanskrit mr, which means "to crush," "to grind," as in a mill. There is another root inkh, which means "to move." Molinkh, or molik with a slight variation, would, therefore, be one who makes the mill go; one who provides food, or who directs the work of preparing it.

139In the Egyptian the "mill mover" became the "king," and so we have the Valley of the Kings, the Biban el Molouk, where royal bodies were interred, perhaps as far back as before the days of Moses.

139There is a very interesting inscription in which the word has been discovered. In the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam, king of Judah, about 933 B.C., Shishak, the Egyptian pharaoh, invaded Judea. (1 Kgs. 14.) Dr. W. M. Flinders Petri [^36] suggests that, as Solomon had married a near relative of Shishak but not recognized her son as heir to the throne, he undertook that expedition to avenge a supposed insult and at the same time to strengthen the relations between Egypt and the apostate kingdom of Israel. So he went through the land, plundered the temple and the royal palace, and carried off whatever valuables he could find, including, probably, the three hundred shields of gold made by Solomon and valued at over a million dollars in our money. [^37] A record of this exploit was made upon one of the temple walls at Karnak, Egypt, and in this record there is a list of 156 names of places captured by the pharaoh. One of these places is called, as transcribed in Hebrew characters, Judah-Malech, but in English letters, Yuteh Mark. [^38] There is no real discrepancy in this, because the glyph representing an "l" could also represent an "r" [^39] Champollion translates the name, "Kingdom of Judah," but Dr. Bird, more correctly, identifies it with the "City of the King of Judah," that is, Jerusalem. [^40]

140Here we have some very important information. We learn that the kingdom of Judah, or the capital of the kingdom, was known by a name in which malech formed an essential part. But Malech in this Egyptian inscription is, undoubtedly, the Mulek of the Book of Mormon. The Mulekites, therefore, in naming the land of their first settlement, gave it a name by which Judah, or jerusalem, was known in the Old World. We also learn that the Egyptian character for "l" in this word sometimes represents an "r," and this is of importance in studying the derivatives of the word.

140In the Hebrew the molik of the Sanskrit has become malach, "to possess, "to rule," the same as the Arabian malaka. From malach we have melech "king," Malkoth, "kingdom," and such names as Malcham, Malchiel, Milcom, Moloch, Malchiah, Melchizedek, Meleketh, and with the definite article, Hammelech, and Hammoleketh, and also such names as Marcus and Mark, where the "l" has become "r."

141In the American languages there are a great many derivatives from the original molik. The Mexican word molic-tli, says Mr. Denison, [^41] is the "mill mover," and its derivation seems clear. The ninth day of the Maya calendar is Muluc, and the eighth month is called Mol. Both names may be from the same root. Dr. Augustus le Plongeon in Queen Moo, [^42] says that the Maya word mol means "to gather," and that och or ooch means "food," "provisions," "provender." The Maya moloch would, then, be the same as the original molik and the Mexican Molictli--the mill-mover, the provider, the king.

141The Peruvians had a word malqui, which signified the preserved body of the ancestors. But to them the ancestor of the tribe, or "lineage," was always the head, the king, and reverence was paid to him after death, as if he had been alive. The Malqui was their melech.

141From Rivero and Tschudi we gather that the malqui was sometimes called marca, changing the "l" into "r," as was noted in the consideration of the Egyptian inscription at Karnak. We read: [^43]

141"The Llacuaces, as foreigners, have many huacas and much worship, and venerate their rnalquis, which, as we have said, are the bodies of their dead ancestors."

142Again:

142"What they call marcayoc (malquis) * * * is sometimes of stone, sometimes the body of some of their dead progenitors."

142This makes it beyond question that the word malqui has the same meaning as melech and mulek, and also that marca is the same as Malqui.

142The malqui or marca of the great Inca Tupac Yupanqui was shamefully desecrated by the Spaniards, and the priest guarding it, the malqui-villac, and his assistants, were put to death. [^44]

142Now, the word marca, which, as we have seen, is the same as mulek and its relatives, is found all over America. We find it in Maracaibo, the name of the beautiful sheet of water in Venezuela; in Maracay and Maraca, names of two cities in that country; in Cundinamarca, the name of the highland plateau in Colombia; in Cunturmarca and Papamarca, places mentioned by Garcilasso de la Vega; in Caxamarca, [^45] the name of the Peruvian city in which Inca Atahu-alpa was murdered by Pizarro. It is, further, found in Antamarca, the name of the Peruvian city in which Inca Huascar, the brother of Atahualpa, was slain by his brother who was his rival in the struggle for the Incariat. In the Valley of Yucay--the Biban el Molouk of Peru--the places of interment on the steep mountain sides are called to this day, Tantamamarca. [^46] In Argentina there is the province of Catamarca, and Joyce [^47] mentions a river Maraca and an island, off the Amazon delta, having the same name. In the western division (the Chinca-suyu) of the domain of the Incas there was a place called Uramarca, and the three towers of the fortress overlooking Cuzco, the Sacsahuaman, were called, respectively, Mayocmarca, Paucarmarca, and Saclacmarca, [^48] not only because of their height but because they were royal towers, manned by the Incas and troops of the royal blood. One of them had a chamber profusely decorated with gold and silver ornaments, and the entire fort was dedicated to the sun, that is to say, to the omnipotent King and Ruler of the universe, of whom the sun was the most glorious, visible emblem.

143The word Marca is, further, found in Maracana, the name of an Indian tribe which Fathers Cataldino and Maceta met in Paragua, [^49] and perhaps in Mariche, [^50] the name of some Indians in the highlands near Caracas, in the valley of Valencia, now extinct.

143To this list should be added, I believe, the word maraka, the name given to a sacred instrument used by so-called medicine-men when engaged in miraculous healings. It is an Arawak word translated "rattle," and it denoted the authority wielded by an Indian clothed with the power and authority of some kind of priesthood among his people. It might better be called a scepter than a "rattle." It was an emblem of authority. It may be compared with the rod of Aaron (Ex. 7:10), or that of Moses (Exodus 9:23.) According to tradition the maraka was a gift of the spirits to man. [^51]

144In Central America the word Marca is also found in proper nouns. I make this statement on the authority of Prof. Marcou, who, in a remarkable article on the name America published in the Atlantic Monthly for March, 1875, says, in part:

144"Americ, Amerrique, or Amerique is the name in Nicaragua for the high land or mountain range that lies between Juigalpa and Libertad, in the province of Chontales, and which reaches on the one side into the country of the Carcas Indians, and on the other into that of the Ramas Indians. The rios Mico, Artigua, and Carca that form the rio Bluefields; the rio Grande Mata-galpa, and the rios Rama and Indio, that flow directly into the Atlantic; as well as the rios Comoapa, Mayales, Acoyapa, Ajoqua-pa, Oyale, and Teopenaguatapa, flowing into the Lake of Nicaragua, all have their sources in the Americ range. (See public documents of the Nicaragua government; and The Naturalist in Nicaragua, by Thomas Belt, 8vo, London, 1873.)

144"The name of places, in the Indian dialects of Central America, often terminate in ique or ic, which seems to mean "great," "elevated," "prominent," and is always applied to dividing ridges, or to elevated, mountainous countries, but not to volcanic regions; as for instance, Nique and Aglasinique, in the Isthmus of Darien."

144The meaning of the Central American ic or ique identifies it with the mar-ca of the South American languages. For, according to Sir Clements Markham, [^52] marca, in the Quichua means a "hill," or a terrace or a village on a hill. [^53] The idea of elevation or prominence seems to be its fundamental meaning when used in names of places, and possession, leadership, excellence, such as is supposed to belong to royalty, when applied to persons. That is, it means "head," "chief," "king," the same as melech, malqui, mulek, and the original mol-ic.

145Sir Clements Markham also furnishes a clue to the meaning of the word. He tells the story [^54] of a certain Peruvian, Martin Huaman, who, having saved the life of a Spaniard named Ayala, at the battle of Huarina, adopted the Spanish name and called himself, Martin Huaman Mallqui de Ayala, where Malqui seems to be equivalent to "lord" or "king" of the man whose life he had saved.

145Prof. Marcou was of the opinion that America is the accepted form of the old Indian Americ or Amerique, and not, as generally held, a name coined in glorification of Amerigo Vespucci. [^55] If this view is correct, America is, both in form and meaning, identical with the Book of Mormon names, Amaleki and Amalekiah, the meaning of which is, "The King of Jehovah," and, as applied to the country, "The Land of the King of Jehovah;" that is to say, in other words, The Land of Zion.

146NEPHI. Elder George Reynolds traces this celebrated name to an Egyptian root. He says: [^56]

146"Its roots are Egyptian; its meaning, good, excellent, benevolent. * * * One of the names given to this god [Osiris], expressive of his attributes, was Nephi, or Dnephi, * * * and the chief city dedicated to him was called N-ph, translated into Hebrew as Noph, in which form it appears in Hosea, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. Its modern English name is Memphis ."

146This agrees with a statement credited to Eusebius, to the effect that the Egyptians called the Creator Kneph, and they pictured him as a man with a coiffure adorned with feathers; or as a serpent; and sometimes as a man with a solar disk on his head. Noub, or Nouv, according to Champollion, was the Knouphis of Strabo, and the same as the Kneph of Plutarch and Eusebius.

146It is necessary to note that all these forms, Nephi, Dnephi, Kneph, Noub, Nouv, and Knouphis, are variants of the same name.

146Wm. Osburn [^57] connects the name also with Noah, thus:

146"Kneph, Nu or Noah was a local god of some city of the Mendesian nome in the northeast of the delta. * * * A shrine dedicated to Kneph was found there by Mr. Burton. As we have explained, he was the god of the yearly overflow. His name was sometimes written (with hieroglyphics) which seem to mean, 'Nu (Noah) of the waters."

146 Isaiah calls the flood "The Waters of Noah." [^58]

147There is also a word nebhu, which Churchyard [^59] says is a divine title meaning, the Everlasting, the Self-existent, the Eternal One.

147Some Egyptian words have close relatives in the Hebrew, easily recognized. I believe this is one of them. Nebi, from Naba, is, evidently, the Nephi of the Book of Mormon, and the Kneph of the Egyptians. Naba, according to Gesenius, [^60] in Niphil means "to speak under divine influence," as a prophet. One of the derivatives from this root is Nebo, a name given to the planet Mercury, by the Chaldeans, because they regarded that star as the celestial scribe.

147How expressive the name Nephi is, when we understand its meaning! How well it corresponds with the character and mission of the great son of Lehi!

147There are several names among American proper nouns, which seem to be derived from the same root as Nephi. One of the affluents of the Amazon is Napo, and in the upper Amazon valley there is a tribe of Indians, of the Zaparo linguistic stock, known as the Nepa Indians. The Nahuapos, the Napeanos, the Napos, and the Napotoas are among the tribes enumerated by Dr. Brinton. [^61] And then there are the Nahuas, of the great Uto-Aztecan stock of which tribes have been found all the way from the Isthmus to the banks of the Columbia river.

147This word should be given special attention.

147The Nahuas had lost all the labial sounds except "p" and "u." The sound of "b" or "f" or "ph" they would represent by a "u." "The change of b, p, to u," says Mr. Denison, [^62] "is of very wide geographical reach, as Mexican kauh, 'ape,' Sansk. kapi." He also points out that the pseudo-labial "u" may represent a labial, such as "b," "p," "f," "v," or "w;" or even a lost "g" or "r." The word Nahua may, therefore, as far as the pronunciation indicates, be considered identical with Nephi.

148The meaning of the word is variously given. Sahagun says that all who spoke the Mexican language clearly were called Nahoas. Molina traces the name through a verb meaning "to instruct," and especially in an occult sense. Brasseur de Bourbourg is more definite. He considers it a word of the Quiche language, meaning "to know," "to think," and, as a noun, "wisdom," "knowledge." It is, in fact, the Abbe suggests, identical with our "know-all," but it is frequently used to denote something mysterious, extraordinary, or marvelous. [^63] According to these definitions, Nao is identical in meaning with the Hebrew naba, "to speak under divine influence," to "prophesy," and the Indian Nahua is the same as the Book of Mormon Nephi, and the Hebrew Nabi, a prophet.

149The word nepohualtzitzin should be mentioned here. That, we are told, is an Aztec word.

149Boturini makes the statement that the Nahuas used knotted cords, similar to the quipus of the Peruvians, to record events, but that their use had been discontinued before Aztec supremacy. Those knotted cords were called nepohualtzitzin. The Italian traveler even claims to have seen one of them in a very dilapidated condition at Tlascala, but Bancroft [^64] rather doubts this. Be that as it may, the word itself is very instructive.

149To begin with the last part of it, tzitzin, seems to be the Hebrew tsits which means "a shining forth," "brightness." It was the name for the shining plate of gold worn by the high priest, and upon which "holiness to the Lord" was engraved. [^65] [^66] were designated. The Nahua word tzitzin may, if of Hebrew origin, therefore, be understood to refer to either engraved plates, or to knotted cords, or fringes.

149If Nepo, as I believe, is Nephi, and ual gives the word to which it is attached the value of an adjective, as, for instance, Nezahualcoyotl, "The fasting coyote;" Nezahualpilli, "The Fasted-for prince;" [^67] Quetzalcoatl, "feathered serpent," then, analogous with such construction, Nepohual would be "Nephite."

149Nepohualtzitzin would, then, mean, "Nephite plates," or "Nephite cords." It is easily understood how knotted cords used as "records" could be called tzitzin, "plates," figuratively speaking, if we remember that our records are still "books" from the time when "beech" staves were used as we use paper.

150The word Anahuac, as the country of the Nahuas was called, the authorities tell us, has no relationship to Nahua; it means the country, or any country, near the water. But, notwithstanding the authorities, it is not impossible that it is very closely related to Nahua, and that its true meaning is, "The Land of Nephi, by the Water."

150Napa was, further, the name by which a sacred figure of the llama was known by the Peruvians. [^68] At a certain festival a number of those animals were sacrificed. The shepherds came with a special llama, draped in red cloth and wearing golden ear rings. This llama was the napa. The insignia of the Inca was brought out in honor of that animal, and dancing was performed as part of the sacred ceremonies.

150This, I think, shows clearly that the word stands for something sacred, something in a special manner connected with the divine service.

150ONIDAH. This is the name of a hill on which Alma preached the gospel to the Zoramites (Alma 32:4), and the place where Lamanites, later, gathered themselves when they expected to be attacked by Amalickiah. (Alma 47:5.)

150It is a genuine Indian word. According to Schoolcraft, [^69] its Indian form is, oneotaug, which means "stone people." That would, reasonably, be "hill people," and that would confirm the use of the word in the Book of Mormon as the name of a hill. The proper analysis of the word is, Onia, "stone,' oda, "people," and aug, a plural ending.

151The Oneida Indians formed one of the five tribes (the Onondagas, the Mohawks, the Senecas, and the Cayugas were the others) who united into a federation under the leadership of Hiawatha, for the purpose of abolishing war in the world.

151There is an Oneida valley in the state of New York, and a number of other places in America are known by this Book of Mormon name.

151PACHUS was the name of a king who ruled the "dissenters" that had driven the "Freemen" out of Zarahemla and taken possession of the land. (Alma 62:6.)

151This word is found in the Peruvian Pacha-camac, which means world-creator, and was the name given to the Deity." [^70] The Chibchas, in what is now Colombia, had the same name for God, in the shorter form, Bochi-ca. It is also found in such royal titles as Pacha-cutec Inca Yupanqui, where it seems to be equivalent to "lord." In that case it is identical in meaning with the Pachus of the Book of Mormon, the title assumed by the dissenting king.

151Pacha means both "world" and "time," or perhaps an "eternity." That connects it in meaning, though not in form, with the Hebrew olam, which also means both world and eternity.

151SIDON. This was the name of the river that is so often mentioned in the Book of Mormon. (Alma 2:15.) Sidon means "fishing," and the River Sidon means, therefore, the same as "Fishing River." It is the same name as that which was given to the river, on the banks of which Zion's Camp was located, in Missouri, June 19, 1834, where the important revelation, D&C Sec. 105, was given, June 22, the same year.

152The name "Sidon" may not have been retained in the languages of the descendants of the people of Zarahemla, but the Lenni Lenape Indians have preserved a tradition in which the name "Fishing River" is mentioned. According to their tradition, the Lenni Lenape, many centuries ago, lived somewhere in the western part of the American continent. For some reason or other they decided to migrate. After a very long journey they arrived on the Namesi Sipu, [^71] which in their language means "Fish River," the same as "Sidon." Here they met another tribe, which they called Mengwe. By their scouts they had been informed that the Talligewi, or Alligewi who lived east of the Mississippi, were a powerful nation which had built many cities and regular fortifications. The Lenape and Mengwe united and made war upon the Alligewi, though these were a people of gigantic stature. [^72] They do not claim that the entire nation crossed the Namesi Sipu. Many, they say, remained behind in order to assist those who had not crossed over but who had "retreated into the interior of the country on the other side." Those who did emigrate finally settled on the four rivers Delaware, Hudson, Susquehannah, and Potomac.

153 TIMOTHY is the name of one of the Twelve appointed by our Savior in this country, to carry the gospel message to the people here. On the face of it it appears to be a Greek word, meaning "Honoring God."

153But it is also Indian. Dr. Brinton [^73] tells us that in the mountain district south of the plains near Maracaibo, in south America, there are some Indian bands, or what remains of them, known as the Timotes.

153ZARAHEMLA. Elder George Reynolds [^74] suggests that this word means either, "A rising of Light," or, "Whom God Will Fill Up." The latter I consider the better rendering of the two. The word zara is Peruvian for "corn," or "maize." It is also Hebrew for "seed," especially in the sense of offspring. "Hemla" is, probably, the Hebrew hamulah "abundance," and Zarahemla would then mean, applied to the country, "a place where there is a seed abundance;" that is, Bountiful; applied to a person, it would mean one "who has a numerous offspring."

153That Bountiful and Zarahemla refer to the same country seems to be clear from these passages: "Thus the land on the northward was called Desolation, and the land on the southward was called Bountiful."(Alma 22:31.) "The land southward, which was called by the Nephites Zarahemla." (Ether 9:31.) That the two countries were identical only in part, however, may be inferred from this reference to the two countries: "And the land which was appointed was the land of Zarahemla and the land Bountiful, yea, to the line which was between the land Bountiful and the land of Desolation." (3 Ne. 3:23.) From which it appears that the two countries were adjacent, but that Zarahemla did not extend as far as the boundary line between Desolation and the land on the southward, but that Bountiful did. My impression is that practically the entire Central America was called Bountiful, and that a great part of the country along the Atlantic was known among the Nephites as Zarahemla, while the Pacific coast was more particularly the land of Nephi, after the people had been driven from their first inheritance into the land Bountiful. As has been stated on page 130, many of the descendants of Lehi, both Nephites and Lamanites, found their way to North America. As an illustration of this fact, the following incident may be referred to.

It happened during the trek of Zion's Camp to Missouri in 1834. On June 2, that year, the Prophet, accompanied by some of the brethren, ascended a high mound. On the top of this mound they found what appeared to be the remains of three altars and some human bones. On removing the earth to the depth of a foot, they came upon a skeleton, almost entire. It had an arrow between the ribs. Brigham Young retained the arrow, and parts of the skeleton were carried to Clay county.

While the brethren were together, the Spirit of the Lord enlightened the understanding of the Prophet Joseph, and he declared that the remains were the skeleton of a "white Lamanite." a warrior and chieftain under the great prophet, Onandagus, who was known from the hill Cumorah, or eastern sea, to the Rocky Mountains. The name of the warrior was Zelph. (Andrew Jenson. Hist. Rec., p. 581.)*ë (Alma 22:33.)

155The only thing absolutely immortal is thought, and words are the long-enduring, almost indestructible symbols of thought. When one looks into a Sanskrit dictionary and finds that lubh, 4,000 years ago meant love, as it does today, that bhar meant bear, and gau meant cow, it is a matter of surprise that mere words may be imperishable--T. S. Denison, A. M.

See Franz Boas. Handbook of American Indian Languages, Smiths Inst., Bull, 40, Part 1, p. 77.

The American Nations, Part 1, pp. 86. 87, 149.

RoyaI Commentaries, Book 5, Chapt. 14.

The American Race, p. 284.

Alma 22: 30, 31; Mos. 8: 7-12.

Nadaillac, Prehistoric America, p. 435.

Bur. of Am. Ethn. Smiths. Inst., Bull. 70, p. 17. J. Walter Fewkes.

Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 3, p. 177.

The Incas of Peru, p. 184-5

Dr. Cyrus Thomas, Indian Languages of Mexico and Central America, Bur. of Amer. Ethn., Bul. 44 Wash., 1911, p. 74.

The American Race, p. 285.

Brinton. The American Race, p. 216. According to the Ethnological Appendix in Mr. H. W. Bates' Central America, London, 1878, there were Lamas in Central California; Laymons, a tribe of Cochimis, in Lower California, and Lemanos, also called Chimus, on the coast south of Lima, Peru where they had a civilization older than that of the Incas. So that, from the ethnological data available, it appears that the Lamanites were actually sprinkled all over the American continents.

Indian Languages of Mexico and Central America. Bureau of Amer. Ethnol. Bul. 44, p. 79.

The American Race, p. 163.

The American Nations, Part 1, p. 144.

Myths of The New World, p. 207.

Aki is the same as our acre.

Not in the jawbone, which he had thrown away, but in the hill which he had named after the jawbone, Lehi.

South American Archeology, p. 28.

Dr. E. A. Wallis Budge. Gods of the Egyptians, Vol. 1, p. 100.

Paul Pierret, Dictionnaire D'Archeologie Egyptienne, p. 337.

Central America, West Indies, and South America, p. 520.

That many of the descendants of Lehi, both Nephites and Lamanites, found their way to North America is beyond doubt.

Rafinesque. The American Nations. Vol. 2, p. 152.

lndian Tribes of the United States, Vol. 4, p. 375.

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma. 2. Nephihah. 3. Pahoran I. 4. Pahoran II. 5. Pacumeni 6. Helaman, the younger. 7. Nephi. 8. Cezoram. 9. His son. 10. Seezoram. 11. Lachoneus I. 12. Lachoneus II. From 91. B.C., to 30. A.C.
[^2] David Whitmer
[^3] Martin Harris
[^4] Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1, p. 12.
[^5] Ether 3:23.
[^6] Essentials in Church History by Joseph Fielding Smith; p. 63.
[^7] February, 1828, is the date given in the Pearl of Great Price, page 55, verse 63, new edition.
[^8] "This little colony brought with them from Jerusalem their ancient scriptures engraved in Egyptian characters, on brass plates."--Orson Pratt, in an article on the Book of Mormon, written in 1874 for the Universal Cyclopedia. Mill. Star, Vol. 38. p. 692.
[^9] E. A. Wallis Budge, A History of Egypt, Vol. 6, p. 198. Scribners Bible Dictionary, under "Alphabet."
[^10] George Rawlinson, History of Egypt, Vol. 1. pp. 57-67.
[^11] L'alphabet hieroglyphique, egyptien avait, dans sa constitution meme, abstraction faite de l'absence de quelques sons, du nombre et de la forms materielle des signes une resemblance tres-marquee avec l'alphabet hebreu.--Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des anciens Egyptiens par Champollion; Paris, 1824, p. 59.
[^12] Pearl of Great Price, p. 51, verse 34, new edition.
[^13] Mess. and Adv., Vol. 1, p. 80.
[^14] It was while thus engaged, on May 15, 1829, that the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon them by John the Baptist, who also instructed them to baptize and ordain each other to that priesthood. On the same occasion they were promised the Melchizedek priesthood, which promise was fulfilled under the hands of Peter, James and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna Co., and Colesville, Broom Co., on the banks of the Susquehanna river, some time between May 15 and the end of June, 1829.--History of the Church, Vol. 1. pp. 40-1.
[^15] David Whitmer, Mill. Star, Vol. 43, p. 421.
[^16] Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1, p. 75.
[^17] See title page, Book of Mormon.
[^18] Testimony of the witnesses.
[^19] Wm. H. Harrison, the ninth president of the United States, who was inaugurated March 4, 1841. The Prophet Joseph Smith says of Mr. Harrison: "We voted for General Harrison because we loved him. He was a gallant officer and a true friend."--Nauvoo, Ill., Dec. 29, 1841; Times and Seasons, Vol. 3, p. 651.
[^20] Doc. and Cov. Sec. 124:1-14.
[^21] Letter from Erastus Snow to Brigham Young, Liverpool. July 10, 1851.
[^22] Letter from Orson Spencer to Brigham Young, Liverpool, Feb. 8, 1853.
[^23] Refers to a delegation of Upsala students.
[^24] Redogorelse for Konung Oscar II:s 25-arige Regerings jubileum, p. 231. Also, Deseret News, Oct. 12, 1897.
[^25] Ib., p. 119. An elegant copy of the official report was sent to me by the direction of the king, the following year, accompanied by this notice: "På Nådigste befallning får Chefen för H. M. Konungens Hofförwaltning hármed áran öfcerlemna ett exemplar af Redogörelsen för H. M. Konungens 25-åriga regerings jubileum, Stockholm den 17 September, 1898."
[^26] In the Algonquin (Fox) Manetowa is said to mean "mysterious being." Manetowi aki is "a mysterious country."--William Jones, Hand book Am. Lang., Smith. Inst., Bul. 40, Vol. 1, p. 850.
[^27] The letter was revised by the Prophet, May 20, 1843. See thedocumentary History, of the Church, under that date.
[^28] The familiar word Iroquois may, possibly, be another instance of this kind of word-building. The orators of that stock of Indians used to close their speeches by saying, Hiro, "I have spoken," very much as the Romans said, Dixi. Their sentinels had a cry of warning which sounded to the French, something like quai. Out of these two words and a French ending, ois, the name Iroquois was composed.
[^29] See Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 3 pp. 733, 739. In the Egyptian, it seems, adjectives were without degrees of comparison, but the particle er, meaning "to," "with," "between," etc., in various combinations, was used to express degrees of superiority, very much as the Hebrew "rain." For instance. "She was fair (good) in her body, more than (er) other women," means, of course, that she was fairer--more good--than the rest. "Good is hearkening, more than anything," or, hearkening is more good, means "To obey is best of all." Good in these sentences is the word nefer, but there is a verb, mench, "to do good," "to abide," and that may be akin to the "mon" in the name Mormon .
[^30] The chain of the eastern Andes is penetrated by five great rivers, which unite to form the mighty Orellana. The first is Maranon, and, being the most western and distant in its source in the Andean lake of Lauricocha, is considered to be the source of the Amazon."--Sir Clements Markham, The Incas of Peru, p. 193. "The least known and the least frequented district of Ecuador," another author says, "is the territory called Del Oriente, on the eastern side of the Cordilleras. This region, lying between Quito and the Amazons, is watered by the great rivers Napo, Pastaza, and Morona, and their numerous tributaries." So that the names of the two great Book of Mormon characters, Nephi and Moroni, have been immortalized in the names of two great rivers in South America.
[^31] The American Race, p. 282.
[^32] The Pizarros entered Caxamarca in the year 1532.
[^33] Markham, The Incas of Peru, p. 379. The spelling on this page is, letter for letter, as in the Book of Mormon. On page 337 the spelling is Maroni. But even so, the word cannot be mistaken.
[^34] Antiguas Historiales del Peru, Trans. published by the Hakluyt Soc., London, 1920, p. 29
[^35] Primitive Aryans in America, p. 29.
[^36] Egypt and Israel, p. 72.
[^37] See 1 Kgs. 10:17, Dr. Clarke's Commentary.
[^38] Smith, Bible Dictionary, under Shishak.
[^39] Le lion couche est l'equivalent hieroglpyhique du lamed hebreu; mais il import de rapeller que, dans les noms propres grecs et latins, cet hieroglyphe represent souvent la consonne R, et qu'il existe en effet, dans la langue egyptienne, un dialect dont le trait distinctive etai de change indifferement les R en L.--Champollion, Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens, Paris, 1824, p. 59 and 63.
[^40] See a paper by Dr. George Frederick Wright, of the Oberlin College, in Fundamentals, Vol. 2, p. 11.
[^41] The Primitice Aryans of America, p 29.
[^42] P. 61.
[^43] Rivero and Tshudi Peruvian Antiquities p. 174, 175.
[^44] Clements Markham, Incas of Peru, p. 250.
[^45] There are many modes of spelling this name. Garcilasso writes Cassamarca. Prescott spells it Caxamalca (Conquest of Peru. Vol. 1, p. 375), no doubt, following his excellent authorities. Nadaillac (Prehist. Amer., edited by Dall, London, 1885, p. 381) has Caxalmalca, and Cajamarca is the spelling of Rivero and Tschudi (Perucian Antiquities, p 50), but the accepted spelling seems to be Caxamarca.
[^46] Nadaillac, Prehistoric America, p. 435
[^47] South American Archeology, p. 266.
[^48] Garcilasso, Cam. Real., Book 8, Chapt. 29.
[^49] P. De Roo, America before Columbus, p. 222.
[^50] Brinton, The American Race, p. 180.
[^51] Walter E. Roth, An Inquiry into the Animism and Folk Lore of the Guiana Indians. 30th Annaual Report of the Bureau of Am. Ethn., pp. 330-1.
[^52] Introduction to Memorias Antiguas Historiales del Peru, by Montesinos. Hakluyt Society, London, 1920, p. 10.
[^53] The Incas of Peru, p. 69.
[^54] lncas of Peru, p. 17.
[^55] The name Amerigo is also spelled Amerrigo, Merigo. Almerico. Alberico, and Alberigo, as well as Americus, and it is a question whether the last form was not coined as a explanation of the origin of America, by scholars who knew not the Indian word, Amerique.
[^56] The Story of the Book of Mormon , p. 296.
[^57] Monumental History of Egypt, Vol. 1. p. 340.
[^58] Isa. 54:9.
[^59] Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man, p. 365.
[^60] Naba, in Kal, means "to boil up," as a fountain; hence to pour forth words, as those who speak under divine influence.
[^61] The American Race, pp. 118, 208, 282, 285.
[^62] The Primitive Aryans in America, p. 94.
[^63] Bancroft, Native Races. Vol. 2. p. 129. "On n'en trouve pas, Toutefois, la racine dans le mexicain. La langue quichèe en donne une explication parfaite; il vient du verbe nao ou naw, connaitre, sentir, savoir, penser. Tin nao, je sais; naoh, sagesse, intelligence. Il y a encore le verbe radical na, sentir, supçonner. Le mot nahual dans son sens primitif et vèritable, signifie donc litteralment "qui sait tout:" c'est la même chose absolutment que le mot anglais Know all, avec Icquel il at tant d'identitè. Le Quichè et le Cakchiquel 1' emploient frèquement aussi dans le sens de mystèrieux, extraordinaire, merveilleux."
[^64] Native Races, p. 55l.
[^65] Ex. 28:36-8.
[^66] Num. 15:38.
[^67] Comp. Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 5, p. 372. Prescott, Conq. of Mex., Vol. 1, pp. 86, and 151.
[^68] Sir Clements Markham, The Incas of Peru, p. 51.
[^69] lndian Tribes in the United States, Vol. 4, p. 384.
[^70] John Fiske, The Discovery of America, Vol. 2, p. 338.
[^71] From namaes, "fish," and sipi, "river;" see Brinton. Library of Aboriginal American Literature, Vocabulary. Vol. 5.
[^72] Brinton, Libr. of Abor. Amer. Liter., Vol. 5. p. 141. The Delawares says Dr. Brinton, applied the name "Fish River" to several streams, but not to the Mississippi.
[^73] The American Race, p. 179.
[^74] The Story of the Book of Mormon, p. 298.
