Janne M. Sjodahl, Introduction to the Study of the Book of Mormon ( 1927)

Chapter Seven

American Names from Old-World Languages

FROM what has been said in the preceding chapter, it is evident that many of the important Book of Mormon names are still retained in some of the names of Indian tribes and in many American geographical names. In this chapter another list of words will be presented. These are not directly connected with the Book of Mormon, but they furnish, in their construction and meaning, satisfactory evidence of their origin in Old-World languages, and, by so doing, corroborate the remarkable story of the Book of Mormon, according to which this country, at different times, received colonists from Asia, who brought with them their civilization, including their,languages, traditions, religion, etc. Everyone of these words, which are only a few out of many, deserves the closest study.

156ABAGH, a Chapanec word said to mean "father;" the Hebrew ab, or abba. (Donelly. [^1]) It is found, in different forms, in different Indian languages, as, for instance, apa (Shoshonian and Ute); abi, (Tsimshian) "my father;" apu (Quichua), "chief" "father." (Brinton, The American Race, p.122.)

156ACCLA-CONA, a Quichua word meaning "chosen virgins." Mama Cona is the name for "matrons." The word "kone" for a married woman, and "kona" for a woman of ill repute are still used in Teutonic languages. They are evidently from the same source as the Indian word.

157AH-TUM, a Maya word meaning, "he of the new things" (Augustus le Plongeon, Queen Moo, p. 99.) That is Adam. It is the Egyptian Atum, a name for the Creator.

157ALLPACAMASCA, a Quichua word for the human body. Nadaillac (Prehistoric America, p. 435) says it means literally "animated earth." The conception of the earthly tabernacle of man as a lump of animated earth, must have come from the same source from which Moses drew his information.

157AMOLAC. This is the name of one of the kings of the Akahals, mentioned in the Annals of the Cakchiquels.

157The Cakchiquels were one of four closely related tribes of the Maya linguistic stock, the others being, the Quiches, the Tzutuhils, and the Akahals. They occupied a portion of what is now Guatemala. The Annals contain the early traditions and later history of the people. The author says: "Here I am going to write a few of the sayings of our earliest fathers and ancestors, those who begat men of old, before the hills and plains were inhabited."

157Concerning the origin of the people, he writes:

157"We came from the other side of the sea, from the land of Tulan, where we were brought forth and begotten by our mothers and our fathers." [^2]

158Again:

158"These are the sayings of Gagavitz and Zactecauh, and these are the very words which Gagavitz and Zactecauh spoke: 'Four men came from Tulan; at the sunrise is one Tutlan, and one is at Xibalbay, and one is at the sunset; and we came from this one at the sunset and one is where is God. Therefore there are four Tulans * * * from the sun setting we came, from Tullan, from beyond the sea; and it was at Tullan that arriving we were brought forth, coming we were brought forth by our mothers and our fathers.'" [^3]

158The author of the Annals tells us that one of the kings of the Akahals was called Ychal Amolac. During his reign the Akahals occupied several cities. Then messengers came from neighboring kings challenging Amolac to a test of valor and military strength. He accepted the challenge, but was murdered when he entered the council chamber whither he had been summoned.

158Ychal may, possibly, be the Hebrew Ishel, meaning "man of God."

158Amolac certainly is the Book of Mormon name Mulek, with the prefix "a." This prefix, according to Dr. Brinton's vocabulary, means "thy." [^4] Or, it may be an abbreviated form of the masculine article "ah." Mulek means "king," and A-Mulek, or Amo-lac, would mean, either "thy king," or "the king." It may have been this very title, whether assumed or given by the people, that aroused the jealousy that caused his death.

159The name proves that Mulek with its derivatives, Amulek, Amaleki, and Amalickiah, is a genuine Indian name, handed down from generation to generation, and thus it has interest to us.

159APA, see abagh.

159AKO, or nakho, a word very similar to nahash and nagas, one Hebrew and the other Hindu for "snake" or serpent. The nations of the Lenape group, says Rafinesque (American Nations, p. 85), connect the ideas of devils, snakes, foes and call them ako, or nakho.

159AZATLAN, probably the Scandinavian "asgard." BABA, Haytian for "father." See also abagh.

159BATZ, Chapanec for "daughter;" Hebrew bath. (Donelly.)

159BEEN, Chapanec for "son;" Hebrew ben. (Donelly.)

159BUSK, or puskita, the name of a religious festival of the Creeks. (Brinton, The American Race, p. 88.) It was observed when the corn became edible, and was connected with a particular drink and the maintenance of the perpetual fire. Compare the Hebrew pesach, the Greek pascha, the Scandinavian pask, or paask, and our pascal.

159CUZCO, the name of the holy city of the Peruvians, the capital of the Incas. The word is Quichua and means, according to Garcilasso de la Vega, "navel." (Roy. Com., Book 2, chap. 5.) Rivero (Rivero and Tschudi, Peruvian Antiquities, p. 44), takes the same view:

159"It is certain, according to the traditions of the natives, that, as the navel is the source whence the infant receives life and growth in the womb, the plain of Cuzco was the nucleus of civilization and the focus of light for the estate founded by Manco Capac and Mama Oclla Huaco, as the celestial couple were called."

160Squier (Incidents of Travel and Exploralion in the Land of the Incas, p. 426), says:

160"Its name, which signifies umbilicus or navel, was not given to it after the Inca dominion had been widely extended by warlike princes, but at the very period of its foundation, to denote that its position was central and dominating." [^5]

160If we accept this derivation of the word, we are struck with the fact that the concept of the name for the city is purely Hebrew. Jerusalem was by the ancient prophets called the "navel" of the earth. (Ezek. 38:12; Judg. 9:37.) "Thus saith the Lord God, This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst [Hebrew "navel"] of the nations and countries that are around about her." (Ezek. 5:5.) The highland forming the backbone of Palestine, where Jerusalem was established, was to the Hebrews the tabbur, the "midst," "the center," literally "the navel" of the earth. The very name proves that Cuzco was to the Peruvians what Jerusalem was to the Hebrews. Dante borrowed the Hebrew idea and placed Jerusalem in the "center," with Ganges as one extreme and the Pillars of Hercules as the other. To the Greeks Delphi was the "navel" of the earth. They, too, borrowed the Hebrew idea; for the Greeks were great travelers and liberal borrowers. But where did the Peruvians get the same idea, if not through some such connection with the Old Country as related in the Book of Mormon?

161EHAJE means "sun," in the dialect of the Ticunas, an Indian tribe in the upper Amazonian basin. (Brinton, The American Race, p. 357.) Their name for fire was ejheh. These words should be compared with the Hebrew, Eheyeh asher eheyeh, "I am that I am," the name by which God revealed himself to Moses, when he appeared as a flame, burning without consuming. (Ex. 3:14.) To a sun worshiper--as the Indians are--the sun is the visible manifestation of God, and fire is but an emanation from the sun. But how are we to account for the fact that these Indians applied to the sun and to fire the very Hebrew name by which God revealed himself to Moses, when appearing in a flame?

161ELAB, Chapanec for "God." The Hebrew EI-ab, or Eliab, means, "whose father is God." (Donelly.) ELAPI. This word, according to Rafinesque, (The American Nations, Vol. 1, p. 150), is Lenape and means, "the most manly." He connects it with the Semitic Alabi, meaning "angel fathers," probably the same as Arabi, or Arabians, and also with the Turanian Chelabi, or Cherabi, "lords," and the Hebrew Cherubim.

161ENOT, Chapanec; the same as the Hebrew Enos, the son of Seth. (Donelly.) Or enosh, "man?"

161ES-RUACH, Chapanec for "Holy Spirit," according to Garcia. It is the Hebrew, eth-ruach. (Isaiah 63:10.) "From the want of "r" the es-ruach of the Chiapanese was pronounced by the Mexicans, Eh-Euach." (Mrs. Simon, The Ten Tribes of Israel, p. 57.)

162EW-EIWAH, or Huewah, is the Arawak name for the morning and evening star, which was revered as one of the visible manifestations of the Deity. See also ehaje.

162HAYLLI. On the testimony of Dr. Boudinot (A Star in the West, p. 231), Iroquois Indians had a song in which the Hebrew Hallelujah was plainly heard. Garcilasso de la Vega (Roy. Com., Book 5, chap. 2), says haylli is a Peruvian word meaning, "triumph," and that every stanza of the native songs to the sun--that is to say, to the Deity manifested in that glorious luminary--ended with that word. In other words, it was used as the Hebrew Hallelujah in the psalms of praise.

162ILLA TICI VIRA COCHA. In Peruvian tradition, the Pirua dynasty is represented as beginning with a divine personage having this name. Illa which seems closely related to the Semitic El, It, Allah, etc., is said to mean Light, and is one of the names applied to God. Tici is said to mean "the foundation or beginning of things." Vira, also spelled Uira, may be the same as Phirua from the Egyptian Phra, "the sun," and is said to mean "store house of all things," the same as the Egyptian per-aa, "the big house." The meaning of Cocha is said to be, a "lake," and also "abyss." Sir Clements Markham renders the words, "The Splendor, the Foundation, the Creator, the Infinite God." (The Incas of Peru, p. 42.)

162In this combination of words there seems to be an obvious reference to the story of the creation related in Genesis, where we are told that the Creator, in the beginning, laid the foundation of the world, the great store house, in the deep (tehom.)

163INNUIT, the name by which the Eskimos are known among themselves, is derived from Inuk, which, according to Bancroft (Native Races, Vol. 1, p. 40), means "man." Both the form of the word and its meaning points to the Hebrew Enosh, or Enos, as related words.

163INTI, the Quichua word for "sun," is, according to the opinion of Rivero and Tschudi (Peruvian Antiquities, p. 96), derived from the Sanskrit Indh, "to shine," "to burn," "to flame." The Greeks, too, we are told, (John Fiske, Myths and Myth Makers, p. 20), borrowed from Sanskrit many of the names of their deities.

163ISHU in the dialect of the Totoro Indians in Colombia means "women." (Brinton, The American Race, p. 347.) It is pure Hebrew. It is found, in one form or another, in numerous Indian dialects; for instance, ysaho (Piaroa) yusabu (Pano) ; esate (Motilone); ixal (Maya.) These are from Brinton's The American Race. Bancroft tells us that Ixok is the Maya-Quiche word for woman, and that the sound ish, expressed by the "x," is frequently used to denote the feminine gender. (Native Races, Vol. 3, 767.) Ixchel, "woman-god," was the goddess of childbirth, and in Yucatan her image was placed under the bed. In Guatemala the name of the same goddess was Xmucane, which is said to mean "mother of the gods."

163JIN-WIS. Rafinesque claims that this is the Hebrew Ish, or Adam, of all the Lenape tribes. (Am. Nations, Part 1, p. 152.) Wis, he says, is the same as ish, "man," the "w" being the definite article, meaning either "he," "she," or "they."

164KANTI KANTI. This is the name the Lenapes gave to their principal religious rite, which consisted of singing and dancing. It is from an Algonquin root meaning, as Dr. Brinton informs us, "to sing." The Abnaki related word is skan. Compare kanti with the old English cant, which later became chant, from the Latin cantare, which originally meant to perform mass, or divine service. The related words "cantata," "cantor," "chanson," etc., are well known. Compare skan with the English scan, which formerly was written skan, as it is in Danish and Swedish, and which is traced to the Sanskrit "skand," "to spring," "to ascend." In the Abnake it means to "sing," and to "dance," which is near enough to the Sanskrit. In our language it means to examine a song or to count the verse feet, or to read or recite a piece of poetry so as to indicate the meter. The relationship of the Lenape and Algonquin words with the Sanskrit skand is apparent.

164LUUMIL AHAU. This, according to le Plongeon, is Maya for "The King's Country." (Queen Moo, p. XIV.) Bishop Landa reads the glyph representing that name, Yaxkin, which is the name of the seventh month of the Maya calendar, and translates it, "the vigorous sun." If, however, Dr. Plongeon says, we interpret the symbol phonetically, it gives us, "the country of the king, which is surrounded by water;" or, "the kingdom in the water." It is the name, he says, in the Troano manuscript, for the Maya kingdom.

165It might be remembered in this connection that Jacob, the brother of Nephi, shortly after the exodus from the first settlement in the Land of Lehi, in his teachings, told his brethren that they were upon an "isle of the sea" (2 Ne. 10:20), referring, possibly, to South America; and also that there were other "isles of the sea," which were "inhabited by our brethren," because the Lord had led others away from the house of Israel, "according to his will and pleasure." If he alluded to the Mulekites, among others, which he may have seen in his prophetic vision, he may well have referred to Central America as one of the other isles, where the Maya kingdom at one time flourished. In the Book of Alma (22:32) the land of Nephi and the land of Zarahemla are said to be "nearly surrounded by water," there being, as I understand it, a "narrow neck of land" at each extremity. (Alma 22:32;50:34.)

165According to Dr. Augustus le Plongeon, long, long ago the land of the Mayas had attained to a high degree of culture in arts and sciences. The Mayas were mighty navigators, whose ships traveled the seas, and they became known as such. He identifies them with the Nagas, of whom J. Talboys Wheeler in his History of India says: "The traditions of the Nagas are obscure in the extreme; they point, however, to the existence of an ancient Naga empire. * * * The Nagas, or serpent worshipers, who lived in crowded cities and were famous for their beautiful women and exhaustless treasures, were doubtless a civilized people living under an organized government."

166Mr. le Plongeon's theory is that the Mayas, like the British of today, had colonies all over the world, and that traces of their culture are still found in many parts of the world. This agrees with the thought expressed by Elder George Reynolds, that America, during the reign of the Jaredites was not cut off from the rest of the world, as it was later, after the colonization by Lehi. But this is, of course, only a theory which has yet to be proved, or disproved.

166MAMA, the word for "mother," is found in many Indian languages and dialects, from Peru to the extreme north. It is also a Semitic word.

166MAMONA, according to Rafinesque, is a Haytian name for the deity. The word is known from the New Testament where it stands for "the god of this world," "wealth," "money," the "riches of unrighteousness" as contrasted with the riches that consist in righteousness. (Matt. 6:24; Luke 16:9.)

166MEXICO. The "x" in this name is generally pronounced as our "ks," as in "Dixi," but I understand that the correct pronunciation, according to Pimentel, is rather like "ch," though not quite the same. Lord Kingsborough says it should be sounded like a "c" with a cedilla, something like "cz" or "z." Perhaps the Hebrew "shin" would represent the sound as well as any modern letter.

166Concerning the etymology of the word, the opinions are divided. Clavigero, after careful consideration, concluded that Mexico means "The Place of Mexitli," or Huitzilopochtli, the god Mars of the Mexicans. (The History of Mexico, Vol. 1, p. 162.)

167Lord Kingsborough [^6] connects the word with the Hebrew Messiah (Mashiach.) He says:

167"It is certainly remarkable, as connected with the expectation which the Mexicans entertained of a future Redeemer, that Quetzalcoatl should have been called by them by the other name of Mecitli. Cortez, in describing to the emperor Charles V, the horrors which the Mexicans sustained during the last days of the siege, and Gomara, in repeating the same history, both mention that they console themselves in their last sufferings with the hopes of going to heaven with Quetzalcoatl. [^7] Quetzalcoatl was worshiped by the Mexicans under the name of Huitzilopuchtli, which name was corrupted by the Spaniards into Ochilobus, so that the accounts of Cortez and Gomara perfectly agree. In Cholula this god was known by the peculiar appellation of Quetzalcoatl, which signifies, The Green Feathered Serpent. With respect to the appellation Meçitli (the Spanish 'ç' thus marked being always pronounced as 'z'), it is very remarkable that it is precisely the same as the Hebrew name mashiach; for 'tli' does not form a part of that proper name, but is a common termination to Mexican names."

167Lord Kingsborough, in this explanation, follows Garcia, whom he quotes thus:

167"In New Spain the word Mesico is found, which, as Brother Stephen de Salaçar remarks, is Hebrew, and is, therefore, introduced in the second Psalm, and signifies 'his Anointed': And although in that province it is the name of a city, and here in the Psalm the name which the Jews bestowed on their kings and priests, and on Christ, our Lord, who, as they expected, was to come and redeem them, still I do not attend to this difference as this name might easily have been given to a city; since the leader who conducted those who peopled Mexico was named Mesi, or, as others write it, Mexi * * * The word Mesi should be noted as being really Hebrew, and it agrees surprisingly with the name of the chief head, or captain of the Mexicans." [^8]

168Prescott [^9] makes this observation:

168"The Hebrew word from which is derived Christ, 'the' Anointed,' is still more nearly--not 'precisely,' as Lord Kingsborough states (Ant. of Mex., Vol. 6, p. 186)--identical with that of Mexi or Mesi, the chief who was said to have led the Aztecs on the plains of Anahuac."

168Mr. T. S. Denison, a more recent writer on the subject, [^10] connects Mexitli with the Assyrian mekh, "strong," "superior," etc., and with the Persian Ah-uraMazda, "the great God." Mazda becomes, he says, by extension, mazida, which would be Mexitli in Mexican.

168Mexico, then, was named, as all seem to think proved, in honor of Mexi, or Mecitl, or Mesi--for the spelling varies--the leader or chief of the Aztecs, probably the same as Huitziton or Huitzilopochtli, as Bancroft suggests. But that name, Mesi, or Mexi, is identical with the Hebrew title Messiah.

168It should be remembered that the Hebrews did not always refer to the Savior of the world when they spoke of the Messiah. To them the anointed priests were Messiahs. (Lev. 4:3.) Their king was a Messiah. (One- 1 Sam. 2:35.) Even Cyrus was a Messiah. (Isa. 45:1.) This is clear from the Hebrew text, although not from the translations. It was, therefore, in accordance with the Hebrew understanding of the word, to call the Nahua (or, as I believe, Nephite) leader after whom the City, and then the entire republic, of Mexico was named, Messiah--Mexi.

169MOL, a Maya word meaning, according to Brinton, le Plongeon, and others, "to gather." It is the first syllable of the Hebrew Molech or Moloch, the name of the god of the Ammonites, which means, literally, "food-gatherer." See also Mulek in a preceding chapter.

169NEOPOHUAL-TZITZIN, Nephite records. See page 149.

169PALLA, a lady of royal blood in Peru. The name is, evidently, from the same source as the Greek pallas, the title which was given to the goddess Athene, or Minerva. The Greek word is, most probably, from pallax, which originally signified a maiden, one well beloved, and, in the plural, was applied to the virgin priestesses. [^11]

169PERU. Some incredible stories have been told about the origin of this name. The Peruvians themselves did not have a common name for the domain of the Incas but called it Tavantinsuyu, "the four quarters of the earth." [^12] Each province had its own name. Whence, then, the name Peru?

169Garcilasso de la Vega relates that Vasco Nunez de Balboa, who, in 153l, was the first European to view the Pacific, having crossed the Isthmus of Darien, sent expeditions south to explore the coast. The sailors of one of these expeditions captured an Indian at the mouth of a river and brought him aboard the ship. Here they asked him, by signs, to tell the name of the country. Misunderstanding the question, he answered Peru, which was his own name, and then added, pelu, which is said to mean "river." So the Spaniards made Peru. out of the two words.

170This feeble attempt to explain how the Spaniards came to apply the name to the country may have an element of truth in it, but where did the word Peru come from?

170Blas Valera claims that pelu, which seems to be only a variant of peru, means "river" among the Indians on the coast between Panama and Guayaquil, and that it was also a proper name. He also states that many derive the word from pirua, which is Quichua for a storehouse, a granary, and he accepts this view "cheerfully," because the Indians have many such storehouses, and "it was easy for the Spaniards to use the word and to say Piru, leaving out the final vowel and placing the accent on the last syllable."

170This seems to be a pointer in the right direction towards the origin of the name. Pascual de Anda-goya claims that, in 1522, he visited a province which had previously been honored by the presence of Gaspar de Morales and Francisco Pizarro, and which they had called the territory of the Cacique Biru. Subsequently this became Piru. So that the name was not of Spanish coinage, even if they were the first to apply it to the entire country. [^13] It was a proper name, common among the people before the arrival of the Spaniards.

171There can be no doubt that Peru is an Indian word of great antiquity. The name or title of the very first Peruvian ruler on record was Pirua Paccari Manco, and his successors for some centuries are called the Pirua dynasty. Their beginning has been placed as far back as the fifth century B.C., [^14] and the name must be as old as the dynasty itself.

171Sir Clements Markham [^15] informs us that Vira or Uira, in Viracocha, is but a variant of Pirua, and that the latter ought to have a final "h." Montesinos spells the word phirua, indicating the probable identity with the divine title uira.

171Rafinesque derives Peru from the Puruas, which, he says, were still in existence when he wrote, in 1836, living on the banks of the Uyacali river. They are, he claims, whiter than other Peruvians and are known as Piros, Paros, and Puruays. [^16]

171It can now be asserted that Peru, or Phiruah, is the Egyptian per-aa, which means "the great house," "the sublime porte," as it were, referring to the country itself, which was the great house of the Egyptians, and the great store house of grain, the granary, of the surrounding nations. It is akin to the well-known title pharaoh, from ra, "sun," and the definite article "ph." The Phiruas of Peru, as the pharaohs of Egypt, claimed to be the children of phra, "the sun," and they took the name of the object of their worship, just as the Christians have done.

172H. F. Lutz, (American Anthropologist, Oct., Dec. 1924, p. 452), has another explanation of the meaning of the word pharaoh. He says it is "a verbal noun from pry 'to come forth, to appear, to spout forth, to trace the origin from, to be begotten of,' and the word pr, simply means 'the great offspring, the great scion, the great son.'" Emphasis is placed on the sonship, and that corresponds to the idea of the Peruvian Incas concerning their origin.

172According to Dr. Wm. Osburn, R. S. L., [^17] the Egyptian sun worship was primarily the reverence paid to Adam, our first ancestor, as the king and the ruler of the race. Somehow they associated Adam with the sun, perhaps as we speak of "the Sun of Righteousness" and mean our Redeemer. It was from some such association of ideas that the rulers of Egypt came to be called pharaoh, from Phra, the sun, as Sir Gardner Wilkinson has shown, and for the same reason they claimed descent from the Sun, figuratively speaking. The Incas of Peru made the self-same claim, and they had their ideas from their predecessors, from the very beginning of the Phiruah dynasty, which is proved by the fact that these Indians had a magnificent sun temple on an island in Lake Titicaca, long before the Inca rule began. The Incas made the sun cult, as they found it, a state religion, and, like the Egyptian pharaohs, maintained that they, not the common people, were the descendants of the great luminary.

172How this Egyptian cult came to America in prehistoric times is an interesting question. The Book of Mormon tells us about the schism that separated the Nephites and Lamanites, who were of the Hebrew race. Enos (v. 14) says the latter, by a solemn oath, committed themselves to the diabolical policy of exterminating their brethren and destroying their records and scriptures, evidently with the view of establishing communities absolutely independent in both civil and religious affairs. But it is well known that the Jews in olden days, whenever they engaged in apostasy, turned to Egypt for religious ideas and practices. They did so at Mt. Sinai, when they feared that Moses had disappeared, and again when the ten tribes under Jeroboam revolted from the house of David. It was but natural for the disaffected Lamanites in this country, to establish the Egyptian sun worship, and more especially that of Ra as practiced at Heliopolis, the city and nome where Moses was born and where the father-in-law of Joseph, Poti-phera (Genesis 41:45), lived.

173SCYRI, "chiefs." Dr. Brinton says the Manta and Cara Indians, according to tradition, had reached the coast between the gulf of Guayaquil and the Esmaraldas river in canoes and rafts, from the north, and that the latter developed into a powerful nation under the rule of their scyri, or "chiefs," of which they claimed 19 in succession before the country was conquered by the Inca Huayna Capac. [^18] Here we have a word which, both as to meaning and form, seems to be identical with the Hebrew Sar, "prince," and with such words as Caesar, Kaiser, Kejsare, Czar, etc., all of which are the same word.

174It will be remembered that the name of the wife of Lehi was Sariah (1 1 Ne. 2:5), which means "A Princess of Jehovah." It is evidently closely related to scyri.

174It is a notable fact, whatever the explanation of it may be, that right here, in the northern parts of South America, we find to this day, on the very surface of the accumulated strata of proper nouns, a number of well-known Book of Mormon names in excellent preservation.

174TEHOM is a Maya word meaning, according to le Plongeon, [^19] "abyss." It is the Hebrew word translated "deep" (Gen. 1:2.)

174TEO-AMOXTLI. this is the name of the sacred record of the Toltecs.

174About the year 83, B. C.,--so the story goes--a great council was held at Huehue Tlapallan, at which the Toltec sages endeavored to restore the records that had been lost. At this gathering the Tol-tec calendar was corrected, to correspond with the solar year.

174In the year 338, A. D., a great prophet arose, whose name was Hueman. He counseled the people to go and seek a new home. According to Ixtlilxochitl, when Hueman had reached the age of three hundred years, another great council was held, this time at Tollan in Anahuac, during the reign of Ixtlilcuechah-uac. At this meeting the records were brought together, and from the existing documents a compilation was made, after a long conference and the most careful study. The result was a book which was called Teoamoxtli, "the divine book."

175This book is said to have contained the annals of the Nahuas from the deluge, or from the creation; also instructions regarding religious rites, government, social and industrial activities, and it closed with a chapter of prophecies, we are told, concerning future events and a description of signs by which the approach of great changes and upheavals might be recognized. When the book was finished, the aged prophet spoke to the assembled nobles about the future of his people, the Toltecs. He predicted that after ten cycles [^20] from the exodus from Huehue Tlapallan the people would become corrupt, and great calamities would be sent upon them by Tloque Nahuaque. [^21] Finally the kingdom was to be destroyed by civil war.

175"When the rabbit should have horns like a deer, and the humming-bird be found with spurs, and stones yield fruit; when the priests of the temples should forget their vows and chastity with noble ladies, pilgrims to the shrines of gold--then might they look for the fulfilment of Hueman's predictions; for lightnings and hail and snow, for famine and pestilence and devouring insects, to be followed by desolating wars." (Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 5, p. 252.)

175Some of the details of this remarkable prediction may be as difficult to comprehend as the Sibylline oracles, but the general meaning is clear enough. It means that when violence and corruption and a desire for gold take possession of a nation, it is ripe for destruction.

176Lord Kingsborough was of the opinion that the word Teo-amoxtli means, "The Divine Book of Moses." [^22] That explanation has not been generally accepted. But whether his Lordship was right or wrong in this respect, the important fact remains that the Mexicans had preserved a tradition of a book, a compilation of sacred scripture, which in many respects reminds us of the Book of Mormon.

176TEOTL. According to competent testimony the Central Americans had preserved an idea of a supreme God whom they worshiped as did the Athenians "the unknown God." They called him Teotl, a name which, undoubtedly, has the same origin as the Greek Theos. "They never offered sacrifices to him, for they said he cared not for such things. All the others, to whom they sacrificed, were men once on a time, or demons." [^23] Muller, quoted by Bancroft, calls attention to the similarity between the Aztec Teotl and the Greek Theos, and also to the calli of the Aztecs and the kalia of the Greeks. He also notes the fact that the word teotl appears in numerous proper nouns, such as Teotlacozanqui, Teocipactli, Teotetl, Teoamoxtli, etc. This should be noted. For it has been asserted that the American Indians did not use the name of God as part of the proper names, as the Hebrews did, and this has been urged as an argument against the authenticity of the Book of Mormon. But the Aztecs did use Teotl as the Hebrews used El and Jehovah, and the argument is, therefore, without force. [^24]

177TONATIUH. "In what we may call civilized Mexico, the sun was definitely worshiped under the name of Tonatiuh," says Mr. Bancroft. [^25] There can be little doubt that this word is from the same source as the Egyptian term for the solar disk, Atonou or Aten.

177TUREI is, according to Rafinesque, the Haytian word for "heaven." It is plainly composed of the three Hebrew words, t' (for attah) "thou;" ur, "light;" and ei, "be." "Be thou light!" The Hebrew, jehi or, "let there be light."

177TUTULXIU. This name occurs in the first paragraph of the Maya chronicle known as the Chilam Balam of Mani. Dr. Brinton suggests this translation of the paragraph:

177"This is the order of the katuns since the four katuns during which the Tutulxiu left their home and country Nonoual to the west of Zuiua, and went from the land and city of Tula, having agreed together to this effect." [^26]

178Who are the colonists mentioned in this record, and to what migration does the tradition refer? Do the names furnish a clew?

178Tutulxiu, Dr. Brinton informs us, means, both in the Maya language and the Aztec, "an abundance of herbage." As a name it is applied to a place, and also to a person, or to persons. It would, therefore, seem to be absolutely identical, in meaning and application, to the familiar name Zarahemla, which means "abundance of seed," and which, in the Book of Mormon, is the name of a city, a country or province, and also of a ruler. Considering the meaning of these two words alone, I would say that Tutulxiu is the Maya equivalent of the Mulekite or Nephite Zarahemla, just as the "Black Forest"--the name of a wooded region of Germany--is the English equivalent of the German Schwartzwald. Moreover, both names, as applied to a country, mean Bountiful, and may have been the name of a portion or division of that larger country, one name being used in the Maya record and one in the records of the Nephites.

178This surmise is strengthened by the fact that the other important name in the paragraph, Nonoual, is the same as Nahual, which refers to the Nephites or the land of Nephi. These two names, therefore, seem to indicate that even comparatively recent Maya chroniclers had traditional accounts of the colonization of fertile regions, such as the authors of the Book of Mormon ascribe to the Mulekites and Nephites. (Alma 22:33; Omni . 12-19.)

179ZUIVEN, Dr. Brinton says, was the name of the abode of the Creator, the Father of Quetzalcoatl, and, later, became identified with the Aztec Chicomostoc, or seven "caves" from which so many Indians claimed that their ancestors had emerged in the dim past. These caves, we may add, some students think refer to the barges from which the Jaredites came forth as from so many "caves."

179UTAH. Bishop W. E. Abbott, in the Improvement Era, for December, 1926, furnishes the interesting information that the word "Utah" means "much to eat." He had been so informed by a gentleman whom he met in the town of Omaha, Callatin Co., Illinois. This gentleman, whose name was Lavier, was the only survivor of a party of immigrants on the way to California. While crossing New Mexico and Arizona on the southern route, the party was attacked by Indians. All were killed except this gentleman, who then was only three months old. He grew up with the children of the tribe, accompanied the warriors on their expeditions, and was in all respects one with the Indians. The name Lavier he found on a ring that had belonged to his mother, wherefore he adopted it as his. Mr. Lavier said: "Do you know the meaning of the word Utah? It means 'much to eat.' There was always much to eat around those lakes. I made two or three trips before your people came to Utah."

179"Utah," then means a "Land of Plenty," "Bountiful" the same as "Zarahemla." It points to an association of the people who so first named this region with the people in the Book of Mormon who always gave the name Bountiful to places where they found an abundance of the good things of life. It may be added that the capital of the Quiches, at the time of the arrival of the Spaniards was the ancient, strongly fortified city of Uta-tlan also called Gumarcaah. It was situated near the modern site of Santa Cruz del Quich. It was a large city, from which no less than 72,000 combatants were placed in the field against the Spaniards. It was also the richest city found by the Spaniards south of Mexico. In the opinion of Torque-mada, the opulence of the palace rivalled that of Montezuma in Mexico and that of the Incas in Peru. It was an ancient city, as evidenced by a tradition, that Utatlan was the place from which the twin brothers, Hunahpu and Xbalanque set out for the conquest of hell. (Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 5, p. 180.)

180VIRACOCHA, the name of one of the Peruvian deities, is generally said to signify "the foam of the sea," although Garcilasso de la Vega, whose knowledge of the Quichua language cannot be doubted, long ago declared that it is not Quichua, but a foreign word "the meaning of which is unknown." [^27] We have already noted (under "Peru") that Vira or Uira is a variant of Phiruah, from the Egyptian Ra, and, therefore, akin to Per-aa and Pharaoh. Garcilasso's statement that it is a foreign word strengthens this supposition. Garcilasso tells us that a divine personage appeared in a dream or vision to a prince of the blood, and addressed him thus: "Nephew, I am a child of the Sun, and brother of Inca Manco Capac and Coya Mama Ocllo, his wife and sister." Also: "I am called Viracocha Inca; I come on the part of the Sun, our father."

181In Peruvian theology, therefore, Viracocha was the Son of God--God manifested in the sun, and, in that sense, the son of the sun, as was the Egyptian Pharaoh. The name is identical in meaning with the Semitic Barcochba, "son of a star."

181YOHAWA Ellen Russell Emerson [^28] says:

181"The Indian myths disclose a belief in a supreme God, governor of other and lesser gods, who was the chief--like the principal stream of the Mound-builders' country, to which there were many tributaries."

181The name of the Tuscarora Indians for the Mississippi was, Ouau-We-Yo-Ka, meaning, "The Principal Stream."

181In the Iroquois Book of Rites the lady finds the sacred name more plainly written. She says: [^29]

181"We find in the Book of Rites the word, niyawehkowa ('great thanks')niyaweh, 'thanks,' kowa, 'great.' The plural, when it follows an adjective expressive of number, is indicated by the syllable ni prefixed to the noun, and ke suffixed. Divest this word of the prefix and suffix, and the name Ya-weh is discovered. This word occurs in the second and third clauses of the Condoling Speech in Council. * * * It may be compared to the Hebrew Hoshiahnna, which is both an exclamation of praise to Jah and an invocation of blessings."

182A most remarkable fact should be noted in this connection. The sacred name appears here as the most modern scholarship transliterates the Hebrew word, and not the Anglicized form of it, which appears in the authorized English version of the Bible. Whence, then, did the Indians obtain the word Yaweh?

182According to Adair, certain Northern Indians, at their festival of the first-fruits, used to sing in chorus these mystic words:

182Yo Meschica He Meschica Va Meschica,

182thus forming the name Yoheva, and the title Meschica, the latter repeated three times. They are also said to have had a song in which the following occurs:

182Shiluh Yo Shiluh He Shiluh Va,

182where the sacred name occurs again, this time in connection with Shiloh, which is generally supposed to refer to the Messiah. Here, too, we have a form of the sacred name which the Indians could certainly not have received from Christian sources.

182I am well aware that Adair is not accepted as an authority, but what is here stated is quoted by Rivero and Tschudi as reliable, [^30] and I dare say that a statement that has been given the weight of their endorsement is entitled to some consideration.

183But Adair is not the only witness on this question. Boudinot [^31] says he was present at a dance given by Seneca and other Indians, who during their strange performance, sang, Y-he-ho-wah, and also Hal-le-lu-yah. He says:

183"There could be no deception in all this. The writer was near them, paid great attention, and everything was obvious to the senses, and discovered great zeal in the performers. Their pronunciation was very guttural and sonorous, but distinct and clear."

183The fundamental conception of the divine attributes for which Yahweh stands is universal among cultured races, past as well as present. Even the Chinese sages of old knew the name J-hi-wei, and explained it to mean that which we are looking at without seeing; that which we listen to and hear not; that which our hand is reaching for and does not feel. [^32]

184Truth is calculated to sustain itself; it is based upon eternal facts, and will endure, while all else will sooner or later perish.--Brigham Young.

Donelly in his Atlantis, p. 234, gives a list of Indian words with Semitic affinities, copied from Senor Melgar's North Americans of Antiquity, a few of which are found in this chapter.

Brinton. Library of Aboriginal American Literature, Vol. 6, p. 67.

Ibid., p. 69. Tulan is spelt as quoted, in one place with one "l" and in another with two "ll."

Brinton, Library of Aboriginal American Literature, Vol. 6, p. 209.

Montesinos derives the word from cosca, "to level," and translates it. "leveler of ground;" or from coscos, the heaps of earth found in the neighborhood. Sir Clements Markham says, cozque, "leveler of ground," from cusquini. "to level." "to break clods." But Garcilasso's derivation may probably be accepted safely.

Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. 6, p. 186.

His Lordship spells the Name, Quecalcoatle.

Garcia, Origin of the Indians, Book 3, chap. 7, D&C 2; Quoted by Kingsborough, Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. 6, p. 186.

Conquest of Mexico, Vol. 2, p, 391, footnote.

Primitive Aryans of America, p. 54.

Liddell and Scott.

Prescott. Conquest of Peru. Vol. 1, p 52.

See Garcilasso de la Vega, Roy. Com., Part I, Book 1 chap. 6

Discovery of America, Vol. 2, p. 303, by John Fiske.

Incas of Peru, p. 41.

Am. Nations, Vol. 2, pp. 26-7.

MonumentaI History of Egypt, Vol. I, p. 339.

Brinton, Am. Race, p. 207.

Queen Moo, p. 73

The Mexican cycle consisted of 52 years.

This name is said to mean, "He who Contains All;" or "He who Accompanies the Other Gods;" or "He upon whom Depends the Existence of All Things, Preserving and Sustaining Them--a word also used to mean God, our Lord." (Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 3, p. 195.) But these definitions appear to be so many attempts to state what the old Mexicans believed concerning this deity, rather than explanations of the meaning of the word. For the meaning of nahua see a previous chapter under Nephi.

Mexican Antiquities. Vol. 6, p. 204.

Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 3, p. 191.

Muller, as quoted by Bancroft, says: "Die Mexikanischen Völker haben einen Appellativenamen fur Gott, Teotl, welcher, da die Buchstaben tl blosse aztekische Endung sind, Merkwurdiger Weise mit dem Indogermanischen theos Dens, Dewa, Dew, zusammenstimmt. Dieses Wort wird sur Bildung mancher Götternamen oder Kultusgegenstande gebraucht. Hieher gehören die Götternamen Teotlacozanqui, Teocipactli, Teotetl. Teoyamiqui, Tlozolteotl. Der Temple heisst Teocalli (vergleich Kalia, Hutte, Kalias, Capelle) oder wortlich Hans Gottes--das göttliche Buch. Teoamoxtli, Priester, Teopuxqui, oder auch Teoteuktli, eine prozession Teonenemi, Göttermarch. Dazu kommen noch manche Namen von Stádten, die als Kultussitze ausgezeichnet waren, wie das uns schon fruher bekannt gewordene Teotihuacan. Im plural wurden die Götter Teules genannt und eben so, wie Bernal Diaz so oft erzáhlt, die Gefáhrtendes Cortes welche das gemeine Volk as Götter bezeichnen wollte."--Native Races, Vol. 3, p. 184.

Ibid., p. 109.

Library of Aboriginal American Documents, Vol. 1, p. 108, et seq.

Roy. Comm., Vol. 1, p. 343, Sir Clements Markham's translation, Hakluyt Edition, London, 1869.

Indian Myths, p. 321.

Ibid., p. 627.

Peruvian Antiquities, New York, 1853, p. 10.

A Star in the West, Trenton, N.Y., 1816, p. 229

Celui que vouz regardez, et que ne voyez pas, se nomme J: Celui que vouz, ècoutez, et que vous n'entendez pas, se nomme Hi; celui que votre main cherche, et qu'elle ne peut pas saisir, se noraroe Wei. Ce sont trois êtres qu'on ne peut cornprendre, et qui, confondus, n'en font qu'un."--Remusat, quoted by Ellen Russell Emerson, Indian Myths, p. 638, with the remark that the Chinese J-hi-wei may be claimed to be the Indian Yo-he-wah, allowing for vernacular and phonetic changes. If so, it may have come to this country with the Jaredites.

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma. 2. Nephihah. 3. Pahoran I. 4. Pahoran II. 5. Pacumeni 6. Helaman, the younger. 7. Nephi. 8. Cezoram. 9. His son. 10. Seezoram. 11. Lachoneus I. 12. Lachoneus II. From 91. B.C., to 30. A.C.
[^2] David Whitmer
[^3] Martin Harris
[^4] Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1, p. 12.
[^5] Ether 3:23.
[^6] Essentials in Church History by Joseph Fielding Smith; p. 63.
[^7] February, 1828, is the date given in the Pearl of Great Price, page 55, verse 63, new edition.
[^8] "This little colony brought with them from Jerusalem their ancient scriptures engraved in Egyptian characters, on brass plates."--Orson Pratt, in an article on the Book of Mormon, written in 1874 for the Universal Cyclopedia. Mill. Star, Vol. 38. p. 692.
[^9] E. A. Wallis Budge, A History of Egypt, Vol. 6, p. 198. Scribners Bible Dictionary, under "Alphabet."
[^10] George Rawlinson, History of Egypt, Vol. 1. pp. 57-67.
[^11] L'alphabet hieroglyphique, egyptien avait, dans sa constitution meme, abstraction faite de l'absence de quelques sons, du nombre et de la forms materielle des signes une resemblance tres-marquee avec l'alphabet hebreu.--Precis du Systeme Hieroglyphique des anciens Egyptiens par Champollion; Paris, 1824, p. 59.
[^12] Pearl of Great Price, p. 51, verse 34, new edition.
[^13] Mess. and Adv., Vol. 1, p. 80.
[^14] It was while thus engaged, on May 15, 1829, that the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon them by John the Baptist, who also instructed them to baptize and ordain each other to that priesthood. On the same occasion they were promised the Melchizedek priesthood, which promise was fulfilled under the hands of Peter, James and John in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna Co., and Colesville, Broom Co., on the banks of the Susquehanna river, some time between May 15 and the end of June, 1829.--History of the Church, Vol. 1. pp. 40-1.
[^15] David Whitmer, Mill. Star, Vol. 43, p. 421.
[^16] Hist. of the Church, Vol. 1, p. 75.
[^17] See title page, Book of Mormon.
[^18] Testimony of the witnesses.
[^19] Wm. H. Harrison, the ninth president of the United States, who was inaugurated March 4, 1841. The Prophet Joseph Smith says of Mr. Harrison: "We voted for General Harrison because we loved him. He was a gallant officer and a true friend."--Nauvoo, Ill., Dec. 29, 1841; Times and Seasons, Vol. 3, p. 651.
[^20] Doc. and Cov. Sec. 124:1-14.
[^21] Letter from Erastus Snow to Brigham Young, Liverpool. July 10, 1851.
[^22] Letter from Orson Spencer to Brigham Young, Liverpool, Feb. 8, 1853.
[^23] Refers to a delegation of Upsala students.
[^24] Redogorelse for Konung Oscar II:s 25-arige Regerings jubileum, p. 231. Also, Deseret News, Oct. 12, 1897.
[^25] Ib., p. 119. An elegant copy of the official report was sent to me by the direction of the king, the following year, accompanied by this notice: "På Nådigste befallning får Chefen för H. M. Konungens Hofförwaltning hármed áran öfcerlemna ett exemplar af Redogörelsen för H. M. Konungens 25-åriga regerings jubileum, Stockholm den 17 September, 1898."
[^26] In the Algonquin (Fox) Manetowa is said to mean "mysterious being." Manetowi aki is "a mysterious country."--William Jones, Hand book Am. Lang., Smith. Inst., Bul. 40, Vol. 1, p. 850.
[^27] The letter was revised by the Prophet, May 20, 1843. See thedocumentary History, of the Church, under that date.
[^28] The familiar word Iroquois may, possibly, be another instance of this kind of word-building. The orators of that stock of Indians used to close their speeches by saying, Hiro, "I have spoken," very much as the Romans said, Dixi. Their sentinels had a cry of warning which sounded to the French, something like quai. Out of these two words and a French ending, ois, the name Iroquois was composed.
[^29] See Bancroft, Native Races, Vol. 3 pp. 733, 739. In the Egyptian, it seems, adjectives were without degrees of comparison, but the particle er, meaning "to," "with," "between," etc., in various combinations, was used to express degrees of superiority, very much as the Hebrew "rain." For instance. "She was fair (good) in her body, more than (er) other women," means, of course, that she was fairer--more good--than the rest. "Good is hearkening, more than anything," or, hearkening is more good, means "To obey is best of all." Good in these sentences is the word nefer, but there is a verb, mench, "to do good," "to abide," and that may be akin to the "mon" in the name Mormon .
[^30] The chain of the eastern Andes is penetrated by five great rivers, which unite to form the mighty Orellana. The first is Maranon, and, being the most western and distant in its source in the Andean lake of Lauricocha, is considered to be the source of the Amazon."--Sir Clements Markham, The Incas of Peru, p. 193. "The least known and the least frequented district of Ecuador," another author says, "is the territory called Del Oriente, on the eastern side of the Cordilleras. This region, lying between Quito and the Amazons, is watered by the great rivers Napo, Pastaza, and Morona, and their numerous tributaries." So that the names of the two great Book of Mormon characters, Nephi and Moroni, have been immortalized in the names of two great rivers in South America.
[^31] The American Race, p. 282.
[^32] The Pizarros entered Caxamarca in the year 1532.
