Mormon Channel, the official Church radio station, was launched in May 2009 at Radio.lds.org. The new station originates from Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah, broadcasting new programs created specifically for Mormon Channel as well as content from the Church’s archives and programming from partner organizations such as Deseret Book, Bonneville International, the Deseret News, LDS Business College, and the campuses of Brigham Young University.

The station broadcasts online 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and is also available via HDRadio in every Bonneville radio market, including Salt Lake City, Utah; Los Angeles, California; Washington D.C.; Chicago, Illinois; Phoenix, Arizona; and Seattle, Washington; all in the USA. Other distribution options are currently being explored, including satellite radio and mobile devices.

The Church-centered programming includes content for many audiences and ages. The content is primarily in English, with some content in Spanish and Portuguese.

“It’s a new broadcasting opportunity to be able to share the gospel around the world,” said Rob Boshard, a program manager for Mormon Channel.

The channel began with 11 programs, some of which air several times a day, such as Church News. Others, such as Mormon Identity, air once a week.

Many of the programs feature interviews with people from the LDS community, including Church leaders, Latter-day Saint artists, and other faithful members from around the world.

Other programs feature stories from general conference, dramatized stories about the Savior’s life and ministry, and scripture story retellings designed for children. One program discusses gospel topics and accompanies them with music.

A program called History of Hymns will examine the origins of Church hymns. Another program, Legacy, will share the experiences of faithful Church members across the globe as recorded by the Family History and Church History Departments. Music by the Tabernacle Choir will play throughout the day.

Brother Boshard said the channel will also play archived audio files such as recordings of President Wilford Woodruff (1807–98) and President Joseph F. Smith (1838–1918) and Mormon Tabernacle Choir albums dating back to 1911.

An online schedule of programs will appear up to two weeks in advance. See Radio.lds.org for additional information on programming for Mormon Channel. After programs air, all Church-owned content is archived in an online database where it can be downloaded as podcasts.
