The Book of Mormon--An Evidence of the Inspiration of Joseph
    Smith--Its Purport--Impossible to Write Without Divine
    Aid--Prophecies in the Book of Mormon--A Bible! A Bible!--Isaiah's
    Prophecy--Book Gives a Test of its Truth--Attested by Direct
    Evidence--Testimony of Three Witnesses--Testimony of Witnesses
    Unchanged--Testimony of Eight Witnesses--Secular Proof of the Book
    of Mormon--Colonists from the Tower of Babel--Origin Before the
    Christian Era--Of Hebrew Origin--Indian Customs--Indian Practice
    Resembling the Passover--Tradition of a Sacred Book--Acquainted
    with the Old Testament Record--Tradition of Moses--Tradition of
    Eve--Tradition of the Flood--Led by Youngest Brother--Engraved
    on Plates of Metal--Egyptian Writings--Evidences of Advanced
    Civilization--Ruins Discovered--Indians all of One Origin--Ruins
    in Yucatan--Ancient Glass Jar--A Ruined City--Ancient Coins and
    Implements--Destruction at the time of the Crucifixion--Ruins on
    the Ridge of a Mountain--Destroyed by the Action of Heat--Remains
    Found under Lava Beds--Discovery of a Hidden City--Evidences of
    Great Eruptions--The Messiah Known to the Ancient Inhabitants
    of America--The Cross as an Emblem--Knowledge of the
    Godhead--Tradition of the Christ--Strong Proofs of the Truth of the
    Book of Mormon--Conclusion.

Footnotes:

1. See Tract No. 3, "Marks of the Church of Christ."

MARKS OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST.

THE OUTWARD SIGNS BY WHICH IT MAY BE KNOWN.

BY EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

OUTWARD SIGNS BY WHICH CHRIST S GOSPEL MAY BE KNOWN--CHARACTER OF HIS
CHURCH KNOWLEDGE THE OUTCOME OF TRUE FAITH--HOW IT MAY BE OBTAINED--AN
ILLUSTRATION--PARABLE OF THE SOWER--WHERE IS THE TRUE GOSPEL AND CHURCH
OF CHRIST?

MANY FORMS OF RELIGION.

There are many religions in the world. Teachers of one form of religion will tell us they are right. Those who teach another form will make the same claim for themselves. All religions have some truth, or people would not believe in them.

ONLY ONE PERFECT RELIGION.

The Savior taught only one form of religion. That one is called the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It embraces all truth, and contains nothing but truth.

    "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
    hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
    Father of all." (Ephesians 4: 4, 5, 6).

JESUS CHRIST THE AUTHOR OF SALVATION.

All Christians believe that salvation is only to be gained through Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world.

     "'I am the way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh unto
    the Father, but by me." (John 14: 6).

    "For there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby
    we must be saved." (Acts 4: 12).

The holy scriptures justify us in rejecting all religions that do not teach belief in Christ.

WHICH RELIGION CONTAINS ALL TRUTH?

There are many varieties of religion even among Christian believers. But the whole truth is what we want. None but the true Gospel can be acceptable to the Lord.

    "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness." (Matthew
    6: 33).

How are we to know which religion contains all truth?

THE BIBLE WILL GUIDE US.

The Bible will assist us in making this discovery. It tells us many things which Jesus taught as His Gospel. Any teaching contrary to what He gave cannot be true.

    "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
    unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
    accursed." (Galatians 1: 8).

The Gospel which the Savior taught has not changed. It is the same to-day as it was when He dwelt upon the earth.

FAITH A DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

The first and principal doctrine taught by Christ was faith.

    "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
    whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
    life." (John 3: 16).

Our Savior knew that if people truly had abiding faith in Him they would follow Him. They would love Him and obey all His teachings.

    "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also."
    (John 14: 13).

    "If a man love me, he will keep my words." (John 14: 23).

REPENTANCE NECESSARY.

Another commandment taught by Christ was that of repentance.  True repentance is sorrow for sins and a turning away from them. The first words recorded of the Savior's preaching were:

    "Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4: 17).

Deep humility always accompanies true faith and repentance. Without it men cannot be saved.

    "Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child
    shall in no wise enter therein." (Luke 18: 17).

In the days of Christ's ministry, those who believed on Him and sincerely repented of their sins were then ready to receive the next ordinance of the Gospel. They were humble and willing to obey.

BAPTISM.

Christ was baptized Himself. He told John it was necessary for Him "to fulfill all righteousness." He taught that it was necessary for all men to be baptized.

    "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
    into the kingdom of God." (John 3: 5).

    "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." (Mark 16: 16).

Christ's disciples also taught the same. When those who believed Peter's preaching on the day of Pentecost asked what they should do to be saved, he replied,

    "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
    Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
    the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2: 38).

These passages of scripture prove that Jesus and His disciples taught baptism.

THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The last passage quoted shows that the gift of the Holy Ghost was to be given to those who obeyed the principles of faith, repentance and baptism.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

The teachings of the Savior show that it is necessary to observe the ten commandments given through Moses. Upon one occasion a man asked what good thing he should do to gain eternal life. Jesus replied, "Keep the commandments," and then named some of them. (Matthew 19: 17, 18).

OTHER COMMANDMENTS.

Besides the ten commandments, the Savior gave new ones which He said should be obeyed. Many of these are recorded in the fifth, sixth and seventh chapters of Matthew.

TEST DOCTRINES BY CHRIST'S WORD.

In our search for the true Gospel we can safely reject any teaching that does not agree with Christ's word. Anyone who says we can be saved without obeying His commandments is in error.

    "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,
    and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom
    of heaven." (Matthew 5: 19).

    "He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a
    liar, and the truth is not in him." (I John 2: 4).

Any teacher who adds to these any doctrines of men is a false teacher, and should not be followed.

    "In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
    commandments of men." (Mark 7: 7).

MANY CLAIM TO BE TRUE TEACHERS.

The teachers of many forms of religion claim that they teach these doctrines of the Gospel of Christ. How are we to decide which one is right?

HOW FALSE TEACHERS MAY BE KNOWN.

The Savior has furnished a test by which we can prove false teachers. He says, "Beware of false prophets." (Matthew 7: 15). He further adds, "Ye shall know them by their fruits." (10). "By their fruits" means by their works or by their teachings. False prophets or teachers teach falsehoods, and their works are evil. True prophets teach truth, and live righteously. They will not teach anything contrary to the words of the Savior.

HOW TRUE BELIEVERS MAY BE KNOWN.

The Savior tells us how we might know true believers. He says,

    "These signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they
    cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take
     up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall
    not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
    recover." (Mark 16; 17, 18).

The nineteenth verse of the sixteenth chapter of Mark states that these signs did follow the believers in the days of Christ's early apostles. These signs are outward evidences that people are true believers in the Gospel. The absence of them is a proof that faith is lacking, for the same cause will always produce the same effect.

OTHER PROOFS.

If a person truly believes in the Gospel, sincerely repents of his sins, is baptized for the remission of sins, and has hands laid upon him for the reception of the Holy Ghost, he should know that he has received the true Gospel.

    "Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his
    that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
    doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."
    (John 7: 16, 17).

OFFICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The Holy Ghost was promised to those who obeyed the Gospel. To all who receive it, it bears witness to the truth of the Gospel.

    "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
    Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father,
    he shall testify of me." (John 15: 26).

    "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you
    into all truth." (John 16: 13).

If people receive the Holy Ghost they will be led into all truth, according to the promise of Christ. If they are led into all truth they will be led to understand and believe alike.

HOW THE SAVIOR'S DISCIPLES MAY BE KNOWN.

Jesus told how His disciples may be known:

    "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as
    I have loved you that ye also love one another. By this shall all
    men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another."
    (John 13: 34, 35).

When people are divided in their religious views it shows that they do not love each other, and are not the disciples of Christ. If they did love each other they would be united. If they possessed the Holy Spirit they would be joined together in love.

    "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
    gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." (Galatians 5:
    22, 23).

THE CHURCH JESUS ORGANIZED.

When Jesus dwelt upon the earth He organized a church. Those who believed on Him and obeyed the Gospel became members of that one church.

ST. PAUL DESCRIBES IT.

The Apostle Paul told the Ephesian saints they were established upon the foundation of apostles and prophets.

    "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but
    fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and
    are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
    Christ himself being the chief corner stone." (Ephesians 2: 19, 20).

He had reference in these words to the church of Christ.

THE CHURCH COMPARED TO A MAN'S BODY.

He again likened the church to the body of a man. (I Corinthians 12). He showed that the members of the church were like the members of a man's body, and altogether they made a complete whole.

    "For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members
    of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. For
    by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
    or Gentiles." (I Corinthians 12: 12, 13).

St. Paul continues by explaining that all the members of the body of Christ, or officers of the church of Christ, are dependent upon each other, and each is needed in his place. One cannot do without the other, any more than a man's body can be complete without every limb and organ.

OFFICERS NAMED.

This same apostle names some of the officers of the church of Christ. He also names in the same connection some of the gifts that are always to be found in that church.

    "And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily
    prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts
    of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues." (I
    Corinthians 12: 28).

WHAT THESE OFFICERS WERE FOR.

In another place he tells the reason for having these officers in the church.

     "For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the
    ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. . . . That we
    henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
    about with every wind of doctrine." (Ephesians 4: 12, 14).

These officers were to continue in the church, "till we all come to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God." (Eph. 4: 13).

NEED OF APOSTLES AND PROPHETS.

People differ in their opinions regarding the Gospel. There is, therefore, a need of apostles and prophets to declare the word of God to them. His revealed word will settle all differences and bring those who believe on it to a unity of the faith.

WHAT ST. PAUL'S WORDS PROVE.

The scriptures just quoted prove that apostles and prophets must always be in the church of Christ. Any church not founded upon apostles and prophets, with Christ as the chief corner stone, is not the true church of Christ. Any religious organization that rejects these and the other officers mentioned as belonging to Christ's church, or does away with the miracles, gifts of healing, helps, governments, and diversities of tongues, is not the true church.

POWER TO DO MIRACLES.

When Jesus called unto Him twelve apostles He "gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease." (Matthew 10: 1). When He sent them out to preach the Gospel, He told them to say, "The kingdom of heaven is at hand." He also told them to "Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils." (Matthew 10: 7, 8).

AUTHORITY TO ACT IN CHRIST'S NAME.

Men have no right to choose for themselves to be Christ's apostles or ministers of His Gospel. He said to His disciples,

    "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you."
    (John 15: 16).

St. Paul says concerning the holy priesthood of Christ,

    "No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
    God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5: 4).

He also says, "God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers." (I Corinthians 12: 28). This shows that it was not man's right to place men in positions in the church, unless God authorized them to do so.

Jesus said John the Baptist was the greatest of prophets, yet he did not presume to baptize with the Holy Ghost, although he had the right to baptize with water. John understood that men should be specially authorized to act in any calling.

RESULT OF ACTING WITHOUT AUTHORITY.

We read in the scriptures, (Acts 1: 13-17), that certain Jews at one time undertook to act in the name of the Lord. They tried to cast out evil spirits. But they had no authority, and were overpowered by the evil spirits, and duly punished for taking upon themselves to act in the name of the Messiah without authority.

CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM PASSAGES MENTIONED.

From the scriptures mentioned, together with many others of like character, we may conclude that Christ's true apostles have power over unclean spirits and over diseases. They also have authority to act in His name. We can as well conclude that those who think it unnecessary to be authorized to minister in the ordinances of the Gospel are in error. Men may without authority attempt to teach the same doctrines as Jesus taught; they may organize a church after the same pattern; and some may even perform miracles by the power of the evil one, as did the magicians before Pharaoh in the days of Moses; but without authority from heaven to do so their pretensions are vain. We may justly reject any who may have a form of godliness but deny the power thereof.

ALL TRUE DISCIPLES PERSECUTED.

The disciples of Christ were told that they would have to suffer persecution. The Savior informed them that this should be the case, and led them to expect it.

    "If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because
    ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
    therefore the world hateth you. . . If they have persecuted me,
    they will also persecute you." (John 15: 19, 20).

    "Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you: for so did
    their fathers to the false prophets." (Luke 6: 26).

The Apostle Paul says, "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." (II Timothy 3: 12).

OUTWARD SIGNS OF THE TRUE CHURCH.

Most of the marks pointed out herein are outward signs by which the true Gospel and church of Christ may be known. The disciples of Jesus may always be recognized by the following signs which have already been pointed out:

They will Obey and Teach the Ordinances that Christ has said Must be Obeyed.

Those Ordinances are:

First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ;

Second, Repentance;

Third, Baptism by Immersion for the Remission of Sins;

Fourth, Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

They will Teach the Necessity of Obeying all the Lord's Commandments.

The Signs or Blessings Promised the Believers will Follow them,

They will be United, and will Love one Another.

They will be Organized into a Church after the Pattern Mentioned in the Scriptures.

They will have Apostles and Prophets at their Head, who will have Power and Authority to Act in Christ's Name.

They will be Persecuted as Long as Wickedness Reigns in the Earth.

FAITH NEEDED.

The pointing out of the marks by which the disciples of Christ are to be known may assist one in searching for the truth. But faith on the part of the individual himself is needed to guide him. It is very important to salvation.

HOW TO GET FAITH.

The question may be asked, how can this faith so necessary to salvation be gained?

    "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Romans
    10: 17).

When one hears the Gospel of Christ--the "glad tidings of  great joy"--naturally he should wish it were true, because it is so good. That wish or desire will help greatly to awaken belief in his mind. When a person hopes a thing is true he becomes interested in finding out if it be true. Prejudice is a foe to faith. It often causes one to turn away from that which is good.

KNOWLEDGE OF THE GOSPEL NECESSARY TO SALVATION.

It is necessary for every individual to know for himself concerning the truth of the Gospel of Christ.

    "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
    and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17: 3).

There is a way to get this knowledge. That way is similar to the way in which we obtain other knowledge. It is by putting works with our faith.

    "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandments."
    (I John 2: 3).

Faith comes by hearing, knowledge by doing. Knowledge is the result of faith.

HOW KNOWLEDGE IS GAINED.

When a child is told that he can learn to read and write by following the instructions of his teacher he is likely to believe it. If he is told so by his parents or some one whose word he can rely upon he will believe with much assurance or confidence, which is called faith. That faith causes him to act. He follows the instructions of his teacher, and in time learns to read and write. His faith is then turned to knowledge. He does not depend upon the testimony of some one else. He knows from actual experience that the arts of reading and writing can be learned by taking the course marked out. It is the same with the Gospel. When it is obeyed it brings knowledge to the individual.

GROWTH OF FAITH ILLUSTRATED BY A PARABLE.

One of our Savior's parables shows very beautifully how the word of God, when received in the heart, begins to grow and expand. In His parable of the sower He likens the word of God, or the Gospel, to a seed. (Luke 8: 5-16). Embodied within a tiny seed is the germ or source of a most marvelous power. It is one of the greatest forces of the natural world. Under proper conditions that little mite of matter is capable of the most remarkable development. When  a gardener obtains a precious kind of seed, or one that will produce a desirable fruit, he will preserve it with care. He will thoroughly prepare the soil in which he plants it, and will do all in his power to favor its growth. The desire to receive the good fruit he has been told it will produce makes him hope that the seed is good. That hope or wish will inspire him with enough faith to make the test.

In due time after planting he finds that the seed has commenced to grow. It puts forth tiny leaves that appear above the soil, and his faith is strengthened. He is assured that the seed had the germ of life within it when he received it. He continues to favor its growth, by keeping down the weeds, by protecting it from the scorching heat of the sun and the blighting breath of the wind and frost. By doing this the gardener sees that the plant continues to increase in size and strength. Thread-like roots spread out in all directions beneath the soil to secure hold therein, as well as to procure sustenance for its life and growth A tender twig shoots upward to receive additional sustenance from the air and the sunlight. Day by day and year by year the plant continues to grow and gain strength, until eventually it becomes a mighty tree. The heat of the sun now only causes it to grow the stronger, and the fierce winds to make its root more firmly planted, so that no ordinary force can resist its power of expansion.

In due season the tree produces fruit of its kind. Its seeds ripen and fall to the earth, and they in turn grow, and thus the species is perpetuated forever.

With the ripening of the fruit the faith of the man who planted the tree is ripened into perfect knowledge. He knows what was told him about the seed was true, having thoroughly tested it.

WORD OF GOD LIKE A SEED.

The word of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is in character like the seed. As the seed contains within it such great physical force, so the word of God possesses most wonderful spiritual power. When the Gospel of Christ is heard by one who has a desire to obtain its fruits, that desire will awaken within him a spark of belief. That belief will cause him to prepare his heart for the reception of the word of God. He will plant it there by seeking to obey its teachings. When once planted there, if cherished, shielded and protected it will grow. Its effect will be similar to that of  the seed buried in good soil. Its roots of faith will sink deep in the heart and become firmly planted there. Hope, like a tender twig, will spring heavenward. By this the person will know that the seed was good Day by day and year by year it will strengthen, until neither the heat of temptation nor the storms of adversity can disturb it or uproot it from the heart. It, too, in time will bring forth fruit, the fruit of eternal life. Such is the wonderful character of the word of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

WHERE IS THE TRUE GOSPEL AND CHURCH OF CHRIST?

The reader may ask the question, Is the Gospel of Christ, with all its attendant powers, gifts and blessings, upon the earth to-day? If it is, it must be of the character described herein. It must be the same as it was anciently, for it is everlasting and unchangeable in its nature.

IT IS UPON THE EARTH.

There is a church that claims to teach the very same doctrines that Christ taught. Its members claim to enjoy the same blessings promised the believers. They claim to have the same organization, with living apostles and prophets at the head. These officers claim to have received the same power and authority as Christ's first apostles had. They and their followers have been evil spoken of and persecuted for their religion ever since they were first organized as a church. They manifest all the outward signs by which the followers of Christ may be known. They make the same promises as the former disciples of Jesus made to those who obey the Gospel. The many thousands who have accepted their teachings and obeyed them testify that the promises made to them have been received.

THEIR CLAIMS DIFFERENT TO ALL OTHERS.

The claims of the members of this Church are different from those of all other professors of religion. They claim to have received their doctrines and their authority direct from heaven, by the visitation of holy angels. There is no other source from which it could be received. The name by which this Church is known is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Lord in a revelation commanded His latter-day disciples to take upon themselves this name.

The message of the restoration to earth of the true Gospel of Christ is a glorious one. All who hear it should rejoice in  the contemplation that the Lord has again spoken from heaven. The message is such a good one that all mankind should desire and hope that it is true. If they will do this, they will be led to investigate it. Then they will learn for themselves that it is indeed the Gospel of Christ.

The Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, bear witness to the truth of this divine message which they are proclaiming to the nations of the earth. They kindly ask all to lay aside prejudice and examine their claims in the spirit of humility and prayer.

    "Do you suppose that this people will ever see the day that they
    will rest in perfect security, in hopes of becoming like another
    people, nation, state, kingdom or society? They never will. Christ
    and Satan never can be friends. Light and darkness will always
    remain opposites."

    --Brigham Young.

    "Though our religious principles are before the world, ready
    for the investigation of all men, yet we are aware that the
    sole foundation of all the persecution against us has arisen in
    consequence of calumnies and misconstructions, without foundation
    in truth or righteousness."

    --Joseph Smith.

SIGNS OF CHRIST'S SECOND COMING.

WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS CONCERNING HIS ADVENT.

BY ELDER EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

WHAT THE SAVIOR AND HIS APOSTLES AND THE ANCIENT PROPHETS SAY
CONCERNING IT--THE MANY THINGS TO TAKE PLACE BEFORE THAT GREAT
EVENT--THE SIGNS ALREADY APPEARING.

SCRIPTURAL PROOF THAT HE WILL COME.

The holy scriptures supply many proofs that Christ will again come to earth. After His resurrection He appeared to His disciples, and was "seen of them forty days." Then "he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight." While the disciples were looking towards heaven as He went up, two men (angels) in white apparel stood by them and said:

    "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same
    Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in
    like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1: 11).

MANNER OF HIS APPEARANCE.

Christ's second coming will be both glorious and terrible.

    "They shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with
    power and great glory." (Matthew 24: 30; Mark 13: 26; Luke 21: 27).

    "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his
    angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works."
    (Matthew 16: 27; Mark 8: 38).

    "And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
    shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming
    fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
    the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with
    everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
    glory of his power." (II Thessalonians 1: 7, 8, 9).

TIME OF HIS COMING.

The day and the hour of the Messiah's coming is not known.

    "But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
     which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. Take ye
    heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is." (Mark 13:
    32, 33).

MANY SIGNS OF HIS COMING TO APPEAR.

The Bible foretells many things that shall take place before the Savior comes to reign in glory upon the earth.

WARS, FAMINES AND EARTHQUAKES.

Christ's disciples asked Him to tell them what should be the sign of His coming, and of the end of the world. He answered them in these words:

    "Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name,
    saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many. And ye shall hear of
    wars and rumors of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these
    things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. For nation shall
    rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall
    be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places."
    (Matthew 24: 4, 5, 6, 7).

GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM TO BE PREACHED.

In addition to this he mentioned another sign. He said:

    "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world
    for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come."
    (Matthew 24: 14).

These words have no reference to the ministry of Christ's former disciples. The end of the world, or the end of the reign of wickedness, did not follow their preaching. The Savior certainly referred to a time in the future. He spoke of a special message of the Gospel of the kingdom to be restored in latter days, otherwise the preaching of it would not be a witness or sign to all nations of the near approaching end, as He said it should be.

JOHN'S PROPHECY.

The beloved Apostle John, in the book of Revelation, foretells many things that should take place after the time of his writings. One thing he describes in these words:

    "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the
    everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
    to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
    a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his
    judgment is come." (Revelation 14: 6, 7).

John evidently refers to the same event as does the Savior. The coming of an angel with the Gospel message for all nations, as predicted by John, should be in the hour of God's  judgment. That is at the same time referred to by Jesus, when He said wars and rumors of wars, famines, pestilences, and earthquakes should occur; for these things are some of God's judgments.

PREDICTIONS OF DANIEL.

The Prophet Daniel also foretells a similar event, which he says, "shall be in the latter days." After describing the image Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, Daniel explains the meaning of it. He says the image represented Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom and the kingdoms that should be built up after it. The fourth great kingdom--the Roman power--should be divided, and a number of kingdoms should grow out of it. Then he declares a wonderful event shall take place. He says:

    "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a
    kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not
    be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume
    all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever." (Daniel 2: 44).

WHAT DANIEL REFERS TO.

Some may think this prophecy refers to the establishing of the kingdom of heaven on earth in the days of Christ's first coming. This cannot be the case. God's kingdom at that time did not "break in pieces and consume" the one great kingdom then existing--the Roman empire. On the other hand the worldly powers, which St. John describes as a "beast," made "war with the saints," and overcame them, and got power over all kindreds, and tongues and nations. (Revelation 13: 7).

The kingdom referred to by Daniel, as he plainly says "shall not be left to other people," while the Gospel of the kingdom in the days of Christ's former Apostles was rejected by the Jews and left to other people. It was taken to the Gentiles.

CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM THESE PREDICTIONS.

The Apostle John, in speaking of the great event of the future, says he heard voices in heaven saying--

    "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
    Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever."
    (Revelation 11: 15).

This is also in harmony with Daniel's prediction about the kingdom of God being set up in the latter days.

As all these prophecies so nicely agree, we are forced to the conclusion that the Gospel of Christ is to be preached in all the world in latter days as a witness, or sign, of the coming of the Messiah and the establishment of His kingdom.

GOD'S ELECT TO BE GATHERED.

Other significant events should precede the Savior's second coming. He mentions them also:

    "But in those days, after the tribulation, the sun shall be
    darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
    of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be
    shaken. . . . . . And then shall he send his angels, and shall
    gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost
    part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven." (Mark 13: 24,
    25, 27; Matthew 24: 29, 31).

St. Luke adds that there shall be "upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth." (Luke 21: 25, 26).

That all these things shall be signs of His coming is to be understood from what the Savior adds:

    "When ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at
    the doors." (Matthew 24: 33; Mark 13: 29; Luke 21: 31).

ANCIENT PROPHECIES CONCERNING THE LAST DAYS.

More than twenty of the ancient prophets and apostles whose writings are in the Bible predict events that shall happen in the last days, or near the time of Christ's second coming. Many of them prophesy concerning the gathering of the Lord's chosen people, the descendants of Israel. They not only foretell the gathering of the Jews but also the whole house of Israel. Some of the other tribes as well as that of Judah are scattered among all nations. The Prophet Jeremiah says concerning this gathering:

    "Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that it shall
    no more be said, The Lord liveth, that brought up the children of
    Israel out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, that brought
    up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all
    the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again
    into their land that I gave unto their fathers. Behold, I will send
    for many fishers, saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and
    after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from
    every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the
    rocks." (Jeremiah 16: 14, 15, 16).

The Prophet Isaiah says:

    "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set
    his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his
    people. . . . . And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and
    shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
    dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth." (Isaiah 11:
    11, 12).

The Prophets Isaiah and Micah declare:

    "It shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the
    Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
    shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto
    it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to
    the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and
    he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for
    out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
    Jerusalem." (Isaiah 2: 2, 3; Micah 4: 1, 2).

GATHERING OF ISRAEL A SIGN OF CHRIST'S COMING.

From what the prophets have said it is evident that this gathering of Israel shall be connected with Christ's reign upon earth, and will therefore be a sign of His coming. The Prophet Ezekiel predicts that Israel shall be gathered, and in the same connection declares the word of the Lord, saying:

    "I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in
    the midst of them forever." (Ezekiel 37: 26).

The setting of the Lord's sanctuary in the midst of them forever must have reference to the establishing of His kingdom never more to be thrown down.

In connection with this gathering Isaiah speaks of a time when enmity among the animal creations shall cease, and when "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea," (Isaiah 11: 9), indicating that the gathering will be near the time when peace and righteousness shall prevail upon the earth.

SIGNS FOLLOWING THE BELIEVERS.

That the blessings of the Gospel, which were in the church in the days of Christ and His apostles, will be restored at the time when the gathering of Israel shall take place is shown by what Isaiah foretells:

    "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
    deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart,
    and the tongue of the dumb sing." (Isaiah 35: 5, 6).

A MESSENGER TO APPEAR.

There is still another sign to mark the coming of the  Messiah. The whole volume of sacred scripture gives proof that it will be manifest.

The Prophet Malachi, repeating the Lord's words to him concerning His coming in glory, says:

    "Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
    before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his
    temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in:
    behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts." (Malachi 3: 1).

The following verse shows that this prophecy does not refer to Christ's first coming:

    "But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when
    he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's
    soap." (Malachi 3: 2).

It appears from this prediction of Malachi that the Lord will send a messenger to prepare the way for His second coming, as was done at the time of His first coming. It is reasonable to believe this, for it is in full harmony with the teachings of the scriptures. The Prophet Amos says:

    "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret
    unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3: 7).

ABUNDANCE OF SCRIPTURE TO PROVE IT.

The whole Bible history bears witness to the truth of these words of Amos. It is a record of God's dealings with mankind through the agency of "his servants the prophets," The sacred book tells us nothing concerning the things of God but what has been revealed by His holy prophets. In connection with all important events it relates, we read of some inspired men appearing. These prophets were raised up to deliver special messages from the Lord direct to the people. From time to time the Lord has such messages to declare to mankind. In all past ages He has proclaimed them by the mouths of His prophets. The Lord spoke to these men with His own voice, sometimes face to face, sometimes from the midst of a cloud or from a burning bush, and at other times by a voice from heaven.

Before the Lord destroyed the inhabitants of the earth with a flood, He raised up the Prophet Noah to warn the people of the danger they were in, and to point out to them a way of escape.

When the Lord was about to raise up a chosen people of the posterity of Abraham, He told that patriarch of His intention.  He also renewed the promise to Jacob, by speaking unto him, and Jacob prophesied concerning his posterity.

After the children of Israel became slaves to the Egyptians, and when the Lord was about to free them, He revealed His intentions to the Prophet Moses. He chose this man to prepare the people for deliverance and to lead them out of Egypt.

When the Jews were about to be taken captives by the Babylonians, prophets were sent to warn them of their danger. Jeremiah and Ezekiel were two of those prophets. The people heeded not their warning, and many were slain or taken as prisoners.

When the Lord was about to destroy Nineveh, unless the people repented of their sins, He sent the Prophet Jonah to call them to repentance. The people listened to and obeyed his words and were saved.

When the Jewish kingdom was about to be entirely overthrown for the last time, John the Baptist and the Savior Himself appeared to point out the way for the people's salvation; but they were rejected by the great majority.

THE FUTURE DETERMINED BY THE PAST.

Jesus says about His second advent:

    "But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son
    of man be." (Matthew 24: 37).

As Noah was sent to warn the people of the approaching flood in his day, is it not reasonable to expect that a prophet will be sent in the latter days to warn the people of the destruction of the wicked, when the Savior comes to take vengeance upon them?

The Bible fully establishes the fact that all important things done by the Lord in past ages have been preceded by the appearance of inspired prophets. Surely the greatest event of the world's history--Christ's glorious reign on earth--will be preceded by the appearance of divinely inspired messengers!

SIGNS ENUMERATED.

Scriptural testimony has been presented in the foregoing to show that a number of signs of Christ's second coming will be made manifest to the world before His appearance takes place:

There will be Wars and Rumors of Wars, Famines, and Pestilences, and Earthquakes.

The Gospel of the Kingdom shall be Preached in all the World for a Witness unto all Nations.

The Sun and Moon shall be darkened, the Stars of Heaven shall Fall, and the Powers of Heaven shall be Shaken.

The Lord's Chosen People will be Gathered.

The House of the Lord shall be established in the Top of the Mountains.

All the Gifts and Blessings of the Gospel shall be Restored.

A Messenger shall Come to Prepare the Way Before the Lord.

APPEARANCE OF THE SIGNS.

The order in which these signs will appear is not clearly stated in the scriptures. It is consistent to believe that several will be apparent at once. Famines and pestilences often occur as the results of war.

The preaching of the Gospel and the gathering of the Lord's elect will take time, and may proceed together. It is plainly evident that before the preaching or the gathering the Lord's authorized messenger must appear to begin the work and to show how the Lord desires it carried out.

SIGNS ALREADY APPARENT.

The "wars and rumors of wars," the rising of "kingdom against kingdom," the "distress of nations," and the "famines, pestilences, and earthquakes" of the present time proclaim that THE COMING OF THE LORD "IS NEAR, EVEN AT THE DOORS." The desire awakened among the Jews to return to Jerusalem, and the efforts being made for them to do so, are also witnesses that THE TIME OF THEIR "REDEMPTION DRAWETH NIGH."

WHO BELIEVES THESE THINGS.

But what about the messenger to prepare the way before the Lord? How about the preaching of the Gospel of the kingdom in all the world? Where are the gifts and blessings of the Gospel--the signs to follow the believers? Where are the chosen people being gathered? And where is the house of the Lord being established?

In this age of unbelief who is looking for the fulfillment of these important events which must surely come to pass? Well might the Savior ask the question: "When the Son of  Man Cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" "As the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be." There were but few believers in Noah's day.

A PEOPLE PREPARING FOR CHRIST'S COMING.

The Latter-day Saints claim that the divinely inspired messenger has come to prepare the way before the Lord. They know that the gifts, powers and blessings of the Gospel have been restored, for they are partakers of them. Among them the eyes of the blind have been opened, the ears of the deaf unstopped, and the lame healed. Their missionaries in a humble way have been proclaiming the Gospel of the kingdom for over sixty years; and thousands of them are among the nations of the earth declaring it at the present time. Many of those who have believed their message have been gathered out from all nations, "from the four winds," from the "islands of the sea," from the "mountains" and "hills," and the "holes of the rocks." They have built the Lord's house in "the top of the mountains," where "all nations shall flow unto it," as they are now doing. There they are being taught the Lord's ways, that they might more fully "walk in His paths." The claims of the Latter-day Saints are worthy of the earnest and prayerful consideration of all who are seeking to prepare for the coming of the Lord.

    "We have turned the barren, bleak prairies and swamps into
    beautiful towns, farms and cities, by our industry; and the men
    who seek our destruction and cry thief, treason, riot, are those
    who themselves violate the laws, steal and plunder from their
    neighbors, and seek to destroy the innocent, heralding forth lies
    to screen themselves from the just punishment of their crimes by
    bringing destruction upon innocent people."

    --Joseph Smith.

SAVED BY GRACE THROUGH OBEDIENCE.

IMPORTANT QUESTIONS CONCERNING SALVATION ANSWERED BY THE WORD OF GOD.
EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL ENGLAND.

BIBLE TEACHINGS UPON THIS SUBJECT--IMPORTANT QUESTIONS CONCERNING
SALVATION ANSWERED BY THE WORD OF GOD SALVATION FREE TO ALL WHO WILL
OBEY--FAITH ALONE WILL NOT SAVE--TRUE FAITH CANNOT BE SEPARATED FROM
WORKS OF OBEDIENCE--ILLUSTRATIONS OF SALVATION BY GRACE.

IS SALVATION FREE TO ALL?

The Bible plainly says that it is. St. Paul tells us that our Savior "Will have all men to be saved." (I Timothy 3: 4). John tells us that

    "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
    whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting
    life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world;
    but that the world through him might be saved." (John 3: 16, 17).

ARE ALL MEN SINNERS?

The Bible says so.

    "There is none righteous, no, not one." (Romans 3: 10).

    "For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
    sinneth not." (Ecclesiastes 7: 20).

    "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
    is not in us." (I John 1: 8).

WHAT IS THE LORD'S INVITATION AND PROMISE TO SINNERS?

He invites them to come unto Him, and promises them rest unto their souls and forgiveness of their sins.

    "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
     give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I
    am meek and lowly of heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
    For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matthew 11: 28-30).

    "Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your
    sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be
    red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah 1: 18).

CAN SINFUL MAN SAVE HIMSELF?

No. The Apostle Paul says salvation "is the gift of God," (Ephesians 2: 8); he also says,

    "The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life."
    (Romans 6: 23).

THEN BY WHAT MEANS CAN MAN BE SAVED?

Only through the grace of God, which means by His goodness, favor, or kindness.

    "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
    yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man
    should boast." (Ephesians 2: 8, 9).

DOES THIS MEAN THAT WE ARE TO DO NOTHING?

Certainly not, for the next verse of St. Paul's writing states that we must perform good works.

    "For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
    works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them."
    (Ephesians 2: 10).

WHAT IS THIS GIFT OF GOD WHICH BRINGS SALVATION TO MAN?

It is the atonement made by Jesus Christ, by which He took away the sin of the world.

    "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
    unjust, that he might bring us to God." (I Peter 3: 18).

    "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world."
    (John 1: 29).

FROM WHAT IS MAN SAVED BY CHRIST'S ATONEMENT?

First, from the effects of Adam's fall, which is death.

    "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
    the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
    made alive." (I Corinthians 15: 21, 22).

Second, from the sins man himself commits, provided he accepts the grace which Christ offers.

     "And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours
    only, but also for the sins of the whole world." (I John 2: 2).

HOW CAN MAN RECEIVE THE GREAT GIFT OF SALVATION FROM SIN?

Only by obeying the Gospel of Jesus Christ; that is, by doing what He has commanded. There is no other way. St. Paul says of Christ:

    "Being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto
    all them that obey him." (Hebrews 5: 9).

The Savior Himself says:

    "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
    kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my father which is
    in heaven." (Matthew 7: 21).

    "If ye love me, keep my commandments." (John 14: 15).

    "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that
    loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I
    will love him, and will manifest myself to him." (John 14: 21).

SHALL WE BE JUDGED ACCORDING TO OUR BELIEF OR ACCORDING TO OUR
OBEDIENCE?

The scriptures tell us that every man will be rewarded according to his works.

    "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his father with his
    angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works."
    (Matthew 16, 27).

    "Who will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who
    by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and
    immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are contentious, and
    do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and
    wrath." (Romans 2: 6, 7).

    "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
    books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book
    of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were
    written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up
    the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead
    which were in them: and they were judged every man according to
    their works. (Revelation 20: 12, 13).

WHAT WILL BE THE PENALTY OF DISOBEDIENCE?

The Apostle Paul says the Lord Jesus will take vengeance upon those who obey not the Gospel of Christ.

    "And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
    shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming
    fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
    the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." (II Thessalonians 1: 7, 8).

The Apostle James says people deceive themselves if they do not the things the Lord commands:

    "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
    selves." (James 1: 22).

    "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
    and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be
    naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
    Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give
    them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it
    profit?" (James 2: 14, 15, 16).

The Apostle John gives this testimony concerning those who obey the Lord:

    "Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have
    right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
    the city." (Revelation 22: 14).

ARE NOT MANKIND CLEANSED FROM SIN BY THE BLOOD OF JESUS?

Yes, if they follow Him, that is, keep His commandments.

    "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
    unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If
    we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we
    lie, and do not the truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in
    the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
    Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (I John 1: 5, 6,
    7).

#DOES THE OBEDIENCE WHICH THE LORD REQUIRES MEAN BELIEF ONLY?

No; for true belief, or faith, cannot be separated from works. Jesus says,

    "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also."
    (John 14: 12).

    "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
    kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is
    in heaven." (Matthew 7: 21).

    "And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
    say?" (Luke 6: 46).

    "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 15:
    14).

The Apostle James also tells us,

    "Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone." (James
    2: 17).

Knowing that a man cannot show that he has faith except by his works, this Apostle adds:

    "Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith
    by my works." (James 2: 18).

To make it plain that a belief without works is not a living faith and will not save, he says,

    "The devils also believe and tremble." (James 2: 19).

WHAT WORKS ARE REQUIRED WITH OUR FAITH?

The ordinances of the Gospel, such as repentance, baptism and the laying on of hands, and all the works of righteousness God has commanded. Jesus says concerning repentance and baptism,

    "Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4: 17).

    "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." (Luke 13: 5).

    "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." (Mark 16: 16).

The Apostle Peter says,

    "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
    Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
    the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2: 38).

In regard to works of righteousness Christ says:

    "Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the
    scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom
    of heaven." (Matthew 5: 20).

    "He that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matthew 10: 22).

Upon this subject the Apostle Peter writes:

    "Add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to
    knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience
    godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly
    kindness charity." (II Peter 1: 5-7).

DOES ANY PART OF THE BIBLE TEACH THAT MAN CAN BE SAVED WITHOUT
WORKS?

No. The passages that some people suppose teach such a doctrine are not fully understood by them. Paul and Silas said to the jailer, when he asked them what he should do to be saved,

    "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved and thy
    house." (Acts 16: 31).

They knew that the jailer could not truly believe without obeying. That he did obey is shown by the words that follow:

    "And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their
    stripes; and was baptized, he and all his, straightway." (Acts 16:
    33).

On the day of Pentecost the Apostle Peter repeated these words from the prophecy of Joel:

    "And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name
    of the Lord shall be saved." (Acts 2: 21).

But on the same occasion he commanded every one of them to repent and be baptized. (Acts 2: 38).

St. Paul says,

    "A man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law." (Romans
    3: 28).

It is made plain by other remarks which he makes in the same connection that he refers to the Jewish law, and not to deeds of righteousness, nor Gospel ordinances. In no place does the Bible teach that faith without works will save.

AN ILLUSTRATION.

Suppose a farmer were told these words by a friend: "If you only had a horse, you might do much more work." The farmer would at once understand that his friend meant that he should not only procure a horse, but that he should feed it, and use it in the harness in order to get the work performed. He would be considered a very foolish man if he merely bought the horse, and never fed it or used it, simply because his friend did not say the words "You must feed it and make use of it after you get it." The horse would soon die, and then be of no use to the owner if he treated it in such a way. Anyone who says he believes in Jesus Christ and never obeys His commandments has but a dead faith, which is of no more use to him than is a dead horse to a farmer.

WHAT KNOWLEDGE DOES THE BIBLE SAY IS NECESSARY TO ETERNAL LIFE?

A knowledge of our Father in heaven, and our Redeemer.

    "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
    and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17: 3).

CAN THIS KNOWLEDGE BE OBTAINED WITHOUT OBEDIENCE TO THE
COMMANDMENTS OF THE LORD?

It cannot. The Apostle John says:

    "Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his commandment.
    He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a
    liar, and the truth is not in him." (I John 2: 3, 4).

CAN THERE BE MORE THAN ONE WAY OF SALVATION, OR MORE THAN ONE TRUE
GOSPEL AND CHURCH OF CHRIST?

No. The Savior taught only one way, and organized but one church. He says:

    "I am the way, the truth and the life: no man cometh unto the
    Father, but by me." (John 14: 6).

    "He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth
    up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber." (John 10: 1).

St. Paul says concerning the one Gospel of Christ:

    "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
    unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
    accursed." (Galatians 1: 8).

The same Apostle says concerning the Church of Christ:

    "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
    hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Ephesians
    4: 4, 5).

St. John gives this warning against those who teach not the necessity of abiding in Christ, that is obeying all His doctrines:

    "If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
    him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that
    biddeth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds." (II John 10,
    11).

IF ORDINANCES AND COMMANDMENTS MUST BE OBEYED HOW ARE MANKIND SAVED
BY GRACE, WHICH IS A FREE GIFT?

The Gospel plan is given through the grace of God. It is a gift to man. If man refuses to obey it he rejects the gift, which is the only means of his salvation.

    "I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of
    God unto salvation to every one that believeth." (Romans 1: 16).

TRUTHS DECLARED BY THE WORD OF GOD.

The passages already given are from the writings and sayings of divinely inspired apostles and prophets. They are the words of God, for these men "spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." With many other passages in the Bible they prove that--

Salvation is Free to all. All men are Sinners.

The Lord Invites all Sinners to come to Him, and Promises them Forgiveness.

Sinful man Cannot save Himself.

He can only be Saved by the Grace of God.

He can only partake of the Full Grace of God by Obeying the Gospel of Christ.

Obedience means to Keep the Commandments as well as to Believe.

The Bible Teaches no other way of Salvation.

SALVATION AND EDUCATION.

The Gospel which redeems from sin may be likened unto a course of education which redeems from ignorance. The two are so near alike that if we understand the one we may be able to understand the other. Sometimes wealthy men establish schools that are free to the public. All who desire to get an education are invited to receive it freely. It might be said that it is by the grace or kindness of these men that those who accept their offer are educated. But to receive the education they offer so freely one must comply with the rules of the school. He cannot enter unless he is willing to do so. After he has entered the pupil must obey the instructions given or he never will gain the education offered, although it is offered freely.

Salvation in the kingdom of heaven is very much the same. It is offered to all freely, but to receive it one must accept of the conditions upon which it is tendered; and he must gain it by obedience to the instructions of the Savior, who made salvation free to mankind.

SIN AND DEBT.

Sin may be likened unto a debt. Sometimes men get into debt and are unable to pay what they owe. Suppose a man in this condition was told by the man to whom he was in debt that he would be forgiven if he would agree to certain conditions. Such a man would not expect forgiveness unless he made the promise and kept his agreement.

All men are sinners before the Lord, and they cannot free themselves from their sins. The Savior, however, promises them forgiveness on condition of their obedience to His commandments. How then can we expect to receive forgiveness unless we accept His offer and obey His word?

THE BEGINNING OF THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST.

RULES THAT MUST BE OBEYED BY ALL WHO ENTER CHRIST'S CHURCH.

BY ELDER EDWIN F. PARRY, LIVERPOOL, ENGLAND.

###WHAT IS SALVATION?

Salvation means redemption from eternal death, and deliverance from the effects of sin. It is the gift of God to man.

    "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of
    yourselves: it is the gift of God." (Ephesians 2: 8).

Adam's transgression, or original sin, brought eternal death upon mankind. The atonement made by the Savior made redemption from that eternal death general or universal; that is, all will be redeemed from it. Both good and bad will be resurrected.

    "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of
    the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be
    made alive." (I Corinthians 15: 21, 22).

OUR OWN SINS.

Salvation from our own sins is a special blessing of our Heavenly Father. It is offered freely, but all who desire it must accept it upon the condition specified. That condition is obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

WHAT IS THE GOSPEL?

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is called the plan of salvation. It is a system of rules by complying with which salvation may be gained; hence it is called in the scriptures the "power of God unto salvation."

There are many systems or branches of knowledge known to man, such as that of music, of chemistry, of mathematics, of geometry, etc. By learning and practicing the rules of one of these systems a person can receive the benefits to be had from that particular system. By learning and practicing the rules of the Gospel we can receive the blessing it offers, which is salvation.

To enjoy the privileges and blessings of civilized society children have to learn the rules or customs of civilized people. This they do by obeying the teachings they receive from their parents. If an uncivilized man wishes to associate with civilized people, and enjoy their company, he must be willing to obey their teachings, or the rules of their society. The Gospel of Jesus Christ leaches the rules of conduct that are to be observed by all who are saved in the kingdom of heaven. These rules are simple, but they are very strict. They must be obeyed.

THE FIRST RULE--FAITH.

The first rule or principle of the Gospel is faith in God. The Apostle Paul says:

    "Without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh
    to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
    that diligently seek him." (Hebrews 11: 6).

It is shown in the above passage that we cannot come to God without believing that He exists, and also that He rewards them that diligently seek Him. In order to believe that God rewards all that seek Him, we must trust Him, or have confidence in His word. That is, we must rely upon His promises. This is the full meaning of faith. The same apostle gives this definition of faith:

    "Faith is the substance" [assurance] "of things hoped for, the
    evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11: 1).

The reason why it is impossible to please God without faith is because He desires that His children should come unto Him, that they might be saved. It pleases Him when they keep His commandments, while He is displeased when they are disobedient.

NATURE OF TRUE FAITH.

True faith is sometimes called living faith. It is capable of growing. When exercised it becomes stronger. When we  trust in the Lord we prove to ourselves that He can be relied upon. We learn that His word can be depended upon, and so our confidence in Him is increased. By the continued exercise of faith in God it becomes a principle of great power. Men by it have influence with the Lord. By it they are enabled to do many marvelous things. Jesus says,

    "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
    believeth." (Mark 9: 23).

    "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto
    this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove;
    and nothing shall be impossible unto you." (Matthew 17: 20).

    "What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye
    receive them, and ye shall have them." (Mark 11: 24).

POWER OF FAITH.

St. Paul mentions many great things done by the power of faith, and speaks of a number of men of old "who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens." (Hebrew 11: 33, 34).

Knowing the great power of living faith, the Savior promised with assurance that marvelous blessings should follow all who believe on the Lord. These blessings, He said, should be signs or evidences of their belief.

    "These signs shall follow them that believe; in my name shall they
    cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take
    up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
    them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."
    (Mark 16: 17, 18).

All these blessings were enjoyed by believers in former days. They are also received by true believers to-day. The result of faith is always the same. If it was possible for miracles to be performed by the power of faith in ancient times it is equally possible to do the same by faith at the present time.

NECESSITY OF MIRACULOUS GIFTS.

It is necessary that the signs or gifts of the Gospel should follow believers in our day as well as in past ages. They furnish a proof of our faith. If our faith is not sufficient to bring to us the temporal blessings of God which we need or desire, then we have cause to fear that our faith is not strong enough to bring to us eternal salvation. It is possible for a  person to be mistaken in estimating his own faith. Sometimes people over-estimate their strength, and only learn of their mistake when they make some test of it. Persons can also overestimate the faith they possess, and if they do not test it they may deceive themselves.

Faith, like bodily strength, can only be developed or increased by exercising it; and a person once possessing faith may lose it by disuse, as one loses his strength of muscle when it is not exercised.

EXISTENCE OF FAITH SHOWN BY WORKS.

True faith is always made manifest by works. When a person has faith in the Lord he will show it by his works of obedience; that is by keeping the commandments of God. It is useless for any one to profess that he has faith, if he does not show it by his obedience. The Savior asks the question,

    "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?"
    (Luke 6: 46).

The Apostle James says we deceive ourselves if we are not doers of the word:

    "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own
    selves." (James 2: 22).

He further adds that it is not profitable to say we have faith and do not perform works, and that the best way to show our faith is by our works:

    "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith,
    and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be
    naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them,
    Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give
    them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it
    profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone.
    Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works; shew me thy
    faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works.
    Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils
    also believe, and tremble." (James 2: 14-19).

ANOTHER EVIDENCE OF FAITH.

True faith can be recognized by another proof or test. When it is obtained it causes its possessor to be very humble. It is always accompanied with humility. It convinces its possessor that he is a sinner, and he feels penitent.

THE SECOND RULE--REPENTANCE.

Repentance is the second rule or principle of the Gospel of Christ. It naturally follows faith in God and Jesus Christ. True faith leads to repentance of sin as one step up a ladder leads to the next.

MEANING OF REPENTANCE.

According to the teachings of the scriptures, to repent means to feel sorrow for sins committed and to turn away from them; that is to do them no more. St. Paul, in writing to the Corinthian saints, says to them concerning their repentance:

    "Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
    to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly manner that ye
    might receive damage by us in nothing. For godly sorrow worketh
    repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of
    the world worketh death." (II Corinthians 7: 9, 10).

The same apostle in exhorting the Ephesians to repent told them what they should do, or how they should repent. He says,

    "Let him that stole steal no more." (Ephesians 4: 28).

One who sincerely repents will also seek to make restitution for wrongs done. If he has stolen he will return, if possible, that which he has taken. Such is the full meaning of repentance--to forsake sin.

NECESSITY OF REPENTANCE.

Repentance is very necessary to salvation in the kingdom of heaven. Those who have been led to exercise faith in the Lord are under great condemnation if they do not repent. They are in rebellion against Him and cannot receive His approbation. Unless they turn from their sins they are not fit subjects for His kingdom. Both John the Baptist and Jesus began their labors in the ministry by calling upon the people to repent.

    "In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness
    of Judea, and saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at
    hand." (Matthew 3: 1, 2).

    "From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the
    kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matthew 4: 17).

John refused to baptize those who came to him, without repenting, and told them to bring forth "fruits meet for repentance." (Matthew 3: 7, 8).

Neither faith nor baptism will benefit a person unless he repents also. The object of the Gospel is to bring mankind back to God. Through sin they are separated from Him.

    "Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
    sins have hid his face from you." (Isaiah 59: 2).

To return to Him it is necessary to put away sin--to repent of it.

    "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
    God?" (I Corinthians 6: 9).

    "Except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish." (Luke 13: 3).

It is only upon certain conditions that the blood of Christ cleanseth from all sin:

    "If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship
    one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth
    us from all sin." (I John 1: 7).

In order to "walk in the light" we must turn away from the dark paths of sin.

THE THIRD RULE--BAPTISM.

Repentance alone does not remit sin, yet every one who is truly penitent desires that his sins be remitted. It is through the atonement of Jesus Christ that a remission of sins is obtained. To make that atonement effective to each individual the Savior has instituted an ordinance. By obeying that ordinance, after repenting of his sins, a person can receive a remission or forgiveness of them.

TRUE MODE OF BAPTISM.

The ordinance for the remission of sins is called baptism. The meaning of the word baptize is to immerse or dip. The only proper mode of baptism is by immersion. All the baptisms described in the New Testament were performed by immersion.

St. Matthew says concerning the baptism of Jesus:

    "And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the
    water." (Matthew 3: 16).

    This shows that He must have gone down into the water. "And John
    also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much
    water there." (John 3: 23).

This is also a proof that John baptized by immersion.

The baptism of the eunuch by Philip is described thus in the Bible:

    "They went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch;
    and he baptized him. And when they were come up out of the water,
    the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip." (Acts 8: 38, 39).

This, again, shows the manner of baptism practiced by the Savior's disciples.

St. Paul writes:

    "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ
    were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by
    baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead
    by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness
    of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of
    his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection."
    (Romans 6: 3, 4, 5).

The apostle here likens baptism to the burial and resurrection of Christ. Any ordinance called baptism performed in some other way is not in the likeness of Christ's death and resurrection, and is not baptism at all.

All the early church historians testify that baptism by immersion was practiced during the first centuries after Christ.

WHAT BAPTISM IS FOR.

The following passages of scripture show that baptism is for the remission of sins:

    "John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
    repentance for the remission of sins." (Mark 1: 4).

    "And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the
    baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Luke 3: 3).

    "Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of
    you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins." (Acts
    2: 38).

The scriptures tell of no ordinance or means by which a remission of sins can be obtained without baptism. Faith and repentance are not sufficient. The Bible says of John the Baptist's ministry:

    "All the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God,
    being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and
    lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not
    baptized of him." (Luke 7: 29, 30).

It appears from this that those who refuse to be baptized reject the counsel of God against themselves. To do this is a great sin, and the only way to repent of it is to obey the counsel of God, and the counsel of God is to be baptized.

Cornelius, who is described as "a devout man, and one that feared God," and who was visited by an angel from heaven was commanded to be baptized. (Acts 10: 48). This shows  that baptism is necessary for all mankind, no matter how righteous they may be.

OTHER PURPOSES OF BAPTISM.

Jesus said it was necessary for Him to be baptized, in order to fulfill all righteousness, though He was without sin:

    "Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized
    of him. But John forbade him, saying, I have need to be baptized
    of thee, and comest thou to me? And Jesus answering said unto him,
    Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all
    righteousness." (Matthew 3: 13, 14, 15).

If it was becoming or proper that the Savior, who was without sin, should obey this ordinance, how much more becoming and necessary it is for all mankind, who are in sin, to follow Him and be baptized!

Baptism is one of the ordinances by which persons are admitted into the church of Christ, as shown by the following scriptures:

    "Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the
    same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls."
    (Acts 2: 41).

    "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
    into the kingdom of God." (John 3: 5).

To be "born of water" one must be baptized in water. Upon another occasion Jesus said,

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved: but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16: 16).

In no part of the scripture is it stated that man can be admitted into the church of Christ or be saved without baptism. It is an ordinance binding upon all who have reached the age of accountability.

The words of Jesus to the thief on the cross, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise," (Luke 23: 43), are believed by some to mean that the thief was promised salvation without complying with the ordinance of baptism. The Apostle Peter says Christ, after being "put to death in the flesh," "went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah." (I Peter 3: 18, 19, 20). Three days after His crucifixion, and after He was resurrected, Jesus said to Mary: "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." (John 20: 17). This proves that Christ did not go to heaven on the day He told the thief he would be with  Him in Paradise; if He did not, then it is evident that the thief did not.

THE BAPTISM OF INFANTS.

The baptism of infants is not an ordinance of Christ's church. He never instituted such a practice, and does not require it nor approve of it. Baptism as has been shown, is for the remission of sins, and for admission into the kingdom of God. It must follow faith and repentance. Infants are without sins; they are unable to exercise faith, or to understand repentance. Concerning them Jesus says:

    "Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
    FOR OF SUCH IS THE KINGDOM OF GOD." (Mark 10: 13, 14).

THOSE WHO HAVE DIED WITHOUT BAPTISM.

If this ordinance is so essential to salvation, it might be asked, what becomes of those good people who die without baptism, not knowing it is necessary? Will they be lost? It might also be asked, What will become of those good people who die without believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, never having heard of Him? Let the scriptures answer these questions:

    "And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
    and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
    evil." (John 3: 19).

    "Where no law is, there is no transgression." (Romans 4: 15).

    "For sin is the transgression of the law." (I John 3: 4).

    "That servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself,
    neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
    stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of
    stripes shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much
    is given, of him shall be much required." (Luke 12: 47, 48).

These passages of scripture are sufficient to make it clear that people are not condemned until they, after having the privilege of complying with the law of God, reject it. The Lord in His infinite mercy has provided means by which all who die without the privilege of hearing and obeying the Gospel may be saved by future compliance.[1]

But those who do hear it and refuse to obey its teachings simply because other good people before them who died without  the opportunity did not comply with them in this life, will surely be under condemnation.

BAPTISM A TEST OF OBEDIENCE.

The fact that baptism is a commandment of God should be enough to convince any one that it must be observed. It is not an unreasonable requirement. The Lord promises salvation to those who obey Him. Baptism is one of the tests of obedience. Nothing but a lack of faith, repentance and humility will cause one to object to baptism. An unwillingness to submit to baptism is a proof that faith and repentance have not been complied with. Baptism therefore serves as a test of one's faith and repentance, just as repentance is a test of faith. A spirit of repentance and humility proves that we have faith; and an honest desire to accept baptism proves that we manifest faith, repentance and humility.

When these three rules or principles have been sincerely obeyed we are prepared for the next one. By complying with it the Lord's approval of our course is to be received.

THE FOURTH RULE--LAYING ON OF HANDS.

Following the ordinance of baptism by immersion in water for the remission of sins, is that of laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost. The manner of conferring the Holy Ghost in the days of the apostles was by the ordinance of laying on of hands, as the following passages will show:

    "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
    Ghost." (Acts 8: 17).

    "When Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the
    Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money." (Acts 8: 18).

    "When Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on
    them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied." (Acts 19: 6).

Those who truly believe, sincerely repent of their sins, and are baptized by one having authority are entitled to receive this ordinance of laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost. If it is performed by one called of God, that is, one having authority to administer His ordinances, the Lord will sanction the act by bestowing the gift of the Holy Ghost upon those who receive the ordinance.

NECESSITY OF LAYING ON OF HANDS.

The scriptures show that it is very essential that this ordinance be received by all who accept the Gospel of Christ. Like that of baptism, it is one by which mankind are admitted  into the church of God. When the people of Samaria accepted Philip's testimony and were baptized, Peter and John were sent to lay hands upon them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. (Acts 8: 14-17). If it was not necessary that the people of Samaria should have this ordinance attended to the apostles would not have gone to the trouble of sending Peter and John unto them for that purpose.

OFFICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.

The influence of the Holy Spirit may be felt by men and women who have not complied with all these rules of the Gospel. The Spirit of the Lord leads people to have faith, to live good lives, and to perform many good works, but it will never manifest to any one that his life is fully approved of the Lord without obeying these ordinances or rules of His church. People should not think themselves saved because they have felt the influence of the Holy Ghost prompting them to do right. If they do not obey its promptings by keeping the commandments of Christ, that Spirit will not remain with them. The Lord says,

    "My spirit shall not always strive with man." (Genesis 6: 3).

Jesus said to His disciples,

    "I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter;
    that he may abide with you forever." (John 14: 16).

This promise of a Comforter to abide with them forever was on condition of obedience, as may be learned by reading what follows in the same chapter of John's Gospel.

Jesus further promised that the Holy Ghost would lead His disciples into all truth:

    "When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all
    truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
    hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come."
    (John 16: 13).

In order to be guided into all truth, and to receive the other blessings conferred by the Holy Spirit, we must obey these first principles of truth that have been mentioned. Unless we do this we never can make further progress.

RULES HEREIN EXPLAINED.

In the foregoing the first principles of the Gospel of Christ have been briefly explained, namely.

1. Faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ.

2. Repentance.

3. Baptism by Immersion, for the Remission of Sins.

4. Laying on of Hands for the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

That this is the order in which these principles were taught by the Savior and His disciples, is evident from the writings of the New Testament.

John the Baptist first called upon those who believed his word to repent of their sins; and he refused to baptize those who did not show fruits of repentance. (Matthew 3: 2-8). He also promised that after their baptism of water they should receive the baptism of the Holy Ghost. (Matthew 3: 11).

To those who believed his words, spoken on the day of Pentecost, the Apostle Peter said,

    "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
    Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of
    the Holy Ghost." (Act 2: 38).

The people of Samaria who believed Philip's preaching "were baptized, both men and women." (Acts 8: 12). Afterwards Peter and John were sent to them that they might receive the Holy Ghost:

    "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
    Ghost" (Acts 8: 17).

These four rules must be obeyed in order to gain admission into Christ's church. They are the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

These doctrines were taught by the Savior and His disciples, as recorded in the Bible. There is no other way of entering the Church of Christ. Anyone who teaches that there is some other way is under condemnation. St. Paul says:

    Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel
    unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be
    accursed." (Galatians 1: 8).

St. John, in speaking of the doctrine of Christ, says:

    "If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
    him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that
    biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds." (II John 10,
    11).

All the doctrines taught by Jesus and His disciples are believed and taught to-day by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and all the blessings and gifts that characterized the primitive church are enjoyed by the Latter-day Saints.

Footnotes:

1. For further information upon this subject see tract No. 5, entitled "A Prophet of Latter Days."

THE ANGEL WITH THE GOSPEL.

BY ELDER ORSON PRATT, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1866.

    "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven having the
    everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
    to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with
    a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his
    judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and earth, and
    the sea, and the fountains of waters."--Rev. 14: 6-7.

Has the angel, seen in John's vision on Patmos, yet come? Or will he hereafter come? The Latter-day Saints are diligently and boldly declaring to the nations that the angel has come, that he has appeared unto chosen witnesses, that he has committed the everlasting Gospel to them, commanding them to preach it to all people, to cry with a loud voice that the hour of God's judgment is come, to call upon all to fear God, and give glory to Him, and worship Him, etc. There are some who have heard this solemn testimony of the servants of God, who are in doubt upon this all important subject. They suppose that the angel himself was to preach this Gospel to all mankind, and that the angel himself was to cry with a loud voice, etc. And because all people have not heard the angel speak, and have not heard the everlasting Gospel from his own mouth, and have not heard him cry with a loud voice, they suppose he has not come and denounce the Saints as false witnesses. But let unbelievers candidly investigate the words of the text, and see if they are justified in drawing this hasty conclusion. By a careless glance at the passage, one might suppose that the heavenly messenger himself was to do all the work of preaching; but the words evidently do not warrant such a construction. The angel was to fly having the everlasting Gospel; but that he was to preach the same to all people, is not mentioned in the text; neither is it, in that place, declared that he should publish with a loud voice, to all nations, any proclamation. When he left the heavenly worlds and came to earth, and committed the message he was intrusted with, into the hands of chosen vessels, commanding them to preach it, he had fulfilled his part of the sacred mission, so far as the introduction of the heavenly message among them was concerned.

The words, "To Preach Unto Them That Dwell on the Earth," could be fulfilled by other agents, under the angel's authority and direction; and the same agency which does the preaching is also commissioned to say, "With a Loud Voice, Fear God, and Give Glory to Him for the Hour of His Judgment Is Come." If the passage had definitely said that the angel who brings the Gospel should likewise preach it, with a loud voice, there would have been some slight foundation for apparent objections to the Saints' testimony, but even then the objections would be only apparent, for this great dispensation is not yet ended, and there could be no evidence brought that the angel would not, near the close of the dispensation, actually publish with a loud voice to all people, the very hour of God's judgment, in all its fierceness and terror, so that all people would hear His voice. But such a wonderful and miraculous proclamation in the heavens would not preclude the angel from sending agents just prior to prepare a people for so great an event.

When we look at the angel's mission, by the aid of reason, the conviction at once forces itself upon the mind that he will authorize missionaries to carry the Gospel to all nations; otherwise how could believing penitent souls obey the Gospel ordinances? Is it reasonable to suppose that the angel would travel around on the earth, and baptize, and confirm by the laying on of hands for the baptism of the Holy Ghost, and minister the sacrament, and attend to all church ordinances? It is not only reasonable, but certain, that the everlasting Kingdom of God will be established on the earth, through the reception of the Gospel that the angel brings; if so, there must be officers called and ordained, such as Apostles, Prophets, etc., etc., to minister ordinances; otherwise, the everlasting Gospel, though proclaimed in the heavens by a mighty angel, would be of no use. Reason, therefore, would testify at once, that the angel at first only brings the Gospel, and directs other inspired agents to minister in its numerous ordinances, to build up the Kingdom, to publish with a loud voice the solemn testimony, that the hour--the terrible hour of God's judgment is come.

Let no one suppose that because the angel has begun the fulfillment of John's vision, that he has fully accomplished all things in relation to it. Hear what new revelation says upon the subject. "And now, verily, saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you, O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through the  midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel, who hath appeared unto some, and hath committed it unto man who shall appear unto many that dwell on the earth; and this Gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and tongue and people, and the servants of God shall go forth saying with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to Him, for the hour of His judgment is come; and worship Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters, calling upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying, O, that Thou wouldst rend the heavens, that Thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might flow down at Thy presence. And it shall be answered upon their heads, for the presence of the Lord shall be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the waters to boil," etc. (Doc. and Cov. sec. 108: par. 7.)

This same angel is yet to appear unto many; his mission therefore is not fully completed. Another grand event connected with his mission is to be fulfilled, when the seven angels sound their trumpets, in the morning of the seventh thousand years; then all people, both in heaven and on earth, will hear. But we will quote the word of the Lord: "And another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which is the fifth angel who committeth the everlasting Gospel--flying through the midst of heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people; and this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth; for every ear shall hear it and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they shall hear the sound of the trump, saying, fear God, and give glory to Him who sitteth upon the throne forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come. And again another angel shall sound his trump, which is the sixth angel, saying, she is fallen who made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication; she is fallen, is fallen!" (Doc. and Cov. sec. 7: par. 31-32.)

Thus we have traced the great mission of the angel, from the time that he flies with the everlasting Gospel, and commits it to man, until the grand closing up scene of this wicked world, by the sounding of the seven trumpets. In this last drama the angel of the Gospel will figure as the fifth in the series. In that awful day, our friend, Mr. William Brook, of Bradford, who has written to us, asking questions upon this sublime subject, will have no more supposed reason to complain, because the angel has not complied with all his suppositions in regard to his mission. Whether in heaven,  on earth, under the earth, or among the hosts of hell, every ear will hear the sound of the trump, and every knee bow, and confess to the glory of God, and acknowledge the power, authority and majesty of Him who sits upon the throne, and of His holy angels who go forth at His bidding.

Because God has given the keys of the everlasting Gospel to the fifth angel, let no one suppose that he alone will act in the great latter-day dispensation. Other angels have their missions to perform, and will assist in the wonderful work. We again quote from the revelations given to that great Prophet Joseph Smith, taken from his inspired key to John's vision on Patmos. The Prophet inquires as follows:

"What are we to understand by the four angels spoken of in the seventh chapter and first verse of the Revelation?" He answers: "We are to understand that they are four angels sent forth from God, to whom is given power over the four parts of the earth, to save life and to destroy; these are they who have the everlasting Gospel, to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue and people; having power to shut up the heavens, to seal up unto life, or to cast down to the regions of darkness." (Pearl of Great Price, p. 34.)

From the Revelation of John and from the inspired writings of other holy men, it seems that all the powers of heaven are exerted to assist in the magnificent preparations for the coming of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, to assume His rightful authority over this creation. Shall the heavens above be aroused to the highest degree of expectation, and the earth still continue to slumber in midnight darkness? No! verily no! In the great preparation there must be a union between the heavens and earth. The sons of earth must be awakened from the deep slumbers of ages. Tidings from the great courts above must be sent forth by swift messengers, to the nations; the voice of heavenly truth must penetrate the darkest corners of the habitable globe; ancient dynasties and powerful governments must be overthrown; thrones and kingdoms and empires must be cast down; and revolution must succeed revolution, until every ear shall hear and every heart be penetrated with the solemn warning voice, until all shall know that the great day of the Lord is at hand. Swiftly moving messengers from celestial abodes will freely converse with the sons of God on earth; and every angel and every servant of God will know his place, and understand what part he is to perform in the grand preparation for the eternal union of Saints on earth with the Saints of all ages from heaven.

THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH ON DOCTRINE.

EXTRACTS FROM A SERMON DELIVERED AT NAUVOO, JUNE 27, 1839, TAKEN FROM
THE HISTORICAL RECORD.

Faith comes by hearing the word of God, through the testimony of the servants of God; that testimony is always attended by the spirit of prophecy and revelation.

Repentance is a thing which cannot be trifled with every day. Daily transgression and daily repentance is not that which is pleasing in the sight of God.

Baptism is a holy ordinance preparatory to the reception of the Holy Ghost; it is the channel and key by which the Holy Ghost will be administered.

The gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands cannot be received through the medium of any other principle than the principle of righteousness, for if the proposals are not complied with, it is of no use, but withdraws.

Tongues were given for the purpose of preaching among those whose language is not understood, as on the Day of Pentecost, etc.; and it is not necessary for tongues to be taught to the Church particularly, for any man that has the Holy Ghost can speak of the things of God in his own tongue as well as to speak in another; for faith comes not by signs, but by hearing the word of God.

The doctrine of the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment are necessary to preach among the first principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The doctrine of election. St. Paul exhorts us to make our calling and election sure. This is that sealing power spoken of by Paul in other places (Eph. 1: 13, 14): "In whom ye also trusted, that after ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation, in whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of His glory," that we may be sealed up unto the day of redemption. This principle ought (in its proper place) to be taught for God hath not revealed  anything to Joseph but what He will make known unto the twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them, for the day must come when no man need say to his neighbor, know ye the Lord; for all shall know him (who remain) from the least to the greatest. How is this to be done? It is to be done by this sealing power, and the other comforter spoken of, which will be manifest by revelation. There are two comforters spoken of. One is the Holy Ghost, the same as given on the day of Pentecost, and that all Saints receive after faith, repentance and baptism. This first comforter or Holy Ghost has no other effect than pure intelligence. It is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of a man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile is to purge out the old blood and make him actually of the seed of Abraham. That man that has none of the blood of Abraham (naturally) must have a new creation by the Holy Ghost. In such a case there may be more of a powerful effect upon the body, and visible to the eye, than upon an Israelite, while the Israelite at first might be far before the Gentile in pure intelligence.

The other comforter spoken of is a subject of great interest, and perhaps understood by few of this generation. After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins and is baptized for the remission of his sins, and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which is the first comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him: Son, thou shalt be exalted, etc. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then he will find his calling and his election made sure; then it will be his privilege to receive the other comforter, which the Lord has promised the Saints, as recorded in the testimony of St. John (John 16: 12-27): "And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever, even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you; I will not leave you comfortless,  I will come to you. He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him. If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him."

Now what is this comforter? It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter: that when any man obtains this last comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions--Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle Of Patmos, St. Paul in the three Heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the First Born.

The spirit of revelation is in connection with these blessings. A person may profit by noticing the first intimations of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing from you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; that is, those things that were presented unto your minds by the spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Jesus Christ.

An evangelist is a Patriarch, even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessings unto his sons.

THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AND THE WORLD.

BY WILLIAM A. MORTON. (Copyright by the Author.)

    "Let us dream no dreams and tell no lies, but go on our way,
    wherever it may lead us, with our eyes open and our heads erect.
    If death ends all, we cannot meet it better. If not, let us enter,
    whatever be the next scene, like honest men, with no sophistry in
    our mouths and no masks on our faces."--Sir James F. Stephen.

I.--THE GODHEAD.

The World:--We understand, Latter-day Saints, that you are delighted when an opportunity presents itself which enables you to explain to the world the faith you believe in?

Latter-day Saints:--That is true. We are always ready to give, to every one that asks of us, a reason for the hope that is within us; for, like the Apostle Paul, "we are not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth."

The World:--You testify most positively that you know that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God; that the Church of which you are members was established by Divine revelation. You claim that it is the only Church on earth which teaches the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness?

Latter-day Saints:--That is our position exactly. We testify that God the Father and Jesus Christ His Son appeared to the boy, Joseph Smith, in the year 1820. We further testify that the angel which John the Revelator prophesied would "fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment has come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water;" (Revelation 14: 6-7) came to Joseph Smith, and delivered to him a record containing the fulness of the Gospel of the Son of God. We claim that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is, indeed, the true Church of Christ; that it was established and named by Him; that it has the same officers, holding the same Divine authority, as the primitive Church, namely, "Apostles,  Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc." (Eph. 4: 11.) We profess to be teaching the very same Gospel that was taught by Christ and His Apostles. We contend that there is but one true Gospel. Jesus said, "Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it." (Matt. 7: 14.) Paul taught: "There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling: one Lord, one faith, one baptism." (Eph. 4: 4, 5.) He further said: "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." (Gal. 1: 8.)

The World:--Well, we have decided to follow the admonition of the Apostle Paul--"Prove all things; hold fast that which is good" (I. Thes. 5: 21)--and if you have no objection, we would like to put you on trial and judge you, according to the law and the testimony, that we may learn whether the doctrines which you teach are of God or whether you speak of yourselves.

Latter-day Saints:--We are quite willing to be put on trial, and to be judged as you have proposed, according to the law and the testimony; for, as the Prophet Isaiah said, if we speak not according to the law and the testimony there is no light in us. (Isaiah 8: 20.) We have many witnesses who are ready and willing to testify in our behalf, men whose testimony cannot be questioned. They are not men who have followed cunningly devised fables, but who were eye-witnesses of the things of which they will speak. If it please the court, we are ready; let the trial begin.

The World:--The first offence with which you are charged is that of teaching that the Godhead is composed of three separate and physically distinct Persons. This, as you must know, is contrary to the teaching of all the churches, especially the Church of England. That church teaches that the Godhead is composed of three Persons, namely, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that these three are one in substance, equal in power and glory. Here is an extract from the Book of Common Prayer: "And the Catholick Faith is this: That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; neither confounding the Persons: nor dividing the substance. For there is one Person of the Father, another of the Son: and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is all one: the Glory equal, the Majesty co-eternal. * * * The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and the Holy Ghost eternal. And yet they are not three eternals: but one eternal. * * * So the  Father is God, the Son is God: and the Holy Ghost is God. And yet they are not three Gods: but one God." (Book of Common Prayer, pp. 21, 22.)

Latter-day Saints:--We are aware that that is the teaching of the Church of England, but it is not in harmony with the teaching of Christ and His disciples. We have a witness named John who was intimately acquainted with the Son of God, whom we consider a most competent authority to speak on this matter. He is ready to be examined.

The World:--We will be pleased to hear his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN.

The World:--What is your name?

John:--My name is John, sometimes called the Baptist.

The World:--We understand that you are a disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ?

John:--I am.

The World:--Were you personally acquainted with the Messiah?

John:--I was. I am His cousin. I was associated with Him during His ministry.

The World:--Is it true that you were sent before His face to prepare His way?

John:--It is. The Lord sent an angel to my father, as he prayed in the temple in Jerusalem, who promised him a son who would go before the face of the Lord and make His paths straight. I am that son.

The World:--Were you called of God to do that work?

John:--I was. When the angel appeared to my father, he said unto him, "Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John. * * * And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord." I also cite to you the testimony of John as recorded in his Gospel, which reads as follows: "There was a man sent from God whose name was John." (John 1: 6.)

The World:--What was the nature of your mission?

John:--I was sent to preach repentance and water baptism. I preached in the wilderness of Judaea, saying unto the people, "Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (Matt. 3: 1, 2.)

The World:--Were you able to bring many people unto repentance?

John:--Yes, a great many. Mark has made the following record concerning my missionary labors: "And there went out unto him all the land of Judaea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins." (Mark 1: 5.)

The World:--Have you ever heard the voice of God?

John:--I have, on several occasions.

The World:--Mention one of them.

John:--He spoke to me when I did not know that Jesus, my cousin, was His Only Begotten Son. He said to me, "Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." (John 1: 33, 34.)

The World:--Did you baptize Jesus Christ?

John:--I did.

The World:--What took place at His baptism?

John:--That which is recorded in Matthew 3: 16-17: "Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: and there came a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

The World:--Then, John, according to your testimony, the three Personages who constitute the Godhead are not one in substance, but are separate and distinct?

John:--They are certainly separate and distinct Personages. When Jesus came up out of the water, after His baptism, and while He stood on the bank of the river, the Spirit of God descended like a dove and lighted upon Him, and at the same time the voice of the Father was heard from heaven, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." These things I both saw and heard: I saw Jesus on the bank of the river; I saw the Spirit of God descend from heaven like a dove and rest upon Christ; I heard the voice of God out of heaven bear testimony that Jesus was His beloved Son.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--The testimony of the witness John is certainly very clear and convincing. Have you any other witnesses to prove that the Godhead consists of three separate Persons?

Latter-day Saints:--We have several. Here is the Apostle Peter.

The World:--We will listen to his testimony.

PETER'S EVIDENCE.

The World:--Your name is Simon Peter?

Peter:--It is.

The World:--Are you also one of Christ's disciples?

Peter:--I am one of His Apostles.

The World:--Prior to your call to the ministry what was your occupation?

Peter:--I was a fisherman.

The World:--How did you receive your call to the ministry?

Peter:--I was called by Christ Himself.

The World:--Is there a record of your ordination?

Peter:--There is. You will find it recorded in the Gospel according to Saint Mark, as follows: "And lie ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach." (Mark 3: 14.) I am one of the Twelve.

The World:--Do you believe that God the Father, Jesus Christ His Son, and the Holy Ghost are three Persons in one substance?

Peter:--I do not.

The World:--Can you furnish evidence that they are separate Personages?

Peter:--I can.

The World:--We will listen to your evidence.

Peter:--On one occasion Jesus took James and John and me up into a high mountain apart by ourselves, and there He was transfigured before us. His face shone as the sun and His raiment became as white as snow. We beheld two heavenly messengers come to Jesus and talk with Him. They were Moses and Elias. They spoke to Him of His death which He should accomplish at Jerusalem. We were very much astonished at the things which we saw, and as soon as Moses and Elias had departed I went to Jesus and said to Him, "Master, it is good for us to be here: let us make three tabernacles: one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." (Luke 9: 33.) While I was speaking a cloud came and overshadowed us, and there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son: hear him." (Luke 9: 34, 35.)

The World:--Was there a record made of what took place on the occasion of which you speak?

Peter:--There was. It is recorded in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke. (Matthew 17; Mark 9; Luke 9.) I  also made a record of it in my second general epistle, as follows: "For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount." (II. Peter 1: 17, 18.) Jesus, in speaking to us on one occasion, said: "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father." (John 16: 28.) Now, surely you would not have me interpret Jesus' saying as meaning that He had come from Himself and was going to return to Himself? I was with the Savior during that awful night in the Garden of Gethsemane when in the anguish of His soul He prayed, "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt." (Mark 14: 36.) I did not understand Jesus on that occasion to be praying to Himself.

The World:--The witness is excused.

The Latter-day Saints:--Here are James and John, who will corroborate the testimony of Peter.

The World:--James, you have heard the testimony of the Apostle Peter, what have you to say concerning it?

James:--I corroborate it in every particular. I was also on the mount and heard the voice of God bear testimony that Jesus was His Only Begotten Son.

The World:--The witness is excused.

The World:--John, you have listened to the testimony of your fellow Apostles, what have you to say concerning it?

John:--It gives me pleasure to corroborate it. They have spoken the truth, and nothing but the truth. I also heard the voice of the Father saying, "This is my beloved Son, hear ye him."

The World:--That is all. (To the Latter-day Saints):--Have you any more witnesses?

The Latter-day Saints:--We have one more, a man who laid down his life for the truth's sake; his name is Stephen.

Stephen's testimony.

The World:--What is your name?

Stephen:--My name is Stephen.

The World:--What position did you hold in the Christian Church?

Stephen:--I was one of the seven men who were set apart by the Apostles to look after the temporal needs of the widows in the church. (Acts 6.)

The World:--Did you also proclaim publicly the Gospel, and bear testimony to the divinity of Jesus?

Stephen:--I did.

The World:--How was your testimony received by the people?

Stephen:--They denounced me as a blasphemer. On one occasion when I was preaching to them they gnashed on me with their teeth. (Acts 7: 54.)

The World:--What happened at that time?

Stephen:--The Lord filled me with the Holy Ghost and opened the heavens to me.

The World:--What did you behold when the heavens were opened?

Stephen:--I beheld God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God. (Acts 7: 55.)

The World:--You say that you saw God, and Jesus standing on His right hand. Then, God and Jesus must be two separate Beings?

Stephen:--Certainly. Jesus was not standing at His own right hand.

The World:--You bore testimony to what you saw?

Stephen:--I did.

The World:--How did the people receive your testimony?

Stephen:--It cost me my life. They stoned me to death. (Acts 7: 59, 60.)

The World:--That is all.

Latter-day Saints:--It is not necessary to call any more witnesses. We have proved, most conclusively, that God the Father, Jesus Christ the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three separate and distinct Personages. John proved that, when he testified that he saw Jesus standing on the bank of the Jordan; then he beheld the Spirit of God descend from heaven like a dove and rest upon the Messiah, and at the same time he heard the voice of God testify that Jesus was His Only Begotten Son. Peter testified that when James and John and himself were on the mount with Jesus they heard the voice of God testify that Jesus was His Beloved Son. James and John corroborated his testimony. Stephen testified that he, being filled with the Holy Ghost, had the heavens opened to him, and he saw God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of His Father.

The World:--The evidence which you have produced is, indeed, incontrovertible. It is, to be sure, contrary to the teachings which we have received in the churches and from our fathers. But we now call to mind the words of the  Prophet Jeremiah, "O Lord, my strength and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit." (Jeremiah 16: 19.)

II.--THE PERSONALITY OF GOD.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--It is true, then, as we have been told, that you believe and teach that God the Father is a personal Being, possessing a definite form, with bodily parts and spiritual passions?

Latter-day Saints:--Such is our belief and teaching.

The World:--This also is contrary to the teachings of almost every church in Christendom. The Church of England, in the first of the "Articles of Religion," published in its Prayer Book, says: "There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts or passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness."

Latter-day Saints:--We believe in the God of the Bible, in the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob; the God of all the holy Prophets, and the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We have witnesses whose testimonies cannot be impeached. They are men who can testify from actual experience, men who saw God, and who conversed with Him face to face, and whose testimonies should, therefore, be worthy of all acceptation.

The World:--We will be pleased to listen to your witnesses. Let the first witness be called.

Latter-day Saints:--The first witness who will testify in our behalf is Abraham, "the father of the faithful and the friend of God."

Abraham's testimony.

The World:--What is your name?

Abraham:--My name is Abraham. I was at first called Abram, but the Lord changed my name to Abraham. (Genesis 17: 5.)

The World:--Have you ever had a revelation from God?

Abraham:--I have had many.

The World:--Relate one.

Abraham:--When my wife and I were residing with my parents in Haran the Lord spoke to me, saying, "Abram, get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew then: and I will  make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed." (Genesis 12: 1-3.)

The World:--You were, of course, obedient to the Lord?

Abraham:--I was. I took my wife, Lot, my brother's son, and all those who believed what the Lord had said to me, and, with our substance, we set out for the land of Canaan. While we were camped in the plain of Moreh the Lord appeared unto me and said, "Unto thy seed will I give this land." (Genesis 12: 7).

The World:--Were you visited by the Lord on any other occasion?

Abraham:--I was. I was ninety-nine years old at the time. We were living in the plains of Mamre. The Lord appeared to me there and said, "I am the Almighty God; walk before me and be thou perfect. And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and I will multiply thee exceedingly. * * * As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations. * * * And I will make thee exceedingly fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee." (Genesis 17: 1-6.) I am testifying of things which I have seen with my own eyes; I saw the Lord and talked with Him face to face, as one man talks with another.

The World:--We have no further questions to ask the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness who is prepared to give as strong and as irrefutable evidence as the previous one. His name is Moses.

The World:--We will listen to his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MOSES.

The World:--Your name is Moses?

Moses:--It is.

The World:--Where were you born?

Moses:--I was born in Egypt, of Hebrew parents.

The World:--It is true that at the time of your birth Pharaoh made a decree that all the male children of the Hebrews were to be thrown into the river Nile?

Moses:--It is.

The World:--How did you escape the fate of the others?

Moses:--My mother made a little ark of bulrushes, daubed it with slime and pitch, and placing me in it she took it down  and left it on the flags by the river's brink. In a short time Pharaoh's daughter came down to the river. Seeing the ark, she requested her maid to fetch it. On removing the cover, she beheld me in tears. Her heart was touched, and she decided to keep me as her own child. My sister Miriam, who was in hiding near by, came forward and proffered to get a nurse for the baby. The king's daughter gave her permission to do so, so she went and brought my mother. When my mother arrived, Pharaoh's daughter said to her, "Take this child away and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages." (Exodus 2: 9.) So my mother had the pleasure of raising her own child, and was well paid for doing so. When I was grown I was taken to the court of Pharaoh, and adopted by his daughter. I was treated as though I were her own son and was taught in all the learning of the Egyptians.

The World:--You did not take very well to Egyptian court life?

Moses:--I did not; I would much rather have been with my own people. I finally ran away from Pharaoh and went to Midian, where I fell in love with and married Zipporah, a daughter of Jethro, a priest of Midian. (Exodus 2: 21.)

The World:--What occupation did you follow?

Moses:--I was a sheep-herder; I tended the flocks of my father-in-law.

The World:--We have been told that on one occasion while you were herding the sheep you had a heavenly manifestation; is the report true?

Moses:--It is. While I was tending the sheep one day I beheld a burning bush. I went over to see the strange sight, and as I approached the bush God called unto me out of the midst of the bush and said, "Moses, Moses." And I said, "Here am I." And He said, "Draw not nigh hither; put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." (Exodus 3: 4-6.) On hearing that, I hid my face; for I was afraid to look upon God. Then the Lord said unto me, "I have surely seen the afflictions of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows. * * * Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt and I have said, I  will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt. * * * unto a land flowing with milk and honey." (Exodus 3.)

The World:--Did you do as the Lord commanded you?

Moses:--I did, and the Lord, in His infinite mercy, and by many signs and wonders, brought the children of Israel up out of Egypt into their own land.

The World:--Have you ever seen God?

Moses:--I have. On one occasion I talked with Him face to face. I was in the tabernacle at the time. A cloudy pillar descended and stood at the door of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with me. And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshiped, every man in his tent door. And the Lord spake unto me face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. (Exodus 33: 9-12.) Later He hid me in the cleft of a rock, and as He passed by, in His glory, I beheld His back parts. (Exodus 33: 22-23.)

The World:--Did any of your associates ever see God?

Moses:--Yes, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu and seventy of the elders of Israel and myself saw Him on one occasion. (Exodus 24: 9, 10.)

The World:--Is it true that you spent forty days and forty nights with the Lord on Mount Sinai?

Moses:--It is. It was on that occasion that He gave me two tables of stone on which He had written with His own finger the ten commandments for the children of Israel.

The World:--Moses, we recognize you as one who is fully competent to speak on this important matter. You have seen the Lord a number of times; you have talked with Him face to face; you have been with Him for forty days and forty nights at one time; now, we would like you to describe to us, just as plainly as you can, the true and the living God.

Moses:--I tell you in plainness and in all truth, that God is just like a perfect man. If you could see God today you would see Him just as Abraham saw Him, just as I saw Him, in the form of man, for man was made in the image of God. (Genesis 1: 27.)

The World:--Thank you; that is all.

Latter-day Saints (to the World):--Surely the testimony of these two witnesses ought to be enough to convince you that the God whom we worship--a God with body, parts and passions--is, indeed, the true God, the God of the Bible. But these are not all our witnesses. We have others, whose testimony we desire you to hear.

The World:--Let them come forward.

Latter-day Saints:--Thomas, the World desires to hear your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS.

The World:--Were you acquainted with the Lord Jesus Christ when He was on the earth?

Thomas:--I was.

The World:--What position did you hold in the Church of Christ?

Thomas:--I was an Apostle.

The World:--Did you see the Savior after His resurrection?

Thomas:--I did. I at first considered the news too good to be true. When the other Apostles told me that they had seen the risen Lord, I said, "Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe."

The World:--Did Christ show Himself to you after that?

Thomas:--He did. Eight days later I was with the Apostles in a house in Jerusalem when the Savior appeared in our midst. As soon as He entered the room He said, "Peace be unto you." Then turning to me, He said, "Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithless, but believing." (John 20: 26, 27.) I recognized Him at once, and I exclaimed, "My Lord and my God!"

The World:--You saw the print of the nails in His hands, and the mark of the spear in His side?

Thomas:--I did.

The World:--Then, He must have appeared to you in the same body in which He was crucified?

Thomas:--He did, in the very same body of flesh and bones, but quickened by Spirit. (Luke 24: 39.)

The World:--Did you see Him after that!

Thomas:--I did, a number of times. One evening Simon Peter, Nathaniel of Cana, the sons of Zebedee, two other disciples and I went out fishing. We fished the entire night, but caught nothing. As we were returning in the morning, we saw a "man," as we supposed, standing on the shore. He asked us if we had any meat, and we answered that we had not. He told us to cast our net on the right side of the ship. We did so, and to our astonishment we caught one hundred and fifty-three fishes. John was the first to recognize the "man" on the shore, and as soon as he saw who He was, he  exclaimed, "It is the Lord!" On hearing that, Peter jumped into the sea and swam to the shore. We were delighted to meet our beloved Redeemer once again. The Lord had prepared a fire of coals, and had some fish cooked. He invited us to come and dine with Him, which we did, and ate heartily of bread and fish. That was the third time that Jesus showed Himself to us after His resurrection. (John 21.)

The World:--Were you present at the ascension of Christ?

Thomas:--I was.

The World:--Tell us what took place on that occasion.

Thomas:--Just before His ascension He said to us, "Ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1: 8.) As soon as He had finished speaking He was taken up, and a cloud received Him out of our sight. As we stood gazing after Him, two men dressed in white apparel appeared, and, addressing us, said, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1st chap.)

The World:--That is all, Thomas.

Latter-day Saints (to the World):--We have proved by the last witness, an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, that Christ arose from the grave in the same body which was nailed to the cross, but immortalized; in that body He appeared to His disciples; in that same body He made a fire of coals on the shore and prepared food, which He ate with His disciples; in that same body He ascended into heaven; in that same body He shall come again to the earth.

The World:--What evidence have you that Christ shall come again in His crucified body?

Latter-day Saints:--We have the testimony of the Prophet Zechariah.

The World:--We will hear what he has to say.

TESTIMONY OF ZECHARIAH.

The World:--Your name is Zechariah?

Zechariah:--It is.

The World:--Were you a Prophet in Israel?

Zechariah:--I was so honored of the Lord.

The World:--Did you prophesy concerning the second coming of Christ?

Zechariah:--I did. I prophesied and said, "And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south." (Zechariah 14: 4.) "And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends." (Zechariah 13: 6.)

The World:--We will excuse the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness whose testimony we would like you to hear; his name is Paul.

The World:--We will be pleased to listen to his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

The World:--Your name is Paul?

Paul:--It is.

The World:--Are you an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ?

Paul:--I am.

The World:--Have you ever seen Christ?

Paul:--I have. (I Cor. 15: 8.)

The World:--What is your testimony concerning Christ?

Paul:--It is the same as that of Thomas and the rest of the Apostles--that He has a body of flesh and bones.

The World:--What is your testimony concerning God, the Father of Christ?

Paul:--I testify that as Christ is so is His Father. I wrote to the Hebrew saints on this matter, as follows: "Who being the brightness of His glory, and the express image of His person, and upholding all things by the word of His power, when He had Himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high." (Heb. 1: 3.) Christ said on one occasion: "He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father."

The World:--We have no further questions to ask the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We now respectfully ask you to listen to the testimony of the young prophet, Joseph Smith.

The World:--We have heard a great deal concerning that young man. It has been reported that he declared he had seen God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ.

Latter-day Saints:--Such, indeed, was his testimony, and tens of thousands of us have received testimonies from the Lord that he spoke the truth.

The World:--We will hear him for ourselves.

TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH SMITH.

The World:--Your name is Joseph Smith, Jr.?

Joseph Smith:--It is.

The World:--Are you the founder of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints?

Joseph Smith:--I was simply an humble instrument in the hands of the Lord in re-establishing, according to the revelations of God, the Church of Christ upon the earth.

The World:--So, you profess to have received revelations from God?

Joseph Smith:--I do. More than that: I have seen God and His Son Jesus Christ, and have talked with them.

The World:--We are desirous of hearing from your own lips your testimony concerning this matter.

Joseph Smith:--Realizing that I, as well as all other men, shall have to stand some day before the judgment bar of God to be judged according to my works, my testimony in this case shall be the truth, and the truth only, God being my witness. I was born in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and five, on the twenty-third day of December, in the town of Sharon, Windsor county, state of Vermont. My father, Joseph Smith, Senior, left the state of Vermont, and moved to Palmyra, Ontario (now Wayne) county, in the state of New York, when I was in my tenth year, or thereabouts. In about four years after my father's arrival in Palmyra, he moved with his family into Manchester, in the same county of Ontario. His family consisted of eleven souls, namely--my father, Joseph Smith; my mother, Lucy Smith (whose name, previous to her marriage, was Mack, daughter of Solomon Mack); my brothers, Alvin (who died November 19th, 1824, in the 27th year of his age), Hyrum, myself, Samuel Harrison, William, Don Carlos; and my sisters, Sophronia, Catherine, and Lucy. Some time in the second year after our removal to Manchester, there was in the place where we lived an unusual excitement on the subject of religion. It commenced with the Methodists, but soon became general among all the sects in that region of country. Indeed, the whole district of country seemed affected by it, and great multitudes united themselves to the different religious parties, which created no small stir and division amongst the people, some crying, "Lo, here?" and others, "Lo, there!" Some were contending for the Methodist faith, some for the Presbyterian,  and some for the Baptist. For notwithstanding the great love which the converts to these different faiths expressed at the time of their conversion, and the great zeal manifested by the respective clergy, who were active in getting up and promoting this extraordinary scene of religious feeling, in order to have everybody converted, as they were pleased to call it, let them join what sect they pleased--yet when the converts began to file off, some to one party and some to another, it was seen that the seemingly good feelings of both the priests and the converts were more pretended than real; for a scene of great confusion and bad feeling ensued; priest contending against priest, and convert against convert; so that all their good feelings one for another, if they ever had any, were entirely lost in a strife of words and a contest about opinions. I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined that church, namely--my mother Lucy; my brothers Hyrum and Samuel Harrison; and my sister Sophronia. During this time of great excitement, my mind was called up to serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who wrong. My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of either reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least, to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all others. In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself, What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it? While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth  not, and it shall be given him." Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know, and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to "ask of God," concluding that if He gave wisdom to them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might venture. So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt to pray vocally. After I had retired to the place where I had previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon myself to destruction--not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being--just at this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description, standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name, and said, pointing to the other--"This is my beloved Son, hear him!" My object in going to enquire of the Lord was to know  which of all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in the light, which of all the sects was right--and which I should join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that "they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrine the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back, looking up into heaven. Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active in the beforementioned religious excitement; and, conversing with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only lightly, but with great contempt, saying, it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them. I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects--all united to persecute me. It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor, should be thought a character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself. However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made  his defence before King Agrippa, and related the account of the vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest, others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest breath, that he had both seen a light, and heard a voice speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe otherwise. So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God, or why does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen? For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it, and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it, at least I knew that by so doing I would offend God, and come under condemnation.

The World:--Then, according to your testimony, God the Father, and Jesus Christ are two distinct Personages?

Joseph Smith:--That is my testimony. "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also: but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of spirit. Were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us."

The World:--So that if we were to see God now, we would see Him in the form of man?

Joseph Smith:--You would. "If the veil was rent today, and the Great God, who holds this world in its orbit, who upholds all worlds and all things by His power, was to make Himself visible--I say, If you were to see Him today, you would see Him like a man in form--like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image, and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked, and conversed with Him, as one man talks and communes with another."

The World:--The witness is excused.

Latter-day Saints:--This closes our case. You have heard the testimonies of Abraham, Moses, Thomas, Zechariah, Paul,  and Joseph Smith. The testimonies of these servants of the Lord are similar in every respect. You cannot reject the testimony of Joseph Smith without rejecting the testimonies of the others. We pray you, give heed to these things; for "this is life eternal: to know the living and true God, and Jesus Christ, whom He has sent."

III.--FAITH AND WORKS.

The World:--What are the first principles and ordinances of your religion?

Latter-day Saints:--The first principles and ordinances of our religion are these: First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second, Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The World:--Do you believe that good works must accompany faith in order for men to obtain salvation?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. We maintain that belief alone is not sufficient to bring salvation to any man. "Faith without works is dead." Faith is the first principle of the Gospel of Christ: it is the foundation upon which every other principle and ordinance rests. You remember, the Apostle Paul said, "But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him." (Heb. 11: 6.)

The World:--Well, we have been taught that all a person has to do in order to be saved is to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. That is the Gospel which Paul and Silas preached to the Philippian jailor and his household. When the jailor asked Paul and his companion what he should do to be saved, they answered, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved." (Acts 16: 30, 31.)

Latter-day Saints:--No, that is only part of the Gospel which Paul and Silas preached to the jailor and his house. They did not stop at belief, as the majority of preachers do in these days. But here is the Apostle Paul; he can speak for himself.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

The World:--Paul, when the Philippian jailor asked you and Silas what he should do to be saved, what did you tell him?

Paul:--We told him to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and he would be saved, and also his house. (Acts 16: 31.)

The World:--We thought so. Now, if the jailor and his  household had simply to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ in order to gain salvation, why should other people have to do more?

Paul:--But we did not tell the jailor and his household that that was all they had to do. We taught them other doctrines besides belief in Christ; we taught them the ordinance of baptism. Here is what the record says: "Then he (the jailor) called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house. And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house. And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his straightway." (Acts 16: 29-33.)

The World:--You have spoken truly, Paul. We see that, according to the record, after you had told the jailor to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, you taught him and his household other commandments of the Lord, among them baptism. One more question: Did you preach to the people that Jesus Christ was the author of eternal salvation?

Paul:--I did.

The World:--And Jesus Christ, the author of eternal salvation, taught this doctrine, that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have eternal life?"

Paul:--He did. But you have quoted only part of what I said and only part of what Christ said. I did not tell the people that Christ had become the author of eternal salvation to all those who would simply believe in Him. Here is what I said: "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 5: 8, 9.) Jesus did not tell the people that they would have eternal life by simply believing in Him. This is what He said: "Not every one that sayeth unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." (Matt 7: 21.) Now, it would appear from this that there were people in the days of the Savior who believed, as thousands of people believe today, that they could get into the Kingdom of God by simply believing in Christ, and calling Him Lord, Lord. And in order to disabuse their minds of that erroneous belief. Jesus made use of the words which I have just quoted. Now, do you think that I, or any other servant of the Lord, would  preach salvation through belief alone when Christ had condemned such doctrine? On one occasion He said: "And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will shew you to whom he is like: he is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock. But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was great." (Luke 6: 46-49.) Here is a Gospel not only of believing, but of doing: a Gospel, not of faith alone, but of faith and works.

The World:--We dare not dispute what you have said; were we to do so, we would be disputing the words of Christ. Permit us, however, to ask you another question.

Paul:--Certainly.

The World:--Isn't it a fact that Christ, when He was upon the cross, and just as He was about to give up the ghost, said, "It is finished"?

Paul:--That is true.

The World:--Did Christ not mean that He had done all that was necessary for man's salvation? that He had paid the price of man's redemption, and that there was nothing left for mankind to do?

Paul:--Part of what you have said is, indeed, true: Christ atoned for our sins on Calvary's cross; He died that we might live, and that He might present us, pure and spotless, to the Father. But when He said, "It is finished," He did not mean that from that time henceforth and forever mankind would have nothing whatever to do but to believe in Him, and by that simple assent of their minds obtain eternal life and an everlasting inheritance in the Kingdom of His Father. He meant that His sufferings were at an end; He meant that He had drunk the bitter cup to the dregs; He meant that He had done the will of the Father, and had thus become, as I told the Hebrew Saints, the author of eternal salvation to all those who would obey Him. After Christ had risen from the dead He tarried for forty days with His disciples, during which time He taught them many things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. In giving them their commission, He said to them, "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have  commanded you." (Matt. 28: 19-20.) So you see, Christ did not tell His Apostles to tell the people that all they had to do was to believe in Him: they were to teach them to observe all things whatsoever He had commanded them.

The World:--Did you write an epistle to the Ephesians?

Paul:--I did.

The World:--Here is an extract from it to which we desire to call your attention: "For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast." (Eph. 2: 8, 9.) Did you write that?

Paul:--I did.

The World:--What did you mean by writing in this way to the Ephesians?

Paul:--Merely this, and nothing more: the Ephesians, as well as many others, thought to justify themselves by the works of the law--by circumcision, for instance. They did not understand that the law had been fulfilled in Christ, and so they wanted to continue in the practice of dead works. These I condemned, but I never spoke one word against the commandments of the Lord Jesus Christ. On the contrary, I exhorted the people to perform good works. This is what I wrote to the Ephesians: "Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free." (Ephesians 6: 8.) I wrote practically the same thing to Titus. Here is an extract from my letter to him: "This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works." (Titus 3: 8.) Surely you do not think that I would write to the Ephesians one time condemning good works, and write afterwards to them and also to Titus commending good works? The works that I condemned were dead works, such as circumcision; but God forbid that I should advise anyone against keeping all the commandments of the Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus said that he who would break one of the least of His commandments, and teach men to do so, the same would be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

The World:--That is all, Paul.

Latter-day Saints:--Perhaps you would like to hear the testimony of the Apostles John and James?

The World:--Certainly, if they can give us any additional light on the subject.

Latter-day Saints:--John, we would be pleased to have  you tell The World whether you consider good works essential to salvation.

JOHN'S TESTIMONY.

John:--I am more than pleased to speak on this important matter. As an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, I taught the people to do the will of God as it had been laid down by the Savior.

The World:--It is recorded in the Gospel which bears your name that Christ said, "God so loved the world that he gave his only Begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life?"

John:--That is correct.

The World:--Did you not infer from that that all a man had to do in order to be saved was to believe in Christ?

John:--I did not; for Christ, just a little while before, had said to Nicodemus, who knew that Jesus was a Teacher sent of God: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." (John 3: 5.) There is something more than belief in those words.

The World:--Did you not teach the people that the blood of Jesus Christ would cleanse them from all sin?

John:--I did; but it was on the condition that they walked as Christ walked. This is what I said: "If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin." (I John 1: 7.) After Christ had taught us the principles of the Gospel, He said to us: "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." (John 13: 17.) Again He said to us: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me the works that I do shall he do also." (John 14: 12.) The Lord gave me a vision when I was on the Isle of Patmos: "and I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works." (Rev. 20: 12.) In the face of all these things, how could I believe that belief alone in Christ was all that was necessary for salvation?

The World:--The witness is excused.

TESTIMONY OF JAMES.

The World:--James, were you commissioned by the Lord Jesus Christ to preach His Gospel?

James:--I was.

The World:--Did you not teach the people that all that was necessary in order to attain to salvation was belief in the Lord Jesus Christ?

James:--How dare I teach such doctrine when the Lord had instructed us to teach them to observe all things whatsoever He had commanded us?

The World:--Then, you believe that in order for a man to procure salvation he must have works with his faith?

James:--I do most assuredly. I taught the people that faith without works is dead. Surely you have read my epistle, wherein I said: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. * * * But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? * * * For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." (James 2: 14-18, 20, 26.)

The World:--This is certainly strange doctrine to us. We have been taught from childhood that all we had to do to be saved was to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.

James:--You say that that is what the preachers have taught you?

The World:--It is. The only gospel that we have been taught is the gospel of Belief Alone. We have never been taught that we had to do anything towards our salvation.

James:--You have been deceived by false teachers, whom Paul prophesied would rise up in the last days. Here is the prophecy: "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth and shall be turned into fables." (II Timothy 4: 3, 4.)

The World:--Paul truly prophesied as you have said; but do you think his prophecy applies to the preachers of the present time?

James:--I would prefer that you answer that question yourselves. I believe that I can make this matter very plain to you. Supposing a man were to come to you at the present time and tell you that good works were not at all essential to  salvation, that all you had to do to be saved was to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and after he had gone out three Apostles of the Lord Jesus should come in and tell you that belief alone would not save you, that you would have to couple works with your faith, which of these men would you believe?

The World:--That scarcely needs an answer: we would, of course, believe the Apostles.

James:--I thought as much. Well, Paul, John and I have told you, just as plainly as it is possible for us to do, that belief alone will not save you: that you must have works as well as faith. And as you have told me that you believe our words, I would advise you, if you do not wish to deceive yourselves, to be doers of the word, as well as hearers of it.

The World:--Thank you, James. That is all.

Latter-day Saints:--The words of the Apostles are very plain, indeed; James told us that what the spirit is to the body so works are to faith; and that as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. We would advise you to accept the teachings of Christ and of His inspired Apostles.

The World:--In the face of all these Scriptures, we cannot see how our preachers can teach that good works are not essential to salvation.

Latter-day Saints:--We are not at all surprised at their doing so. If the Scriptures are to be fulfilled, we must expect to see men arise speaking perverse things, and drawing away disciples after them. It has been clearly proven that Christ and His Apostles taught that men would have to couple good works with their faith if they expected to get salvation. Now, any doctrine contrary to the teaching of Christ and His Apostles is the doctrine of men. But as it was in the days of the Savior, so it is today. Christ said of the people in His day: "This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." (Matt. 15: 8, 9.)

The World:--We are very thankful to you for calling our attention to these plain and precious truths, and the next time that we are visited by our ministers we will request them to tell us who gave them authority to preach that good works are not essential to salvation, when the Lord Jesus Christ and His Apostles taught that they are. For our ministers have most assuredly taught us that the Lord would not accept of any good works that we might do.

Latter-day Saints:--Then He has changed since the days  of the early Apostles. Do you not remember what happened to Cornelius? Cornelius was not like the people of the present day, for he believed in having good works with his faith; and instead of the Lord being displeased with him for performing good works, He sent an angel from heaven to tell him that his prayers and his alms had come up for a memorial before God. (Acts 10: 4.) Now, if all the ministers in the world told you that good works are not essential to salvation, all you would have to do would be to turn to this Scripture, and there you could show them how the Lord had so approved of a man's good works that He sent an angel from heaven to tell him that He had accepted of them, and to tell him of other things which were necessary for him to do. And, if that were not sufficient, you could refer them to the writings of the Apostle Peter, who said: "And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these things ye shall never fall: for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." (II Peter 1: 5-11.)

IV.--REPENTANCE.

The World:--You say, Faith in God and in His Son Jesus Christ is the first principle of the Gospel, and the second is Repentance?

Latter-day Saints:--Yes, the second principle of the Gospel is repentance.

The World:--What do you understand the term repentance to mean?

Latter-day Saints:--Repentance is a deep, sincere, heartfelt sorrow for sin, producing a reformation of life. It is, in a word, ceasing to do evil and learning to do well. Here is the Apostle Paul, who will be pleased to speak upon this important subject.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

Paul:--I speak from experience concerning this most essential principle of the Gospel of Christ. I was, as you all know, a most unrelenting persecutor of the Saints. I had even gone so far as to assent to the death of the faithful Stephen. I was on my way to Damascus, with letters from the high priest, authorizing me to bring bound to Jerusalem all those whom I found professing faith in Jesus Christ. I verily believed that I was doing God service. As I neared Damascus, the Lord checked me in my evil course and called me to repentance. He declared that by persecuting His saints I was persecuting Him, and told me to desist from my ungodly work. On hearing the word of the Lord, my soul was rilled with remorse, and I immediately turned round and, by a life consecrated to Christ and His cause, sought to atone for my past offences.

The World:--Was it the Lord, then, who led you to repentance?

Paul:--It was, for repentance is one of the most precious gifts of God to men. Through the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ that choice gift has been purchased for poor, fallen humanity. But, I would have you understand, that God is jealous of all His gifts. He does not bestow them where they would not be appreciated. Repentance, like every other gift of God, has been promised to men on certain conditions.

The World:--Please tell us what these conditions are.

Paul:--One of the conditions is that men will manifest a desire to cease from sin, and to work righteousness in the sight of God. The Lord, speaking through Isaiah the prophet, made a promise unto the children of men that if they would seek Him they would find Him, and that if they would forsake their evil ways and thoughts and turn unto Him, He would pardon their transgressions. I quote from the writings of the prophet: "Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon." (Isaiah 55: 6, 7.) Thus we see that the gift of repentance is promised men on condition that they seek the Lord and forsake their evil ways and thoughts. The Lord has assured us that He has no pleasure whatever in the death of a sinner. Speaking to the house of Israel by the mouth of the Prophet Ezekiel, He said: "Say unto them, as I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?" "Again, when I say unto  the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; if the wicked restore the pledge, given again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die. None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live." (Ezek. 33: 11, 14-16.) But, behold, a greater than Ezekiel has testified to the same thing. Here are the words of Jesus Christ, the Author of eternal salvation: "I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." (Luke 5: 32.) "I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance." (Luke 15: 7.)

The World:--Thank you, Paul, for your testimony.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness who was called by the Lord to preach repentance to the people of his generation.

The World:--We are ready to listen to his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF NOAH.

The World:--What is your name?

Noah:--My name is Noah.

The World:--Were you called by the Lord to preach repentance unto the people in your day?

Noah:--I was. The Lord beheld that the wickedness of the children of men was great upon the earth. They had entirely turned away from the holy commandments which had been delivered unto them. They took pleasure in all manner of wickedness and abominations. They were, as are millions of the human family at the present time, "lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God." The Lord saw that the imaginations of their hearts were evil continually, and that they would surely perish if they did not turn from their wicked, reprobate ways. Therefore, He called me to be a preacher of righteousness, and commissioned me to go forth and cry repentance unto that wicked and perverse generation. I was commanded to build an ark, into which I was to take all those who would hearken unto my words and turn unto the Lord. I was obedient unto the heavenly commandment, and went forth among the people, crying repentance unto them, and warning them to flee from the wrath to come. I preached not alone by precept, but by my works also. I immediately set to work to construct the ark, and during the one hundred  and twenty years while the ark was being prepared, I cried aloud and spared not. O, how my soul was grieved when I beheld the hardness of the hearts of the people, for I knew that God would not be mocked, that He would not strive with them forever, but that He would surely destroy them if they did not repent of their sins.

The World:--What success did you meet with, Noah, in your preaching?

Noah:--Practically none. My words seemed to them as idle tales. They spurned the message which I brought them from their merciful Creator. They ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they married and were given in marriage up till the very day that I and my family--eight souls in all--entered the ark, and the Lord shut the door. Even now, I fancy I can hear their scoffs and scorns, their mockings and derisions, as we bade them a last farewell till we would meet them at the judgment bar of God. Then was the word of the Lord fulfilled, and His righteous judgments were poured out upon those wicked people and they perished from the earth. (Gen. 6: 7.) And now, in closing my testimony, I will say to you, that God has not changed: He is the same yesterday, today and forever; He does not look upon sin with the least degree of allowance, and just as sure as God is God, so sure will His judgments come upon the inhabitants of the earth in these latter-days if they do not repent and turn from their transgressions. "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. (Luke 13: 3.)

The World:--That is all, Noah.

Latter-day Saints:--We now most respectfully ask you to listen to the testimony of another servant of the Lord.

ABRAHAM'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--What is your name?

Abraham:--My name is Abraham.

The World:--Are you prepared to give testimony concerning the matter which is before us?

Abraham:--I am.

The World:--We will listen to your testimony.

Abraham:--It grieves me to have to report that the inhabitants of the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah failed to profit by the sad fate which befell the people in the days of Noah. With the history of the past before them, showing clearly God's hatred of sin, they added day by day to the cup of their iniquities. Their abominations at last became unbearable to the Lord, and He decreed that He would destroy them from  the face of the earth. I shall never forget the day that the Lord came to me in Mamre and informed me of His intention of destroying the cities of the plains and the inhabitants thereof. My soul was filled with sorrow, nevertheless I knew that all the judgments of the Lord were just. I besought Him to grant me favor in His sight, which He did. I asked Him if He would spare the city of Sodom provided fifty righteous souls were found there. He promised me that He would spare the city if it contained fifty righteous inhabitants. But alas! that number could not be found. I plead with the Lord again and again, and He finally consented to turn away His judgments from Sodom if ten God-fearing persons were found in the city. But ten such persons could not be found, and the Lord in His anger destroyed the inhabitants of those wicked cities and thus blotted out their iniquity from before His face. (Gen. 18: 19.) And as He spared not the cities of the plains, neither will He spare any other city or nation that forgets God. As Noah said, so say I, Woe unto the inhabitants of the earth if they do not repent. Behold, ere they are aware, the Spirit of God will cease to strive with them, and they shall, by their ungodly deeds, bring upon themselves swift destruction.

The World:--We have listened with interest to your testimony, Abraham. You are excused.

Latter-day Saints:--We will now introduce a witness who will show you the great blessings which came to the people of Nineveh when they turned from their evil ways and began to work righteousness in the sight of the Lord.

TESTIMONY OF JONAH.

The World:--What is your name?

Jonah:--My name is Jonah.

The World:--Were you called by the Lord to preach repentance?

Jonah:--I was. The word of the Lord came to me on one occasion, saying: "Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me." (Jonah 1: 2.)

The World:--Did you do as the Lord commanded you?

Jonah:--I did not. I went down to Joppa, and there took ship for Tarshish. The Lord punished me for my disobedience, and then He said unto me the second time, "Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee." (Jonah 3: 2.) So I did as the Lord commanded me. As I entered the city I began to cry aloud, "Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. So the  people of Nineveh believed God and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing; let them not feed, nor drink water: but let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not." (Jonah 3: 5-10.)

Latter-day Saints:--The next witness whose evidence we desire you to hear is John, the forerunner of Christ.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN.

The World:--Your name is John?

John:--It is.

The World:--Were you called by the Lord to preach repentance to the people of your generation?

John:--I was. I was sent before the Lord to prepare His way. I called upon the people to repent of their sins, for the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand. (Matt. 3: 1, 2.)

The World:--Were you able to bring many to repentance?

John:--Yes, many people of Judaea and Jerusalem, upon hearing the proclamation, repented, came forward and confessed their sins, and were baptized in the river Jordan. (Mark 1: 5.)

The World:--Are we to understand that confession of sins is essential?

John:--Such has been the teaching of the servants of the Lord in every dispensation. Without confession of sins repentance is incomplete. Here are the words of the inspired teachers: "He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy." (Prov. 28: 13.) "If we say that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." (I John 1: 8, 9.) But confession should be accompanied with a promise and determination to sin no more. To confess his sins before God will not  benefit a man unless his confession is accompanied with a determination to sin no more. He must covenant with the Lord that he is willing to forsake sin, and that in future he will, with His Divine assistance, yield to no evil, but will shun the very appearance of it, and keep himself unspotted from the world. God cannot be deceived, and He will not pardon those who merely confess their sins, and still make no effort to forsake them.

The World:--Repentance is, therefore, conditional?

John:--It is. Men must be willing to confess their sins and to forsake them. They must also be willing to forgive others. In fact, Christ told the people that His Father would not forgive them their trespasses if they in their hearts failed to forgive those who trespassed against them. These are His words: "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses." (Matt. 6: 14, 15.) And this forgiveness must be without limit. On one occasion Peter asked the Lord, "How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times?" The Master answered, "I say not unto thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven." On another occasion He taught the disciples, saying, "If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him." (Luke 17: 3, 4.) Nowhere are repentance, confession and forgiveness more beautifully portrayed than in Christ's parable of the prodigal son. After having wasted his substance in riotous living, and being brought down so low that he had to satisfy his hunger with swine's food, the prodigal at last came to himself. He thought of his father's home in which he had spent so many happy years, of the good things of the earth with which the tables had always been laden, of the hired servants who waited upon the family. The spirit of repentance entered his heart, and springing to his feet he exclaimed, "I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants. * * * But when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. * * * And the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and bring hither the fatted calf and kill it;  and let us eat, and be merry: for this my sen was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found." (Luke 15: 18-20, 21-24.) In this parable is clearly exhibited the love and mercy of God. Verily, he that cometh to Him shall in nowise be cast out.

The World:--We will excuse the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--This is our case. We believe we have proved most conclusively that repentance is essential to salvation. "For this ye know," said the apostle, "that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God." (Eph. 5: 5.) The Lord has also said by the mouth of John the Revelator: "The fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death." (Rev. 21: 8.) We, therefore, say unto all men, "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." (Gal. 6: 7.) "We have pointed out all the prominent principles connected with true repentance. And it can easily be seen by every honest heart, that God requires mankind to seek diligently to discern good from evil, and to ascertain what sins and evils they are guilty of; to be exercised with a Godly sorrow that they have ever sinned against so great and good a Being as God; to make suitable confession before God, for all past sins committed; and such a confession must be accompanied with a solemn covenant or promise to sin no more; and the heart should be fixed and immovable in this covenant. All persons who will do these things will have a measure of the Spirit of Christ resting upon them, imparting humility, and meekness, and lowliness of heart. But still this repentance does not guarantee to them a remission of sins; it only prepares the heart to obey properly a great and holy ordinance which God has instituted expressly for the remission of sins. We mean the ordinance of baptism."

V.--WATER BAPTISM.

The World:--Do you believe and teach that water baptism is essential to salvation?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. Water baptism was commanded by the Lord, and we do not teach people that they can get into the Kingdom of Heaven by breaking the Lord's commandments.

The World:--Well, we have been taught that baptism is  not at all essential to salvation, that it is simply an outward sign of an inward grace.

Latter-day Saints:--Baptism was instituted before the foundation of the world. It is an ordinance of the everlasting Gospel, and by obedience to that ordinance, coupled with faith, and sincere repentance, the Lord has promised mankind a remission of their sins. "We have the testimony of many eminent writers that baptism was practiced by the Jews, as a religious ceremony, ages anterior to the birth of our Savior. It is said that the Jews not only circumcised, but baptized all new converts to their faith; and that in the days of Solomon great numbers were proselyted from the surrounding nations, and were baptized. It is by some supposed that the Jews, before Christ, did not baptize those of Jewish descent, but only such as were proselyted from foreign nations. But it is certain that baptism was administered, under the law of Moses, unto numerous multitudes of Jews; for John the Baptist, who was the legal heir of the Aaronic Priesthood, through the lineage of his fathers, did administer this rite to thousands of the Jews for the remission of their sins; and this, too, at a time when the law of Moses was in full force. Even Jesus Himself had not yet been baptized. None of the old institution was yet abolished; and no new institutions were, as yet, introduced. And while under the strictest obligations to keep the old law, John was baptizing; and there went out to him Jerusalem and all Judaea, and all the region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins." (Matt. 3: 5, 6.) We ask you to hear the testimony of Paul on this subject.

The World:--We will be pleased to hear the Apostle's evidence.

PAUL'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--Paul, did you teach the people that water baptism was practiced by the Israelites before the days of John the Baptist?

Paul:--I did. Water baptism is one of the ordinances of the Gospel--the true Gospel, which embraces one Lord, one faith and one baptism. That Gospel was preached to the people in the days of Abraham; and also to the Israelites under Moses. Have you not read what I wrote to the Galatians, the Hebrews and the Corinthians concerning this matter? I quote from my epistles: "And the scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed." (Gal. 3: 8.) "For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well  as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it." (Heb. 4: 2.) "Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea." (I Cor. 10: 1, 2.)

The World:--Paul, you have clearly proved the antiquity of baptism. We will excuse you for the present.

Latter-day Saints:--We can prove to you beyond the possibility of doubt that water baptism is essential to man's salvation. As you know, nearly all the Christian sects believe in and practice some form of baptism, but, with two or three exceptions, none of them believe that that ordinance aids, even in the slightest degree, in the salvation of the souls of men. This is a mistake. Baptism is one of the first ordinances of the Gospel, and is as essential to man's salvation as any other ordinance that God has ever revealed.

The World:--We are ready to hear your witnesses on this matter.

Latter-day Saints:--The first witness that we will introduce is John the Baptist.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN.

The World:--Your name is John?

John:--It is.

The World:--You told us on a former occasion that you were called of God to go before Christ and prepare His way.

John:--That is correct. You will find it so recorded in John's Gospel. (John 1: 6.)

The World:--What did God command you to preach to the people?

John:--Repentance and water baptism.

The World:--You say that God sent you to baptize with water?

John:--He did. It is recorded in the scriptures: "And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." (John 1: 33.)

The World:--What did you tell the people was the object of water baptism?

John:--I told them that it was for the remission of sins. Mark and Luke bear me witness. The former says: "John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remissions of sins." (Mark 1: 4.) Luke  says: "And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Luke 3: 3.)

The World:--After what manner did you baptize?

John:--As I was commanded by the Lord--by immersion. I took the repentant believers down to the river Jordan, and there I baptized them by immersing them in the water.

The World:--Then you do not believe in infant sprinkling?

John:--I do not. It is contrary to the teaching of Christ and His Apostles. There was but one form of baptism known to them, that was baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. On one occasion when people applied to me for baptism, I had to take them to Aenon, near to Salim, "because there was much water there." (John 3: 23.) Had I considered sprinkling just as acceptable to God as immersion, I would not have taken the people to Aenon to be baptized.

The World:--You baptized Jesus Christ?

John:--I did.

The World:--When Christ applied to you for baptism what did you say?

John:--I said, "I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" Then Jesus said to me, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness." (Matt. 3: 14, 15.)

The World:--You say that Christ requested you to baptize Him in order that He might fulfill all righteousness?

John:--He did. And if the Son of God, being holy, had need to be baptized with water that He might fulfill all righteousness, how much more need have mortal men, they being unholy, to be baptized? According to the words of the Savior a man cannot fulfill all righteousness if he fails to comply with the ordinance of baptism. I told the Pharisees and lawyers that they had rejected the counsel of God against themselves by not being baptized. (Luke 7: 30.) And as it was in those days, so it is today--all those who slight this command of the Lord, and refuse to be baptized by immersion for the remission of their sins, will, like the Pharisees and lawyers, reject the counsel of God against themselves.

The World:--The witness is excused. (To the Latter-day Saints.) When was the method of baptism changed?

Latter-day Saints:--In the third century after Christ, in the case of a man named Novatian. Gahan, a Catholic historian, writing of him, says: "Having embraced the faith, he continued a catechumen, till, falling dangerously ill, and  his life being despaired of, he was baptized in bed, not by immersion, which was then the usual method, but by infusion, or pouring on of water."

The World:--Who is your next witness?

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness is the Jewish ruler Nicodemus.

TESTIMONY OF NICODEMUS.

The World:--Nicodemus, had you an interview with Christ?

Nicodemus:--I had. I called upon Him one night and said to Him, "Rabbi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest except God be with him." (John 3: 2.)

The World:--What did Christ say in reply?

Nicodemus:--He told me that I would have to be born again--born of water and of the Spirit. He spoke most emphatically concerning this matter, saying, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." (John 3: 5.)

The World:--What did you interpret the words "born of the water and of the Spirit" to mean?

Nicodemus:--I interpreted them to mean the baptism of water and of the Holy Spirit. Christ was born of the water and of the Spirit when He was baptized; His disciples were born of the water and of the Spirit, and the Savior declared that except a man receive this new birth he cannot enter the Kingdom of God.

The World:--We have been taught that the water which Jesus spoke of was the word of God.

Nicodemus:--He did not tell me that. I am sure that if Christ had meant the word of God He would have said so. Christ did not say one thing and mean another. Why should men put false sentiments into the mouth of the Son of God? That you may see the absurdity of this interpretation which men have put upon the words of Christ, I will make a few quotations from the scriptures, substituting the words "word of God" for the word "water": "And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the word of God." "And John was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there were much words of God there." "And he commanded the chariot to stand still: and they went down both into the word of God. * * * And when they were come up out of the word of God." u Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid the word of God, that these should not be baptized."  "That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of the word of God by the word."

The World:--This certainly makes the interpretation appear most absured. But, do you consider water baptism essential to salvation?

Nicodemus:--I do, most assuredly. I am aware that this doctrine sounds as strange to the people in these days as it did at first to me. But it is, nevertheless, true. It was not Christ's doctrine, it was the doctrine of the Father who had sent Him, and who had sent John also with a similar message. "My doctrine is not mine," said the Savior, "but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself." (John 7: 16, 17.) Again He said, "For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment what I should say and what I should speak. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting; whatsoever I speak, therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak." (John 12: 49, 50.) Therefore, when Christ impressed upon me the necessity of a new birth, of the water and of the Spirit, He taught me a commandment which He had received from His Father, and which He said was life everlasting. I am surprised that anyone possessed of ordinary intelligence could think for a moment that God, the fountain of all truth and wisdom, would send His Son down to the earth to teach the children of men ordinances which were not necessary for them to observe. Nor can I think of anything more foolish than for Christ to send out missionaries into the world to teach people to observe an ordinance, which, when they had obeyed it, they were no better off than they were before. How dare anyone charge the Almighty with such folly?

The World:--We have no further questions to ask the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness is the Apostle Peter.

PETER'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--Were you commissioned by the Lord Jesus Christ to preach His Gospel?

Peter:--I was. In sending His Apostles forth to preach the Gospel, the Lord said unto them, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and  lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world." (Matt. 28: 19, 20.)

The World:--Baptism is, therefore, a commandment of the Lord?

Peter:--It is, and Christ has said, that he that breaks one of the least of His commandments and teaches men to do so, the same shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. (Matt. 5: 19.)

The World:--Do you believe water baptism to be essential to man's salvation?

Peter:--I do. If it had not been so considered by Christ, He would not have commanded us to preach it. Why send us out to tell people to observe an ordinance of the Gospel which it mattered not with God whether they observed or not? That would not give the Lord credit for possessing as much intelligence as men; for no man among you would command his servants to do a certain work when it mattered not whether it was done or left undone. If baptism is not essential to salvation, then it was needless on the part of Christ to command His Apostles to preach it. It was a waste of time for us to do so, for while we were preaching baptism and administering the ordinances we could have employed the time in preaching principles which are essential to men's salvation. You will observe, Christ told us to baptize the people in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Now, do you think for a moment that we would have used the names of the Holy Trinity in an ordinance in which there was no profit? Did Christ not know that it was written in the Scriptures, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain." If you say that baptism is not essential to salvation, you make the Savior of the world a transgressor of God's holy commandment, for what could be more vain than to use the names of the Holy Trinity in an ordinance in which there were no virtue, no salvation?

The World:--You, therefore, taught the people that it was necessary for them to be baptized?

Peter:--I did. With the rest of the Apostles I stood up on the day of Pentecost before a great multitude of people and declared unto them the message of life and salvation which Christ had given us to deliver. We spoke under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and thousands of people were pricked in their hearts, and cried out saying, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?"

The World:--What did you tell them?

Peter:--I said unto them, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2: 38.) The same day three thousand souls were added to the Church. There was a most devout man named Cornelius, who resided in Caesarea, who prayed to God constantly and gave much alms to the people. His prayers and alms came up as a memorial before God, and He sent an angel to Cornelius to tell him to send for me to Joppa, and that I would tell him words whereby he and his house should be saved. Now, you will remember, that a short time previous to this I had taught thousands of people baptism for the remission of sins. If I had taught them false doctrine do you think the Lord would have sent an angel to Cornelius to advise him to send for me to teach him the plan of salvation? I told Cornelius the same things that I declared to the people on the day of Pentecost, and commanded him and his household to be baptized in the name of the Lord. (Acts 10: 48.)

The World:--That is all, Peter.

Latter-day Saints:--We now submit for your consideration the testimony of the Apostle Paul.

PAUL'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--What is your belief concerning water baptism?

Paul:--I believe and have taught that it is an essential ordinance of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. When Jesus appeared to me on the way to Damascus, He called me to repentance and told me to go into Damascus and that I would there be told of all things that were commanded of me to do. The Lord then instructed His servant Ananias to go to me and to tell me to arise and be baptised and wash away my sins, calling on the name of the Lord. (Acts 22: 16.) So, you see, baptism for the remission of sins is not my doctrine, but the Lord's. So important is this ordinance in the sight of the Eternal Father that He withheld the Holy Ghost from twelve devout Ephesians until I had re-baptized them. They had been baptized previously, but not by one holding authority from God, and so their baptism was not valid in His sight. How dare I teach the children of men that baptism is not essential to salvation when He who spake as never man spake had declared, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God."

The World:--We will excuse the witness.

Latter-day Saints:--We have adduced enough evidence to  convince every fair-minded person that water baptism is essential to his salvation. We have shown that it was instituted by the Lord from the beginning of the world for the remission of sins. The Israelites received the ordinance under the hands of Moses, and were all baptized in the cloud and in the sea. John, the forerunner of Messiah, was sent by God to preach baptism for the remission of sins. He baptized multitudes of people in the river Jordan for the remission of their sins. Christ the Son of God received baptism at the hands of John in order that He, too, might fulfill all righteousness. Jesus told the Jewish ruler that except a man were born of water and of the Spirit he could not enter the Kingdom of God. He commanded His disciples to "Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost." Peter, while preaching under the influence of the Holy Ghost, told the people on the day of Pentecost to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of their sins. The Lord Himself sent Ananias to Saul of Tarsus to tell him to arise and be baptised and wash away his sins. We preach the same doctrine that was taught by Christ and His Apostles, and say unto you, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

VI.--THE HOLY GHOST.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--According to the doctrine of your Church a man must be born of water and of the Spirit before he can enter the Kingdom of God.

Latter-day Saints:--In this we simply reiterate what Jesus said to the anxious Jewish ruler, Nicodemus. These are His words: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." (John 3: 5.) These are the words of the Son of God, and whenever He speaks all discussion should be closed.

The World:--You explained to us in the last examination that being born of the water means being baptized in water: what are we to understand by being born of the Spirit?

Latter-day Saints:--To be born of the Spirit means to be baptized with the Holy Ghost. All men must receive these two baptisms before they can become the sons of God. By being born of the flesh we become the sons of men: by being born of the water and of the Spirit we become the sons of God. We desire you to hear the testimony of John the Baptist on this important matter.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST.

The World:--John, you told us on two former occasions that you were sent of God to prepare the way for His Only Begotten Son. What did you teach the people they had to do in order to be accepted of the Lord and admitted into His Kingdom?

John:--I told them that they would have to repent, and be baptized in water for the remission of their sins. I promised the people that, if they would do these things, when Christ would come He would baptize them with a higher baptism--the baptism of the Holy Ghost and of fire. (Matt. 3: 11.)

The World:--You baptized the Christ?

John:--I did. The ordinance was performed in the river Jordan. As soon as Jesus came up out of the water the heavens were opened and the Spirit of God descended like a dove and rested upon Him, and then was heard the voice of God out of heaven, saying, "Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." (Mark 1: 9-11.) Thus was Jesus born of the water and of the Spirit, and all men must follow the example of the Redeemer of the world if they expect to become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ.

The World:--Did you promise the Holy Ghost to all those whom you baptized?

John:--I did. I said to them, "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." (Matt. 3: 11.)

The World:--You are excused, John.

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness is the Apostle John.

TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE JOHN.

The World:--You are an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ?

John:--I am.

The World:--John the Baptist promised those who believed in Christ and who had repented and been baptized for the remission of their sins that the Messiah would baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Did you receive that higher baptism?

John:--I did, but not until Christ had fulfilled His mission and had returned to His Father. While the Savior was with us He was our Teacher, our Guide and our Comforter; but when He ascended up on high we received from the Father the other Comforter, the Holy Ghost, who was to  abide within us forever. During His sojourn with us, Jesus referred quite often to the Divine Spirit which His Father would confer upon us after His departure. On different occasions He said to us: "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." (John 14: 26.) "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me." (John 15: 26.) "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you." (John 16: 13, 14.) "And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto the magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say: for the Holy Ghost shall teach you in that same hour what ye ought to say. (Luke 12: 11, 12.) "Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you." (John 16: 7.) "And, behold, I send the promise of my Father unto you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high." (Luke 24: 49.)

The World:--How was the Holy Ghost conferred upon the people?

John:--Through prayer and by the imposition of hands.

The World:--Did you receive the Holy Ghost in this manner?

John:--I did, and so did the rest of the Apostles. Jesus said to us, "And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever." (John 14: 16.) He led us out as far as Bethany, where He lifted up His hands and blessed us; He then breathed on us, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost." (Luke 24: 50; John 20: 22.)

The World:--That is all, John.

Latter-day Saints:--Our next witness, the Apostle Peter, is ready to be examined.

The World:--We will listen to his testimony.

PETER TESTIFIES.

The World:--Did you also receive from Christ the promise of the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--I did. After His resurrection, the Lord appeared to us as we were assembled together, and commanded us that we should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, "which," said He, "ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (Acts 1: 4, 5.)

The World:--When did you receive the gift of the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--On the day of Pentecost. The Apostles were assembled together, and suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it rilled all the house where we were sitting. And there appeared unto us cloven tongues like of as fire, and it sat upon each of us. And we were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave us utterance. (Acts 2: 2-4.)

The World:--Were the Apostles the only ones who received the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--They were not. The Lord is not a respecter of persons; in every nation he that feareth God and keepeth His commandments is accepted of Him. John assured all his baptized converts that they would receive the baptism of the Holy Ghost. After being endowed with the Divine Spirit, the Apostles stood up before a great multitude of people and bore witness of the resurrection of Christ. Thousands of people, on beholding the glorious outpouring of the Holy Ghost, and perceiving the power by which we spake, were pricked in their hearts, and cried out, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" This is what I said unto them, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call." (Acts 2: 38, 39.)

The World:--Did Christ give you authority to confer the Holy Ghost upon those who believed on your words and obeyed the Gospel?

Peter:--He did, and also to the other Apostles. He said to us: "But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." (Acts 1: 8.) After His resurrection the Lord appeared unto us and commissioned us to go forth and preach the Gospel. "Go ye into all the world," said He, "and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that  believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name they shall cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover." (Mark 16: 15-18.)

The World:--Did the people who accepted the Gospel of Christ in the days of your ministry receive the gift of the Holy Ghost?

Peter:--They did. The Lord confirmed the words of His servants by pouring out His Holy Spirit upon those who repented of their sins and who were baptized by Divine authority for the remission of their sins.

The World:--How was the Holy Ghost conferred?

Peter:--By prayer and by the imposition of the hands of authorized servants of God.

The World:--Can you refer us to an occasion when the Holy Ghost was given to believers?

Peter:--On one occasion Philip went down to Samaria and preached the Gospel to the inhabitants of that city. "And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them; and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed. * * * When they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women." (Acts 8: 5-7, 12.) While Philip had authority to preach the Gospel, and also to baptize, he did not have authority to confer the Holy Ghost. He, therefore, sent word to the Apostles at Jerusalem, acquainting them of the work which he had performed in Samaria, and requesting them to send men endowed with higher authority, to confirm the baptized converts and to pray for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. John and I were sent down to Samaria, and when we met with the converts there we prayed for them, after which we laid our hands upon them, and the Holy Ghost came upon them. (Acts 8: 14-17.)

The World:--We will now excuse you, Peter.

The World:--We have been taught that the signs spoken of by Peter were only to follow the Apostles and the believers in that age; that they were given to assist in establishing Christianity; and that when Christianity became established they were done away with and were no longer needed.

Latter-day Saints: We know that that is the teaching of  professed ministers of the Gospel, but it is in direct opposition to the teaching of Christ and His Apostles. "Christ places His preaching, believing, salvation, and the signs that were to follow, all on an equal footing; where one was limited, the other must be; where one ceased, the other did. If the language limits the signs to the Apostles, it limits salvation to them also. If no others were to have these signs follow them then no others were to believe, and no others were to be saved. If the language limits these signs to the first age or ages of Christianity, then it limits salvation to the first ages of Christianity, for one is as precisely as much limited as the other; and where one is in force, the other is; and where one ends, the other must stop. As well might we say, preaching of the Gospel is no longer needed; neither faith nor salvation; these were only given at first to establish the Gospel, as to say, the signs are no longer necessary, they were only given at first to establish the Gospel."

The World--We will now excuse you, Peter.

Latter-day Saints:--We have another witness, the Apostle Paul.

The World:--We are ready to hear his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF PAUL.

The World:--Paul, after your conversion did you receive the gift of the Holy Ghost?

Paul--I did. Ananias, being sent of the Lord, came to me in Damascus, and placing his hands upon me, said: "Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, has sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Acts 9: 17.)

The World:--Did anyone ever receive the Holy Ghost under your administration?

Paul:--Yes, many. On one occasion, while Apollos was at Corinth, I passed through the upper coasts and came to Ephesus. There I found certain disciples who told me that they had been baptized. I asked them if they had received the Holy Ghost since they believed, and they answered that they had not--that they had not even heard of the Holy Ghost. I asked them with what baptism they had been baptized, and they replied, "Unto John's baptism." I told them that John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people that they should believe on Him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. I  then laid my hands upon them and prayed for them that the Lord would bestow upon them His Holy Spirit. The Lord hearkened unto my prayer and acknowledged my administration, for the Holy Ghost came upon them and they spake with tongues and prophesied. (Acts 19: 1-6.) Timothy also received this precious gift by the laying on of my hands. (II Tim. 1: 6.)

The World:--How does the Holy Ghost operate upon those who receive it?

Paul:--In divers ways. "There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues; but all these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will." (I Cor. 12: 4-11.) All these gifts, and many others, were enjoyed by the primitive Christians, and were inseparably connected with the true Gospel of Christ.

The World:--Did you not write an epistle to the Corinthian saints in which you told them that the gifts of prophecy, tongues, etc., would cease?

Paul:--I did. I told them that such gifts would cease when that which is perfect should come. I read from my epistle: "Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. * * * For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as I am known." (I Cor. 13: 8-10, 12.) I wrote an epistle to the Ephesians, in which I told them that the spiritual gifts which Christ had placed in His Church were to continue "till we all come to the unity of the faith." The following is an extract from my epistle: "Wherefore he saith, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men." "And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of  the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4: 8, 11-13.)

The World:--The witness is excused. (To the Latter-day Saints):--Do the members of your Church enjoy the gifts of the Holy Ghost?

Latter-day Saints:--They do. "We believe in the gifts of the Holy Ghost being enjoyed now as much as they were in the days of the Apostles; we believe that the revelations of the Holy Ghost are necessary to organize the Priesthood; that no man can be called to fill any office in the ministry without it; we also believe in prophecy, in tongues, in visions, in revelations, in healings; and that these things cannot be enjoyed without the Holy Ghost; we believe that holy men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and that holy men in these days speak by the same power; we believe in its being a comforter and a witness-bearer; that it brings things past to our remembrance, leads us into all truth, and shows us of things to come; we believe that no man can know that Jesus is the Christ but by the Holy Ghost."

The World:--Have you received authority from the Lord to confer the Holy Ghost upon those who comply with the laws and ordinances of the Gospel?

Latter-day Saints:--We have. The authority was conferred upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by the Apostles Peter, James and John.

The World:--Have the gifts of the Holy Ghost been made manifest in this dispensation?

Latter-day Saints:--They have. On the evening of March 27th, 1836, Joseph Smith met the quorums of the Priesthood in the Kirtland Temple and instructed them respecting the ordinance of the washing of feet, and in relation to the spirit of prophecy. He called upon the congregation to speak, and not to fear to prophesy good concerning the Saints; "for if you prophesy," said he, "the falling of these hills, and the rising of the valleys, the downfall of the enemies of Zion, and the rising of the Kingdom of God, it shall come to pass. Do not quench the Spirit, for the first one that shall open his mouth shall receive the Spirit of prophecy." Brother George A. Smith arose, and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues, and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and the Temple was filled with angels, which fact the Prophet declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood  came running together, hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple, and were astonished at what was transpiring." (Compendium pp. 267-8.)

The World:--Do you promise the Holy Ghost to all those who repent and obey the Gospel which you preach?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. In sending forth His servants in these last days to proclaim the glad tidings of the Gospel of peace, the Lord said: "Therefore go ye into all the world, and whatsoever place ye cannot go into ye shall send, that the testimony may go from you into all the world unto every creature. And as I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine apostles, even God's high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me--ye are my friends; therefore, as I said unto mine apostles I say unto you again, that every soul who believeth on your words, and is baptized by water for the remission of sins, shall receive the Holy Ghost; and these signs shall follow them that believe. In my name they shall do many wonderful works; in my name they shall cast out devils; in my name they shall heal the sick; in my name they shall open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf; and the tongue of the dumb shall speak; and if any man shall administer poison unto them it shall not hurt them; and the poison of a serpent shall not have power to harm them. But a commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world, for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation. Verily, verily I say unto you, they who believe not on your words, and are not baptized in water, in my name, for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, shall be damned, and shall not come into my Father's Kingdom, where my Father and I am. And this revelation unto you, and commandment, is in force from this very hour upon all the world, and the gospel is unto all who have not received it." (Doc. and Cov. 84: 62-75.) All who will, with honest hearts, receive the message which we bear--the message that God the Father has in these last days restored through the ministration of angels, the everlasting Gospel--shall receive a testimony by the manifestations of the Holy Spirit of its Divine authenticity. And these manifestations shall be such as to give them perfect knowledge of its truth.

VII. BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD.

Latter-day Saints:--Before proceeding further, permit us  to ask you a question or two: Have we not proved, and that, too, beyond all controversy, that a living, active and abiding faith in God the Father, and in His Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, is indispensable to man's salvation?

The World:--You have shown that, in order for a man to please God, not to mention being saved of Him, he must have faith in Him, and in His Son Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world.

Latter-day Saints:--Have we not proven most conclusively that men must repent of their sins and turn away from their iniquities before they can gain access to the Kingdom of God?

The World:--Sufficient evidence has been given to prove that sincere and genuine repentance must be exhibited in the lives of all men who hope for salvation, for the decree has gone forth that no unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of Heaven.

Latter-day Saints:--Have we not proven that the proper mode of baptism is immersion, and that the object of baptism is for the remission of sins?

The World:--The testimony of your witnesses in regard to the mode, object and essentiality of baptism cannot be refuted. Christ's answer to Nicodemus--"Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter the Kingdom of God"--should put an end to all discussion on that subject.

Latter-day Saints:--Have we not proven that after a man has complied with the ordinance of baptism, he must receive the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands of authorized servants of God?

The World:--Such was the practice in the primitive church. After baptism the Apostles confirmed the believers by the laying on of hands, with prayer, and conferring the Holy Ghost.

Latter-day Saints:--These are the first principles of the Gospel of Christ, and the Apostle Paul has declared that "though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed." (Gal. 1: 8.)

The World:--You have laid before us in a most clear and convincing manner the plan of salvation. Permit us now to ask you, What is to become of those who have died in ignorance of the Gospel of Christ?

Latter-day Saints:--Our reply to that question is this: God is a God of mercy and justice. He does not seek a crop where there has been no seed sown. All those who have died  in ignorance of the Gospel are in the hands of Him whose nature and whose name is Love, whose desire is that all His children may be saved and brought to a knowledge of the truth. He has made provision whereby the glad tidings of great joy which the angel brought to the shepherds on the morning of the Savior's birth shall be proclaimed unto every son and daughter of God. The Creator has made of one blood all nations that dwell on the earth. There is no respect of persons with God. His glorious plan of redemption was not revealed for the benefit of a favored class. When the angel of the Lord appeared to the shepherds on the plains of Judaea, he said unto them, "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people." (Luke 2: 10.) Now, it is an undisputed fact that millions had died before that time without having heard those good tidings, just as millions have died since whose ears have never been saluted with the good news of the Savior's birth, and of the great redemption which He purchased for the whole human family by the shedding of His most precious blood. Who could be so lost to all reason as to think for a moment that God would consign to everlasting punishment all those who died in absolute ignorance of His Divine laws? We now ask you, as Paul asked the Roman saints, "How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?" (Rom. 10: 14.) But here is the Apostle Peter, a recognized authority on the doctrine of Christ. Hear what he has to say in the subject.

TESTIMONY OF PETER.

The World:--Peter, would you have us believe that the Gospel is preached to those who die in ignorance of its Divine truths?

Peter:--I am surprised to hear you ask such a question when so much has been written on the matter. Jesus Christ came, not to save the living only, but the dead also. He declared that if He were lifted up from the earth He would draw all men unto Him, (John 12: 32), and that the hour was coming when the dead, as well as the living, would hear His voice. (John 5: 25.)

The World:--Then, according to your testimony, Christ after having preached the Gospel to men in the flesh, went also and preached the same Gospel to those who had died without having heard of its saving principles?

Peter:--He did; and not to them only, but also to those  who rejected it when it was preached to them on the earth.

The World:--This is certainly strange doctrine to us. Our ministers have never taught us that the dead could be saved as well as the living.

Peter:--That is because they do not understand the Scriptures. The men who wrote the Scriptures wrote as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and in order for men to understand the writings of the prophets and other inspired servants of God, they must be in possession of the same Spirit, for "the things of God knoweth no man but by the Spirit of God." If you will permit me, I will endeavor to make the Scriptures plain to your understanding. Noah, as you all know, was a preacher of righteousness. He was called by the Lord to preach the Gospel to the people of his generation. But they refused to listen to his warning; they turned deaf ears to his entreaties, and at last the Lord came out in judgment upon them and destroyed them from the face of the earth. But did He then cast them off forever? No, indeed. The Lord does not keep His anger forever. He had prepared a place for them, for in His house there are many mansions. He had prepared a prison-house for the wicked and rebellious, and when the antediluvians were destroyed in the flesh, their spirits were shut up in the Lord's prison-house, where they were kept for thousands of years, or in other words, till they had paid the uttermost farthing.

The World:--And did those people have the opportunity afterwards of again hearing the Gospel?

Peter:--I am coming to that. I told you those spirits were shut up in prison for thousands of years. Now, I do not ask you to accept of my testimony alone concerning this matter. I am going to read to you what Isaiah the Prophet has written concerning the Lord's prison-house and its inmates. Here are his words: "And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited." (Isaiah 24: 22.) Now, let us stop for a moment and analyze this Scripture. There is a depth of meaning in it, I assure you. Writing was not done with such ease in Isaiah's time as it is today. The prophet did not pen the words which I have read just for pastime--they were written for our profit and learning. He pointed out most clearly the fate of those who would not hearken to the voice of the Lord or of His servants, but spent the days of their probation in gratifying their carnal appetites. They were to be gathered together as prisoners, and shut up in a prison, where they were to be  confined for many days. But they were not to be left without hope. The promise was made that when they had paid the penalty for their misdeeds they would be visited. This, according to the words of the prophet was part of Christ's missionary work: He was to preach redemption not only to the living, but to the dead as well; He was to visit the prisoners in the prison-house and preach deliverance to them. I quote again from his writings: "I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house." (Isaiah 42: 6, 7.) Now, I desire to remind you that Christ confirmed this prophecy of Isaiah. He told the people that it referred to Him, and that it would be fulfilled in Him. Standing up in the synagogue in Nazareth one Sabbath day He quoted Isaiah's prophecy, as follows: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord." (Luke 4: 18, 19.) So, you see that part of Christ's work was to preach deliverance to the captives, and open the prison to those who were bound.

The World:--When did the Messiah perform that work?

Peter:--During the three days that His body lay in the tomb.

The World:--Was His Spirit not with His Father during that time?

Peter:--According to Christ's own testimony it was not. When the Lord appeared to Mary, after His resurrection, He told her to touch Him not, for He had not yet ascended to His Father. (John 20: 17.) In two epistles which I wrote to the Saints in early days I made special reference to Christ's visit to the spirits in prison. This is what I said: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (I Peter 3: 18-20.) "For for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh,  but live according to God in the spirit." (I Peter 4: 6.) While this doctrine may be strange to you, it was quite well understood by the Saints in former days.

The World:--We thank you, Peter, for your testimony.

Latter-day Saints:--Before calling another witness we will quote to you the comments of Professor A. Hinderkoper, a German writer, and Bishop Alford, on the words of Peter. The former says: "In the second and third centuries every branch and division of the Christian Church, so far as their records enable us to judge, believed that Christ preached to the departed spirits." (Haley's Discrepancies of the Bible.) Bishop Alford says: "I understand these words (I Peter 3: 19) to say that our Lord in his disembodied state, did go to the place of detention of departed spirits, and did there announce His work of redemption; preach salvation in fact, to the disembodied spirits of those who refused to obey the voice of God when the judgment of the flood was hanging over them." We now respectfully ask you to listen to what the Apostle Paul has to say on this matter.

PAUL'S EVIDENCE.

The World:--Paul, do you believe that the Gospel is preached to men after they depart this life?

Paul:--I do. I corroborate all that the Apostle Peter has said concerning salvation for the dead. This doctrine was well understood by the people in our day. Jesus, you remember, told Nicodemus that except a man were born of water and of the Spirit, he could not enter the Kingdom of God. Now, in those days the people asked the same question that many people ask today, "If baptism is essential to salvation, what is to become of those who have died without having been baptized?" Had the Lord failed to make provision for such people, it would have revealed an imperfection in the plan of salvation, which is not the case, for "the law of the Lord is perfect." Peter has told you that the Gospel was preached to the dead; I taught the people the doctrine of baptism for the dead. Here is what I wrote to the Corinthians: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (I Cor. 15: 20.) The Saints in former times believed in and performed a vicarious work for the dead--they were baptized for their dead. But after the death of the Apostles men transgressed the laws and changed the ordinances of the Gospel, in consequence of which darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the minds of the people.

The World:--You are excused, Paul.

Latter-day Saints (to the World):--We desire to call your attention to a prophecy which was made by Malachi. He prophesied as follows: "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." (Mal. 4: 5, 6.) Now, we testify to you, in all soberness, that this prophecy has been literally fulfilled. On the 3rd day of April, 1836, the Prophet Elijah appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple. Addressing them he said: "Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi; testifying that I should be sent before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse. Therefore the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands, and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors." We have built a number of temples, in which baptism and other ordinances have been performed in behalf of millions of our dead relatives and friends. This is also in fulfillment of the prophecy of Micah, who said: "But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it. And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Micah 4: 1, 2.) The work for the dead is still in progress. The hearts of the fathers are being turned to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers. Blessed are all those who engage in this glorious work, for great shall be their joy when they meet their loved ones who have passed beyond the veil, and for whom they stood as saviors upon Mount Zion.

VIII.--DIVINE AUTHORITY.

The World (to the Latter-day Saints):--Do you claim to have received authority from the Lord to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof?

Latter-day Saints:--We do. The Lord has in these last days restored, through the ministering of angels, both the  Aaronic and Melchisedek Priesthood, empowering His servants to preach the Gospel, baptize repentant believers for the remission of their sins, confirm them members in His Church, and by prayer and the imposition of hands call down upon them the Holy Ghost.

The World:--Must a man be called of God and divinely appointed before he can preach acceptably the Gospel of Jesus Christ and administer its ordinances?

Latter-day Saints:--He must, as the Apostle Paul and others will testify.

#TESTIMONY OF PAUL. # The World:--Paul, do you consider it absolutely necessary in order for a man to preach the Gospel and administer in its ordinances, for him to be called of God and ordained by those holding Divine authority?

Paul:--I do. In every dispensation of the world the Lord has chosen certain men to represent Him among the people. These He called, either by His own voice or by the voice of His servants whom He had previously chosen.

The World:--Can you cite us a few examples of the calling of men to the ministry?

Paul:--I can. The Lord called Noah to be a preacher of righteousness to the people of his generation; and when they would not hearken to the testimony of His authorized servant, the Lord destroyed them from the earth. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were called in like manner for the work which the Lord had appointed them.

The World:--How were they called?

Paul:--They were called by direct revelation from heaven, the Lord speaking to them by His own voice. To Abraham He said: "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee: and I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great and thou shalt be a blessing; * * * and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed." (Gen. 12: 1-3.) Isaac and Jacob were called in a similar manner. (Gen. 28: 2-5; 28: 10-15.)

The World:--Would it be improper for a man to preach the Gospel and administer its ordinances without his having been divinely commissioned to do so?

Paul:--It would, indeed. No man has a right to take such honor unto himself except he be called of God, as was Aaron. Permit me to read a couple of extracts from my epistles to the Romans and to the Hebrews. This is what I said:

"How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent?" (Rom. 10: 14, 15.) "And no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Heb. 5: 4.)

The World:--How was Aaron called to the ministry?

Paul:--He was called of the Lord through the Prophet Moses. As you well know, the Lord spoke to Moses out of the burning bush, commissioning him to go on a mission to Egypt and deliver the children of Israel. Moses reminded the Lord that he had an impediment in his speech, when the Lord said to him: "Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what you shall do." (Exodus 4: 14, 15.) "And the Lord said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him. And Moses told Aaron all the words of the Lord who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him." (Exodus 4: 27, 28.)

The World:--When men are called of the Lord, through His inspired servants, to minister unto the people, is it necessary for them to be ordained and set apart for their respective duties by the laying on of the hands of the Lord's servants?

Paul:--It is. Such has been the practice in every Gospel dispensation. Joshua, the son of Nun, was set apart, as directed of the Lord, through the imposition of hands by Moses. Let me read to you what Moses has written on this matter: "And the Lord said unto Moses, take thee Joshua, the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine hands upon him; and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight. And thou shalt put some of thine honor upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient. * * * And Moses did as the Lord commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation: and he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses." (Num. 27: 18-20, 22, 23.)

The World:--Paul, in what way were you called to the ministry, and by whom were you ordained?

Paul:--I was called by the Holy Ghost, and was ordained  under the hands of Simeon, Lucius and Manaen. You will find a record of my call and ordination in the 13th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, as follows: "Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers: as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away." (Acts 13: 1-3.)

The World:--We have no further questions to ask you, Paul.

Latter-day Saints:--We now respectfully ask you to hear what the Apostle Peter has to say on this very important subject.

PETER'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--Were you called of the Lord and ordained to take part in His ministry?

Peter:--I was. You will find an account of my call and ordination, as well as that of the other eleven apostles, in the third chapter of Mark's Gospel. It is as follows: "And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom He would: and they came unto him. And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach." (Mark 3: 13, 14.) "Ye have not chosen me," said Jesus, "but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you." (John 15: 16.)

The World:--Must a man be called of God and ordained by Divine authority before he can hold an office in the Church of Christ?

Peter:--He must. The death of Judas left a vacancy in the quorum of Apostles. In choosing his successor we appealed to the Lord to manifest to us His mind and will in the selection of a man to fill the vacancy. There were two men. Barnabas and Matthias, whom we considered equally worthy of the honor. We presented these two men before the Lord in prayer and said, "Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, show which of these two thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place." (Acts 1: 24, 25.) It was revealed to us that Matthias was  the Lord's choice, and he was appointed by unanimous vote.

The World:--Are we to understand from what you have said that it was the desire of the Lord that Apostles and Prophets and all the other officers should continue in the Church?

Peter:--Such, indeed, was the desire of the Lord. If it had not been, He would not have appointed a successor to Judas.

The World:--Our ministers have told us that Apostles and Prophets are not necessary in these days; that they were placed in the Church to establish Christianity, and that when Christianity was established they were no longer needed.

Peter:--There is nothing in the Scriptures to warrant such an assertion. On the contrary, it is most positively stated that the Lord put these officers in the Church "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." And they were to remain in the church "till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive." (Eph. 4: 12-14.)

The World:--How was the primitive Christian Church organized?

Peter:--It was "built upon the foundation of apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone." (Eph. 2: 20.) The Lord placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc. (Eph. 4: 11.)

The World:--The churches of the world are not organized after that pattern?

Peter:--They are not. They were not established by Christ. Had Christ established them, He would have put in them the same officers that He put in the early Christian Church. The Churches of the world were established by men. They are named after men. There is Saint Paul's Church, Saint Peter's Church, Saint Mark's Church, Saint Luke's Church, Saint John's Church, etc.

The World:--There seems, therefore, to have been an apostasy from the primitive Christian Church?

Peter:--There has. The Scriptures are replete with prophecies concerning the great apostasy which was to take place after the death of the apostles. Permit me to call your attention to a few of them. Have you a Bible at hand?

The World:--We have.

Peter:--Turn to the fourth chapter of Paul's second epistle to Timothy and read what he prophesied concerning the apostasy that was to take place.

The World:--Paul prophesied as follows: "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap unto themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." (II Tim. 4: 3,4.)

Peter:--Now turn to the 29th chapter of Isaiah and read what the prophet said concerning the state of the world in the last days.

The World:--Isaiah prophesied as follows: "Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink. For the Lord hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers hath he covered. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men; therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." (Isaiah 29: 9, 10, 13, 14.)

Peter:--How perfectly did Paul describe the condition of the world at the present time! Instead of having inspired Apostles and Prophets to reveal to them the mind and will of the Lord, and to teach to them the true plan of salvation, the people have heaped to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they have turned their ears away from the truth and turned them unto fables. When you think of the multitude of jarring and contending sects that are in the world today, you can see how literally the prophecies of Paul and Isaiah have been fulfilled.

The World:--Were Paul and Isaiah the only ones who prophesied concerning an apostasy?

Peter:--They were not. There were many others who uttered similar predictions. But I ask you to read what Isaiah further said concerning the apostasy; you will find it in the twenty-fourth chapter of his book.

The World:--Isaiah says: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed  the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left." (Isaiah 24: 5, 6).

Peter:--Notice the similarity in these prophecies: Isaiah prophesied that the day would come when the people would transgress the laws, change the ordinance, and break the everlasting covenant. Paul declared that the time would come when they would not endure sound doctrine, but would heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, who would turn their ears away from the truth and turn them unto fables. On another occasion Paul prophesied as follows: "For I know this, that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them." (Acts 20: 29, 30.) Paul lived to see the beginning of the terrible apostasy of which he spoke. "I marvel," said he, writing to the Galatians, "that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel: which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ." (Gal. 1: 6, 7.) I myself prophesied concerning the apostasy. Here is what I said: "But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you." (II Peter 2: 1-3.)

The World:--The prophets and apostles truly foretold an apostasy, and the divided state of Christendom--the hundreds of different sects and denominations, the numerous, conflicting theories which are being advocated by men for the Gospel of Jesus Christ--bear incontrovertible testimony that such an apostasy has taken place. Must this condition continue, or will there be a restitution?

Peter:--There will be a restitution of all things spoken of by the mouth of the holy prophets.

The World:--Do you think the Lord will ever send us Apostles and Prophets to teach us the true Gospel of Christ as it was taught by Him and His inspired servants in ancient days?

Peter:--He will, for so He has declared. Here is the  Apostle John; I pray you, hear what he has to say concerning the restoration of the Gospel in the latter days.

JOHN'S TESTIMONY.

The World:--John, do you think we will ever be favored with new revelation from God?

John:--Have you forgotten what Joel prophesied concerning the last days? He said: "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions." (Joel 2: 28.)

The World:--Then, we may look for Prophets to be sent of God.

John:--Yes, and angels also will come down from heaven to restore that which was lost. You have heard already of the great apostasy that was to take place; you have seen how the principles and ordinances of the Gospel have been perverted; you see the Christian world a Babel of Confusion. The Lord knew that all these things would take place, and He decreed that in the last days He would set His hand again to recover His people from their lost and fallen state. He revealed to me that before His judgments were poured out upon the inhabitants of the earth He would send an angel with the everlasting Gospel, to be preached to every nation under heaven. Read, I pray you, what I said concerning this matter in the fourteenth chapter of my book.

The World:--You wrote as follows: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water. (Rev. 14: 6, 7.)

John:--Now, I advise you to look for the fulfillment of the things which the Lord has spoken by the mouth of His holy prophets.

The World:--Thank you, John; you are excused.

Latter-day Saints:--Now, we testify to you in words of soberness that the angel which John predicted would come to the earth in the last days with the everlasting Gospel, has come to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The Lord also sent heavenly messengers to him and others, who conferred upon them Divine  authority, and instructed them concerning the restoration of the true Church of Christ on the earth for the last time, preparatory to the coming of the Son of Man. That Church has been organized after the primitive pattern. In it are inspired Apostles and Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. It teaches the very same Gospel that was taught by Christ and His Apostles; its members enjoy the same gifts and blessings that were enjoyed by the former-day saints: they have the gift of prophecy, revelations, visions, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. And, if you desire to know the truth of these things, we advise you to follow the exhortation of the Apostle James, when he said, "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1: 5.)

    "Our enemies have kicked us, and cuffed us, and driven us from
    pillar to post, and we have multiplied and increased the more,
    until we have become what we are this day."

    --Brigham Young.

    "It is not our business to fight our enemies. There is no man or
    woman on the face of the earth, but is our brother or our sister.
    They are the children of God and we are here to bear and forbear
    with them in their interest and for the glory of God."

    --Lorenzo Snow.

A CONGRESSMAN'S OPINION OF THE PROPHET.

(From the Historical Record.)

In the winter of 1840, the Prophet Joseph Smith went to Washington, D. C, to petition the president of the United States and Congress to redress the grievances of the Saints against the people of Missouri. While at the nation's capital he had several opportunities of speaking in public. On the evening of February 5, 1840, he addressed a large audience. Mr. M. L. Davis, a member of Congress, was present. In a letter written to his wife the day after, he gives the following opinion of the Prophet:

    I went last evening to hear "Joe Smith," the celebrated Mormon,
    expound his doctrine. I, with several others, had a desire to
    understand his tenets as explained by himself.

    He is not an educated man; but he is a plain, sensible,
    strong-minded man. Everything he says is said in a manner to
    leave an impression that he is sincere. There is no levity, no
    fanaticism, no want of dignity in his deportment. He is apparently
    from forty to forty-five years of age, rather above the middle
    stature, and what you ladies would call a very good looking man.
    In his garb there are no peculiarities; his dress being that of a
    plain, unpretending citizen. He is by profession a farmer, but is
    evidently well read. * * *

    During the whole of his address, which occupied more than two
    hours, there was no opinion or belief that he expressed, that
    was calculated, in the slightest degree, to impair the morals
    of society, or in any manner to degrade and brutalize the human
    species. There was much in his precepts, if they were followed,
    that would soften the asperities of man toward man, and that
    would tend to make him a more rational being than he is generally
    found to be. There was no violence, no fury, no denunciation.
    His religion appears to be a religion of meekness, lowliness and
    mild persuasion. * * * Throughout his whole address he displayed
    strongly a spirit of charity and forbearance. The Mormon Bible,
    he said, was communicated to him direct from heaven. If there was
    such a thing on earth as the author of it, then he (Smith) was the
    author; but the idea that he wished to impress was that he had
    penned it as dictated by God. * * *

    I have changed my opinion of the Mormons. They are an injured and
    much abused people.

AN ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.

BY HEBER J. GRANT, TOKYO, JAPAN.

    Prove all things; hold fast to that which is good.

    1 Thess. 5: 21.

    If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him.

    But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is
    like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed.

    James 1: 5, 6.

We, as duly authorized representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, have been sent to Japan for the purpose of teaching the plan of life and salvation, as it has again been revealed from heaven by the true and living God to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

We earnestly entreat the people of this nation to fully investigate the message which we have come to deliver.

We testify that there is a God in heaven who is in very deed the Father of the spirits of all men. He is the Creator of heaven and earth, and all that in them is. He existed before the world was created; exists today and will exist forever. He is the same yesterday, today and forever. He is all powerful and to His wisdom there is no limit. He is no respecter of persons; is full of mercy, love and compassion, and is forgiving to all those who will repent of sin and seek Him and serve Him with full purpose of heart.

All men are well aware that compliance with the laws of a nation is absolutely necessary in order to become a citizen thereof, and the same applies with equal force to those who wish to become citizens of the kingdom of God. A knowledge of and compliance with God's laws is a matter of the most  vital consequence to all men. These laws are contained in the divinely inspired books known as the Bible and Book of Mormon. We feel assured that all who will earnestly and fully investigate will come to a knowledge of the divine authenticity of these records.

For many hundreds of years after the creation of the earth God appeared in person, from time to time, and talked with His children and gave instructions as to what was necessary for them to do in order to be worthy, when this life was ended, to come back and dwell forever in His presence. A little over nineteen hundred years ago He sent His Son Jesus Christ to the earth to teach mankind the plan of life and salvation. Jesus is the Savior of the world, and faith on His name and obedience to His commandments will take us back into the presence of God where we shall dwell forever.

Jesus Christ called upon all men to repent, to live lives of righteousness and to be baptized in water for the remission of their sins, and made them the promise that if they would do this and keep His commandments they should know whether the doctrines He proclaimed were of God or man.

In the spring of 1820, God and His Son Jesus Christ visited the earth and talked with Joseph Smith. They afterwards sent heavenly messengers who gave him the necessary instructions and authority to establish on the earth the true Church of Christ. Some immediately accepted the doctrines which this prophet taught, but the majority misrepresented his teachings and persecuted him. False charges were preferred against him, and he was imprisoned many times, but upon trial was declared innocent of every charge. He lived a life of virtue and uprightness, maintaining, in the face of the most bitter opposition, his testimony as to the truths revealed to him from heaven. Finally, while he was in Carthage jail, Illinois, U. S., under the pledged protection of the state, awaiting a trial, to which he had voluntarily surrendered himself, the jail was attacked and he was murdered by a mob of wicked men. Thus did Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the nineteenth century, seal his testimony with his life's blood.

Dr. David Nelson in his book, "The Cause and Cure of Infidelity," says: "A true prophet is not applauded by a majority of the wicked or by the mass of the depraved. He is generally disliked by those furthest from God, and spoken evil of by those who sink deepest in sin. He is often not only reviled, but put to death if the laws permit; but the false prophet is neither stoned nor sawn asunder. He is often extolled greatly by the most dissolute, and is at least tolerated or praised  to some extent by the leaders in depravity or the officers of sin."

Many people have spoken ill of the Latter-day Saints, or as we are commonly called "Mormons." We ask to be judged not by the false statements of our enemies, but by the infallible standard, "By their fruits ye shall know them." Wisdom dictates that no cause should be judged without a hearing, and least of all when only one side has been heard, and that the side of its enemies. The history of the Latter-day Saints is before the world and speaks for itself.

In a tract entitled "My reasons for leaving the Church of England and joining the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," the writer says: "No one who will read the whole history of the Latter-day Saints with a truly honest and unprejudiced heart, and look upon the blessings of prosperity which they at present enjoy, can for a moment doubt that they are members of a church which is under the direct guidance of God through new revelation.

"I am quite sure that any one who will read with a fair, and unprejudiced mind the teachings of Joseph Smith, can not but conclude that he must have been inspired, especially when they consider the fact that all the great and marvelous work which he performed before his martyrdom was accomplished while he was still a young man, and that he had never enjoyed the privileges of education and experience."

We call attention to the last of the accompanying Articles of our Faith, that "if there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, we seek after these things," and advise all men to do likewise.

In conclusion, in all solemnity and humility, we bear testimony that God lives, that Jesus Christ is His Son and the Savior of the world; that Joseph Smith was the prophet of the true and living God, commissioned to restore again the Gospel of Jesus Christ to the inhabitants of the earth. We once more entreat all men to investigate our message, and promise, as did our Savior, that all who will repent of sin and obey the Gospel shall receive a knowledge from God of the divinity of the doctrines which we proclaim.

CORNER STONES OF REORGANIZATION.

A FEW FACTS CONCERNING ITS FOUNDERS COMPILED FROM EARLY CHURCH HISTORY.

    When men come as servants of God, claiming a divine commission to
    reorganize the Church of Christ, the searchlight of investigation
    should be turned upon them. If they bear it there is evidence that
    they have been sent of God. But if inconsistencies hedge their
    entire course of life it is well for an inquirer after truth to
    examine their AUTHORITY.

    William Marks, Zenos H. Gurley, William W. Blair and Samuel Powers
    ordained the Son of the Prophet to succeed his father as President
    of the Church. William W. Blair and Samuel Powers were never
    members of the original Church. We, therefore, pass them by, and
    proceed to bring out a few facts from early Church history relative
    to Marks, Gurley and Briggs, the two latter being the founders of
    the "Reorganization."

HISTORY OF WILLIAM MARKS.

WILLIAM MARKS was President of the Nauvoo Stake at the time of the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph, June 27, 1844.

SOMETHING FROM THE PROPHET'S JOURNAL.

"Whatever can be the matter with these men (Law and Marks)? Is it that the wicked flee when no man pursueth? that hit pigeons always flutter? that drowning men catch at straws? or that Presidents Law and Marks are absolutely traitors to the Church, that mv remarks should produce such excitement in their minds? The people in the town are astonished, almost every man saying to his neighbor: Is it possible that Brother Law or Brother Marks is a traitor and would deliver Brother Joseph into the hands of his enemies in Missouri?  If not, what can be the meaning of all this? The righteous are as bold as a lion."

MARKS DROPPED FROM HIS POSITION AS PRESIDENT OF NAUVOO STAKE.
WILLIAM MARKS was dropped from his position as President of the Nauvoo Stake at a conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, held October 7, 1844. (T. & S., Vol. 5, 692.) The whole Church voted NOT to sustain him, excepting two votes. This action was taken because he supported the claims of Sidney Rigdon as guardian of the Church.

On December 9th, 1844--Nauvoo, Illinois, he acknowledged his error in the following:

NOTICE.

"After mature and candid deliberation, I am fully and satisfactorily convinced that Mr. Sidney Rigdon's claims to the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints are not founded in truth. I have been deceived by his specious pretenses and now feel to warn every one over whom I may have any influence to beware of him, and his pretended visions and revelations. THE TWELVE ARE THE PROPER PERSONS TO LEAD THE CHURCH." (T. & S., Vol. 5, 742.)

"Signed William Marks."

After making this acknowledgment he was received back into fellowship, but did not again obtain his former position. He became dissatisfied, withdrew from the Church and was excommunicated.

JOINS THE STRANGITE ORGANIZATION AND PLAYS A LEADING PART.

Copied from the "Voree Record," official record of Strangle Church.

Conference April 6, 1846.

"On motion of WILLIAM MARKS, High Priest and President of the Stake at Nauvoo, James J. Strang unanimously called to the Chair as President of the Conference."

"On motion of Elder WILLIAM MARKS it was unanimously resolved that this Church receive, acknowledge, and uphold JAMES J. STRANG as President of this Church,  Prophet, Seer, Revelator, and Translator with our faith and prayers."

"On motion of Elder WILLIAM MARKS it was unanimously resolved that we sustain and uphold Aaron Smith as Counselor to First President by our faith and prayers."

"On motion of Elder WILLIAM MARKS, amended on motion of Elder John E. Page, it was resolved that the case of Elder Rigdon be laid over until the October conference for final action and in the meantime a delegation be sent to visit Elder Rigdon personally on the matter by appointment and under instructions of the First Presidency."

"President James J. Strang proposed the appointment of WILLIAM MARKS, President pro tempore of the High Priest's quorum, which, being put separately to the High Priests and the Conference at large, and unanimously approved, he was thereupon appointed."

MARKS APPOINTED BISHOP OF STRANGITE CHURCH.

"Voree Record"--Conference April 8th, 1846.

"The First Presidency presented WILLIAM MARKS for the office of BISHOP of the Church, and on motion of Apostle John E. Page, resolved unanimously (that he) be sustained."

MARKS APPOINTED AN APOSTLE, COUNSELOR AND PROPHET.

"Voree Record"--Conference August 26th, 1849.

"Brother WILLIAM MARKS was then ordained, consecrated and set apart as APOSTLE of the Lord, Jesus Christ, a Counselor to the Prophet, one of the First Presidency, and a PROPHET of the Most High God, under the hands of President STRANG and Adams."

WILLIAM MARKS ORDAINED TO ADMINISTER BAPTISMS FOR DEAD.

"Voree Record"--Conference of August 26th, 1849.

"Brother WILLIAM MARKS was anointed, ORDAINED and set apart to administer baptisms for the Dead, under the hands of Presidents STRANG and Adams. * * * The choir sang a hymn, after which eucharist was administered. The Conference then adjourned twenty minutes, to meet at the water's edge for the purpose of attending to baptisms, both for the living and the DEAD. Conference  assembled pursuant to adjournment. Eight were initiated into the Church by being baptized for a remission of their sins. After which large numbers were baptized for their deceased relatives. Adjourned."

REVELATION OF JAMES J. STRANG GIVEN JANUARY 7TH, 1849. "Hearken, O ye Saints, give ear, for the time to favor Zion is at hand, and the time of her redemption draweth near. Draw near unto me and learn, for the ways of men are foolishness before me. Behold ye shall be one, and if ye are not one, ye are none of mine. And ye shall all speak the same thing. Ye are cursed; ye are confounded because ye have many tongues like unto mystery Babylon; and many are running to and fro, speaking in their own wisdom, which is folly before me. * * * Behold my servant, WILLIAM MARKS, has gone far ASTRAY in departing from me, yet I will give unto him a little space, that he may return and receive my word, and stand in his place; for I remembered his works that he has done in the time that is past. If he will return and abide faithful, I will make him great, and his possessions shall be great, and he shall possess a city, and his children shall dwell therein; a nation shall call him blessed. * * *"

HE REPENTS.

"Voree Record"--Conference of August 25th, 1849.

"President MARKS arose and said he felt that he ought to make a confession to the Saints for NOT acting in his calling and also to ask their forgiveness. Gave a brief history of the course he had pursued after the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph, testified that he had ever had the fullest confidence in the work of the last days, and knew it was of God, and was now determined by the help of God to go forth in the discharge of HIS DUTY and act in the place in which he was called by revelation of God through his servant JAMES.

"President Geo. J. Adams remarked: He rejoiced with joy unspeakable to see an old Saint coming back willing to do his duty, spoke very highly of the former faithfulness of Brother Marks in the cause of God, how he had kept himself uncontaminated in the midst of the lustful and ungodly, and concluded by offering the following resolution, which was sustained unanimously: Resolved, that we will forgive Brother Marks and sustain him in his calling by our faith, confidence, and prayers."

LEAVES STRANG AND JOINS THOMPSON'S ORGANIZATION--HIS OWN STATEMENT.

"Epistle of WILLIAM MARKS, chief evangelical teacher of the school of faith to all the traveling teachers' quorums and classes of said school, and Jehovah's presbytery of Zion, Greeting:

"Beloved Brethren:--Having been chosen and ordained chief evangelical teacher of the school of faith in Jehovah's presbytery of Zion, it becomes my duty to say something by way of encouragement and also by way of instruction to those who are placed under my care and supervision; and first by way of encouragement, let me state what I know in reference to the work in which we are engaged. In order to do this, I must of necessity refer to my experience in the Church. I was a member of the Church some ten years before the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith. I was appointed President of the Stake in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1837, and continued in that office at Kirtland until the fall of 1838, when I was called by revelation to Farr West, Missouri, but before I arrived there the Saints were ordered to leave the state, and when the Stake was organized at Nauvoo, in the fall of 1839, I was appointed President thereof, and continued in that office up to the death of Joseph the Prophet. I always believed the work was of divine origin, and that Joseph Smith was called of God to establish the Church among the Gentiles. During my administration in the Church I saw and heard many things that was practiced and taught that I DID NOT BELIEVED BE OF GOD, but I continued to do and teach such principles as were plainly revealed as the law of the Church, for I thought that pure and holy principles only would have a tendency to benefit mankind, therefore, when the doctrine of polygamy was introduced into the Church as a principle of exaltation I took a decided stand against it, which stand rendered me quite unpopular with many of the leading ones of the Church." (Harbinger and Organ, Vol. 3, Pages 52-3-4, Year 1853.)

AGAIN IN 1853 MARKS WRITES TO THOMPSON.

"Shabbona Grove, DeKalk County, Feb. 17th, 1853.

"Brother C. B. Thompson,

"Dear Sir:--I have some good news to communicate * * * I organized a quorum at Batavia. James Blakeslie  was chosen chief, and Jehial Savage, teacher. I ordained them to their offices, and they said they had satisfactory evidence that the work is of God. I feel as though I was well paid. Bless and praise the Lord.

"Yours in the bond of the covenant,

"Signed William Marks."

WILLIAM MARKS SENT BY THOMPSON TO LOCATE A GATHERING PLACE.

The following appears in the "Harbinger and Organ" of Dec. 10th, 1853:

"St. Joseph, Mo., Aug. 24, 1852.

"Brother Thompson:--I embrace this opportunity to drop a few lines to you to let you know of our whereabouts. I arrived here with Brother Childs and on the 22nd of this month, found Brother Stephens and the most of his family sick; and he is not able to go with us. From what we can learn of the surrounding country here we think is will be very difficult to obtain a suitable LOCATION FOR THE SAINTS TO GATHER TO, near this place on account of the high price of land. We have agreed to start from here tomorrow morning to go north, probably to the Bluffs. * * * We shall write you again as soon as we find a location. * * *

"Signed William Marks."

MARKS CHANGES AGAIN AND JOINS JOHN E. PAGE'S ORGANIZATION.

The year 1855 finds him in a religions organization with John E. Page and others. (History of the Reorganized Church, Vol. 3, 724.)

ON JUNE 11TH, 1859, HE FINDS A PLACE IN THE "NEW ORGANIZATION."

On the above date he was received into this "Organization" subsequently called the "Reorganized Church" on his ORIGINAL baptism into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints. His ORIGINAL ordination was also accepted.

In the light of common sense and the following statement found in the "Saints Herald" (the official organ of the "Reorganization"), what of WILLIAM MARKS' authority? "WHENEVER INDIVIDUALS CLAIMING AUTHORITY
UNDER THE CHURCH AS ORGANIZED BY THE FIRST JOSEPH BECAME MEMBERS
OF ANY FACTION THEY IMMEDIATELY BECAME DIVESTED OF ALL AUTHORITY."
("Saints Herald," Vol. 4, No. 10, Page 158.)

Why did the "Reorganization" receive the Apostate Marks on his ORIGINAL baptism and ORIGINAL ordination after he had joined "The Strang faction," "The Thompson faction" "The Page faction" and "became divested of all authority" (as stated above)? And what of the authority of young Joseph who Was ordained under the hands of such men, WILLIAM
MARKS BEING MOUTH?

FOLLOWING IS THE STATEMENT OF THE PROPHET CONCERNING APOSTATES:

"An Apostate, or one who has been cut off the Church and wish to come in again, the law of the Church expressly says: That such shall repent and be baptized and be admitted as at first." (T. & S., Vol. 5, 752.)

RECORD OF ZENOS H. GURLEY.

ZENOS H. GURLEY was ordained a seventy in Nauvoo in 1844 under the direction of President Joseph Young. (Record in Historian's office, Salt Lake City.)

On April 6th, 1845, he was made the Senior President of the twenty-first quorum of Seventy. (Minutes of 21st quorum.)

THE PRESIDENT OF THE "REORGANIZATION" REPUDIATES AUTHORITY OF THE
MAN WHO ASSISTED IN HIS ORDINATION.

On the 31st of January, 1905, President of the "Reorganization" wrote the following to Elder Joseph F. Smith, Jr., relative to the limitation of the number of Seventy's quorums:

"There are no provisions as revelations as law to the Church for the organization of more than seven quorums of Seventy; for that reason we do not recognize as valid any of the ordinations in Nauvoo in 1844-5 beyond those of the first seven quorums; and our teaching is that the number is necessarily limited by direct provision of the law."

GURLEY ENDORSES THE COURSE OF THE CHURCH IN 1846.

(One month before the great Exodus then in preparation.) The Minutes of January 3rd, 1846 (21st quorum) say:

"Zenos H. Gurley enlarged on the subject of liberally donating to the Church necessity. 'God,' said he, 'had so shaped the scheme of salvation as that to be saved and appear approved of God, we must SACRIFICE OF ALL WE POSSESS.' * * * He felt filled with the spirit. THE
COURSE THE CHURCH IS PURSUING HAS BEEN SPOKEN OF BY JESUS CHRIST AND
THE HOLY PROPHETS OF OLDEN TIMES."

GURLEY RECEIVES HIS ENDOWMENT IN THE NAUVOO TEMPLE.

"ZENOS H. GURLEY arose and said that the Presidents of the quorum had RECEIVED THEIR ENDOWMENT. He observed that it was remarkable for an unusual outpouring of the Holy Spirit. He felt for the quorum that they should receive their endowment. The Church authorities, the quorum of seventy in succession, should furnish the people engaged in the endowment, one day each, and he wanted the quorum (21st) to acquit themselves from every obligation." (Minutes of quorum, Jan. 10, 1846.)

GURLEY ON TEMPLE WORK.

"President ZENOS H. GURLEY arose and said: * * * 'The business before the meeting was the arranging for the donation for the benefit of those of the Priesthood engaged in the Temple' (NOT ON THE TEMPLE, BUT IN THE TEMPLE). He beautifully observed that it was his design and also this Council's, to exalt the Twenty-first quorum and the quorum should reciprocally return the favors of the support and influence towards its welfare." (Minutes of the quorum, January 17th, 1846.)

"President ZENOS H. GURLEY arose and said that the business before the meeting (of the Twenty-first quorum) was to select persons to receive their ENDOWMENTS. He had received direction to select ten or twelve to GO IN THE TEMPLE. He desired the brethren not to think it partiality to make this selection. * * * The Saints who have passed through the trials of the Church were generally rooted and  grounded in love and have a witness in their hearts or they would not have remained." (Minutes of the Twenty-first quorum, January 25th, 1846.) It was ten days after he made this utterance that the Exodus of the main body of the Church began, and this is the last reference we have of ZENOS H. GURLEY while connected with the Church. What became of GURLEY? "Because he had not root he withered away."

JOINS THE STRANGITES--BECOMES AN ARDENT WORKER IMMEDIATELY.

ZENOS H. GURLEY writes to a Brother Cooper, Editor of the "Strangite Gospel Herald," under date of January 10th, 1850, from Pittsburg C. W ., relating an account of his labors in the STRANGITE CHURCH. He closes with these words:

"The brethren in this place, though young, are old enough to dream of BEAVER (meaning Beaver Island, Strang's headquarters). Are you going to BEAVER in the spring? is the inquiry of many of them. * * * But, thank God, if we do no more we are rightly paid for our trouble. One of the Prophets, speaking in reference to these times, says, 'a man shall be more precious than fine gold. Farewell.'" ("Gospel Herald," Page 274.)

ZENOS H. GURLEY writes to the "Gospel Herald" (Strangite organ) from St. Lawrence under date of March 15th, 1850:

"I am now in New York State in company with Brother Linnel, assisting Brother Silsby in organizing the brethren and helping them get ready for BEAVER. We expect seventy or one hundred. Will leave here in May for that place. I left Brother Wright on Monday last. * * *" ("Gospel Herald," Page 22.)

GURLEY RECEIVES AN APPOINTMENT AT STRANGITE CONFERENCE.

September 16th, 1851. Beaver Island.

"Moved and seconded that ZENOS H. GURLEY be appointed to preside over the branches in Western and Southern Wisconsin, west of Voree, by judicial appointment. Carried. * * *" (Record of Conference, pen written.)

GURLEY EXCOMMUNICATED FOR HERESY FROM STRANGITES.

"James Blakeslie dropped for HERESY and Jahie Savage for the same, and their Priesthood taken from them. ZENOS H. GURLEY, ALSO PRIESTHOOD TAKEN FROM HIM. * * *" (Voree Record--Conference at Enoch's Grove, Beaver Island, July 9, 1852.)

DOUBTS FOLLOWED AFTER EXCOMMUNICATION.

By 1851, after about five years of active service, he became convinced that James J. Strang was not a Servant of God. Manifestations followed which satisfied him that he should help organize another Church. Accordingly, he and Jason W. Briggs united their efforts and organized what is known as the "NEW ORGANIZATION," which subsequently emerged into the "Re-Organized Church," in 1860--16 years after the Martyrdom. Zenos H. Gurley, after following the Twelve Apostles as the presiding Quorum of the Church, and holding the position as Senior President of the Twenty-first Quorum of Seventy up to the time of the exodus of the Church from Nauvoo, in 1846, left the Church and joined James J. Strang, remaining with this organization until he and Briggs CREATED THE "NEW ORGANIZATION." In 1860 he assisted William Marks in ordaining the President of the "Reorganization." The question naturally arises, DID HE HAVE ANY AUTHORITY? We prefer to answer this question by simply quoting the statement found in the "Saints Herald," Vol. 4, Page 158.

"Whenever individuals claiming authority under THE CHURCH AS ORGANIZED BY THE FIRST JOSEPH became members of ANY FACTION, THEY IMMEDIATELY BECAME DIVESTED OF ALL AUTHORITY." ("Saints Herald," Vol 4, No. 10, Page 158.)

GURLEY'S DOUBTS FOLLOW HIS FAMILY.

Zenos H. Gurley ("an apostle") had been able to convert many to this organization, yet he was not satisfied in his own mind. In connection with Jason W. Briggs (founder of the "Reorganization), he forsook the Church they claimed had been built upon "revelations" from divers persons, ("Saints Herald" Vol. 33, Pages 248-249.) The reasons why these men withdrew from the "Reorganization" were as follows: That they could not believe in:

1st--"The literal gathering of the Church into Jackson and the adjoining counties in the State of Missouri (or any one or more places) known as a local Zion."

2d--"Temple building and ceremonial endowments therein."

3d--"Baptism for the dead."

4th--"Tithing as a law applicable to the Church."

5th--"The law of consecration by which individuals are made legal heirs to the Kingdom of Zion."

6th--"A sole mouthpiece of God to the Church."

7th--"The plenary inspiration of and consequent absolute authority of what are called the sacred books."

8th--"The doctrine of 'cursing our enemies,' and of 'avenging God upon them to the third and fourth generations.'"

9th--"To the foregoing may be added the revelation of January 19, 1841, Section 107 D. & C. (124, our edition), which enjoins upon the Church the building of a hotel, called the 'Lord's boarding-house,' for Joseph Smith and posterity to dwell in from generation to generation, as also the promise contained therein, viz.: 'And as I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say to my servant Joseph, in thee and in thy seed shall the kindreds of the earth be blessed.'"

"This, coupled with the provisions in Section 43, that 'none else should or could receive revelation for the Church, and the provision of Section 19, that the Church shall receive Joseph's words and commands the same as if from God's own mouth,--establish in our judgment a lineal descent of authority equivalent to an imperial dynasty, which is foreign to the spirit and genius of the Gospel of Christ.'"

JASON W. BRIGGS, ANOTHER FOUNDER OF THE "NEW ORGANIZATION."

Jason W. Briggs, who was really the founder of the "Reorganization" or who, perhaps, did more than any other man to bring about that sect, was born June 20th, 1821, at Pompey, Onondaga County, N. Y. It is said he joined the church at Potosi, Wis., about 1842, but we have no history of this man except as we get through the records of the "Reorganization." He remained with the church under the leadership of President Young and the Twelve until the year 1846. It is interesting to note in this regard that the exodus commenced February 4th, 1846, so we are quite safe in saying that this man was one of the "Fair weather friends."

JASON W. BRIGGS JOINS THE STRANGITES.

After the exodus Jason W. Briggs joined James J. Strang and in Jus organization labored in the ministry quite extensively (Reorganite History 3: 737), filling short missions to various parts of New York and in Wisconsin. In September of 1849, with B. G. Wright, he organized the Waukesha branch of Mr. Strang's church (Hist, of Reorganized Church 3: 737-8.)

ORDAINED A HIGH PRIEST BY JAMES J. STRANG.

"Resolved unanimously that JASON W. BRIGGS be ordained a High Priest. ORDINATION under the hands of President James J. Strang and WILLIAM MARKS, President of the stake at Nauvoo." ("Voree Record of Conferences," April 8th, 1846.)

FOLLOWING FROM THE "NORTHERN ISLANDER," JULY 31ST, 1851.

"The following letter was written in answer to one from Mr. Briggs of Wisconsin. His letter is too scurrilous to appear in print, therefore we publish only the reply of Mr. Bacon."

"Beaver Island, July 18th, 1851.

"Mr. Briggs:

"Sir: Some time since I received a letter from you in which you claim to take the liberty to write to me, on the ground that our acquaintance had been such as to forbid personal enmities; and, therefore, you would carry out the precept: 'Do unto others as you would have others do unto you;' and that I was less orthodox in the pretences of Strang, etc., than some others. * * * I will now notice the argument, powerful as it may be, which you assert you have found upon examination, touching the letter of appointment. But what examination can this be, in which you have found out that you spoke that which was not true? WHEN YOU
DECLARED IN PUBLIC CONGREGATIONS, AT YOUR OWN FIRESIDE, AND AT THE
FIRESIDE OF YOUR NEIGHBORS, that Joseph Smith wrote with his own hand the 'Letter of Appointment' (for you saw him in vision) AND YOUR
SURPRISE AND FAITH IN THE 'KNOCKING SPIRITS' OF NEW YORK, FROM THE FACT
THAT THEY (the spirits) ASSERTED THE SAME?"

BRIGGS STILL A STRANGITE IN 1848.

Jason W. Briggs represents the Beloit and Prairie branches of the Strangite Church at the Conference held in Voree, Wis., October 8th, 18-18. ("Voree Record of Conferences," pen written.)

BRIGGS JOINS WITH WILLIAM SMITH.

In 1850 Briggs left Mr. Strang's organisation and joined with William Smith, who had himself been a follower of Mr. Strang until excommunicated from that organization for the crime of adultery. In William Smith's Church Mr. Jason W. Briggs accepted the position of "APOSTLE," but at the time of the disintegration of Wm. Smith's Church in 1851, he withdrew, and in 1852 joined with Zenos H. Gurley. These two men organized this "NEW ORGANIZATION" today known as the "Reorganization."

BRIGGS FORSAKES THE CHURCH HE ORGANIZED.

Although Jason W. Briggs had received a Revelation as he alleges on the 15th of November, 1851, on the prairie some three miles from town of Beloit, Wis., declaring that Joseph Smith of the Reorganization should preside over the High Priesthood of the Church, etc., on March 28th, 1886, he severed his connection with the church he claimed was of divine origin and in conversation with Elder M. F. Cowley in the presence of President F. M. Lyman and Elder John W. Taylor in relation to his revelation he said: "I WOULDN'T LIKE TO CALL IT A REVELATION
NOW, BUT WE LEARN BY EXPERIENCE."

Reader, the above facts will be of service to you if you are interested in the Great Latter-day work instituted through Joseph Smith, the Prophet. However things may be elsewhere, on this earth truth is met everywhere by error. The false has its adherents as well as the true. Especially is this so in religion. Each individual must sift the grain from the chaff. To those who become earnest in this labor, God has promised help. But without effort, without faith, there is no return and men are allowed to settle into that condition which they are satisfied with. The positive search for the unadulterated plan of salvation is not usually made and many are deceived. For this reason most men do not know the pure truth about religion. In the question before us we have the principle of  AUTHORITY to consider, PUT
WHAT FOLLOWS TO THE ABOVE TEST.

In the economy of God's work is found a Holy Priesthood through which He deals with mankind.

Without this Priesthood the Church of God cannot exist for there would be no one authorized to do the work.

The Ancients, those who wrote the Bible, and others, held this Priesthood. Christ conferred it upon the APOSTLES, Seventies, etc.

The world fell into spiritual darkness and hundreds of religions sprang up after this Priesthood was taken away.

When the time came for the Restoration of the Gospel it was necessary that this Priesthood be restored, Peter, James and John (the ancient Apostles) being sent to confer the authority they held upon the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Joseph Smith, the Prophet, conferred it upon others.

At the time of the death of the Prophet the church was thoroughly organized with twelve apostles, etc., who held the same authority the Twelve held in the days of Christ, and to whom the Lord said in the year 1837:

"For unto you (the TWELVE) and those (The First Presidency) who are appointed with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the Power of this PRIESTHOOD given for the last days and for the time in the which is the dispensation of the fullness of times." D. & C., Section 112: 30.

And again:

"The Twelve traveling Counselors are called to be The Twelve Apostles or Special Witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world; thus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling. And they form a quorum EQUAL IN AUTHORITY AND POWER to the three Presidents previously mentioned." D. & C., Section 107: 23-4.

Now, then, notwithstanding the church had such a commission and such power, we are told by some that the church fell away immediately after the death of the Prophet, and that the three men (Marks, Gurley and Briggs) whose record we have given above, and who were never even members of any general presiding quorum, were able to apostatize, join one man made church after another, be ordained to positions in those churches, and then possess AUTHORITY enough to ordain a man a Prophet, Seer and Revelator and earthly head of the Church of God.

In conclusion, we wish to say that there is but One at a time who holds the keys and the right to receive revelation for the church, and that man is the President of the Church. When the First Presidency is disorganised through the death of the President, then, according to revelation, the TWELVE APOSTLES become the presiding quorum of the church, and then if the Lord has any revelations to give to His people they will come through the proper channel--the President of the Twelve.

When we see this man, or that man, or perhaps that woman or child giving revelations as was the case with the "Reorganisation," when JASON W. BRIGGS, ZENOS H. GURLEY, HENRY H. DEAM, or the daughter of Zenos H. Gurley, received "revelations" bearing on the organization of their cult or the regulation of the Church, we will know assuredly that these things are not of God.

    "The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it
    is founded upon wisdom; it is a heavenly banner; it is like a great
    tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded
    from the burning rays of an inclement sun; and Mormons as well as
    Presbyterians, and every other denomination, have equal rights to
    partake of the fruits of this great tree of our national liberty."

    --Joseph Smith, The Prophet.

IS BELIEF ALONE SUFFICIENT?

ELDER J. H. PAUL.

There is a very large class of professed Christians who maintain that if an individual does no more than simply believe in Christ, he will be saved eternally in God's Kingdom of glory. We do not purpose to disparage the value of belief or faith, for these principles occupy a very important position in the plan of human redemption; but it is the design to show that the doctrine which predicates salvation upon belief only is erroneous, and consequently dangerous.

The evangelist writes: "And this is eternal life, that they might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou has sent" (John xvii: 3). Conjoin this statement with another passage of Scripture, which reads thus: "And hereby do we know that we know Him, if we keep His commandments. He that saith, I know Him, and keepeth not His commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in Him" (1 John ii: 3, 4).

The teachings of these Scriptures are--First: No one can be saved, or obtain eternal life, without a knowledge of God, and of Christ. Second: Those who fail to keep the commandments of the Savior do not possess a knowledge of God; and hence the conclusion is inevitable that there is no salvation without obedience to the Gospel laws and ordinances. This conclusion is in direct harmony with the statements of the Apostle Paul, who says: "And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of His power" (2 Thess. i: 7, 8, 9). Again: "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you" (Matt, xxviii: 19, 20). Thus the disciples were sent forth with a mission to convert all nations if possible, and they were instructed to enjoin upon those who became Christians obedience to "all things whatsoever" Christ gave as commandments to the  early Apostles. His language is so comprehensive that no command can be omitted.

"Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham" (Gal. iii: 7). But, "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham" (John viii: 39). Here it is substantially stated that those who have Christian faith are adopted into the family of Abraham, thus becoming his children; but this privilege is accorded to those only who do the works of Abraham. How this ancient Patriarch obtained the right to be called the "Father of the Faithful" is thus set forth: "Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws" (Gen. xxvi: 5). These were the works of Abraham, and those who are counted worthy to belong to his family, or to the "household of faith," must also obey God's voice, and keep His charge, commandments, statutes and laws. According to Scripture, no evasion of this requirement is possible; for those who are Abraham's children obey the commandments of God.

St. James speaks to the point under consideration thus:

    "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your
    own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he
    is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: for he
    beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth
    what manner of man he was. But whoso looketh into the perfect
    law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful
    hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his
    deed." (James i: 22-25).

Now, what is the "word?" St. Peter answers this question decisively: "Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever. . . . But the word of the Lord endureth for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you" (1 Peter i: 23, 25).

Thus we learn that the Gospel is the word of God, and it "liveth and abideth for ever." Whosoever, therefore, is not a doer of the Gospel requirements is deceiving himself. Notice how particularly the Apostle states that the blessings of the Gospel, or the perfect law of liberty, are obtained by doing the work enjoined by it.

St. Paul writes: "But ye, brethren, be not weary of well doing. And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed" (2 Thess. iii: 13, 14). The "word" referred to in St. Paul's epistle was, for instance, that the Saints should not become "weary in well doing," and he directed that those who  would not obey this commandment should be excluded from the company of Christians. It is folly for us to suppose that those who disqualify themselves for association with Saints on earth by neglecting to keep the commandments of the Lord, are fitted for the company of God, angels and saints in heaven.

"Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God; and every one that loveth Him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of Him. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep His commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep His commandments, and His commandments are not grievous" (1 John v: 1-3). This same writer further says: "We know that we have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death" (1 John iii: 14). There is, according to this last Scripture, not eternal life, but death abiding in the soul of every one who does not love the brethren; and the first quotation assures us that where there is such a love, there is also obedience to the commandments of God. We cannot dissever these things, for the Almighty has joined them together. It follows, from the Scriptures just considered, that those who fail to obey God's Gospel commandments are abiding in death, not in life.

In conformity with the direct declarations of the Scriptures which have been produced, showing that the commandments of God must be obeyed, we observe that the doctrine of obedience to the law is practically enforced. The Lord expresses condemnation of those whose works are not satisfactory. For instance:

    "And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write: These things
    saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars;
    I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art
    dead. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain that
    are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before
    God . . . And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write:
    These things saith He that is holy, ... I know thy works; behold I
    have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it; for thou
    hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied
    my name." (Rev. iii: 1, 2, 7, 8).

The judgment of the Lord is herein clearly founded upon the "works" in these two churches. The first one whose works were imperfect was dead; the second had an open door set before it because it had kept the word of the Lord. What the Lord thus spoke to the Churches collectively must apply to the individuals comprising the society, and hence those who shall have an open door (into heaven) set before them must keep the commandments of God. In these cases God proceeded  on the principle referred to in the writings of St. James, that faith is manifested by works (James ii: 18, etc.). The following passage is also pertinent in this connection: "For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth nothing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love" (Gal. v: 6). The plain proposition herein affirmed is that nothing avails in Christ Jesus but a "faith which worketh." It must operate in or by love; it is manifested by works. If it is not, it avails nothing, being dead. God measures faith by works--by the keeping of His commandments.

The following Scripture is very decisive:

    "When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, and all the holy
    angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory:
    and before Him shall be gathered all nations: and He shall separate
    them one from another, as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the
    goats: and He shall set the sheep on His right hand, but the goats
    on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on His right hand,
    Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
    you from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and
    ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a
    stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick,
    and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then
    shall the righteous answer Him, saying, Lord, when we saw Thee an
    hungered, and fed Thee? or thirsty, and gave Thee drink? when saw
    we Thee a stranger, and took Thee in? or naked, and clothed Thee?
    or when saw we Thee sick, or in prison, and came unto Thee? And
    the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you,
    inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
    brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall He say also unto them
    on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
    prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was an hungered, and
    ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was
    a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not:
    sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also
    answer Him, saying, Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or athirst,
    or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not
    minister unto Thee? Then shall He answer them, saying, Verily I say
    unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these,
    ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into everlasting
    punishment: but the righteous into life eternal" (Matt. xxv: 31-46).

This scene, joyous on the one hand, but dark and terrible as death on the other, is a plain revelation of the principle which shall prevail in the court of heaven at the great day of judgment. Those whom the Savior calls cursed, and whom He overwhelms with everlasting punishment, are not permitted to plead justification by their belief alone. It is an awful question of practical godliness, of righteous works. The devils themselves believe and tremble, and those who do no more must take up their miserable abode with them. Such is the decree of Almighty God. The teachings of Scripture are as plain as they can be expressed in human language, that those who do not manifest their faith by godly works are under condemnation. We learn further from the Scriptures that the righteous works specially mentioned in the foregoing quotation are not the only ones required to entitle a person to eternal life. For instance: "And when He was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to Him, and asked Him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? And Jesus said unto him . . . Thou knowest the commandments: Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father and mother. And he answered and said unto Him, Master, all these I have observed from my youth. Then Jesus beholding him, loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me" (Mark x: 17-21).

A plain question was thus propounded, and it was definitely answered. Christ insisted upon a keeping of the commandments of God; we are to follow Him--to do as He did, that is, devote our lives to doing the will of the Father. The Savior assured His questioner that such was the way to inherit eternal life. This doctrine is pointedly put in Matthew xix: 17, thus: "But if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments."

Again: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" (Mark xvi: 16).

Now, all men believe in the truth of the doctrine taught in the text just quoted, or they do not. If they do not, they cannot believe in Christ as a Being who is full of "grace and truth," as the Scripture asserts. If we admit for a moment that He comes short in the principle of truth, we shatter at once the very foundation of belief and confidence, and doubt is the inevitable result. If Christ's word is doubted, there is no confidence in Him. It follows, therefore, that those who do not believe in the truth of the text do not believe in Christ. But all concede that without this belief no one can obtain eternal life. Those who do believe the truth of the text cannot say that belief alone is sufficient for salvation, since it is expressly stated that "he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." Christ's own statement respecting the matter is final with all those that believe in Him.

The following Scriptures are submitted:

    "And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
    say?" (Luke vi: 46). "But He said, yea, rather, blessed are they
    that hear the word of God, and keep it" (Luke xi: 28). "And this
    is the commandment, that we should believe on the name of His Son
    Jesus Christ, and love one another, as He gave us commandment. And
    he that keepeth His commandments dwelleth in Him, and He in him"
    (1 John iii: 23, 24). "If ye love me, keep my commandments. He
    that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth
    me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
    love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John xiv: 15, 21).
    "Though He were a Son, yet learned He obedience by things which He
    suffered; and being made perfect, He became the author of eternal
    salvation unto all them that obey Him" (Heb. v: 8, 9). "What doth
    it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have
    not works? Can faith save him?" (James ii: 14). "He that saith he
    abideth in Him ought himself also so to walk, even as He walked" (1
    John ii: 6). "But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without
    works is dead? Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when
    he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith
    wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect? And
    the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and
    it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the
    Friend of God. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified,
    and not by faith only. Likewise, also, was not Rahab the harlot
    justified by works, when she had received the messengers, and had
    sent them out another way? For as the body without the spirit is
    dead, so faith without works is dead also" (James ii: 20-26).
    "Blessed are they that do His commandments, that they may have
    right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
    the city" (Rev. xxii: 14).

    "Meddle not with any man for his religion; for all governments
    ought to permit every man to enjoy his religion unmolested. No man
    is authorized to take away life in consequence of difference of
    religion, which all laws and governments ought to protect."

    --Joseph Smith.

THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

ITS RELIGION, HISTORY, CONDITION AND DESTINY. BY JAMES H. ANDERSON, OF
SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH. 1902.

    A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
    tree bring forth good fruit.--Matt. vii, 18.

Of the religious denominations now in existence among men, none have attracted such attention from the others as the organization known as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the members of which are popularly, though erroneously, called "Mormons," because of their belief in the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon, a record of the ancient inhabitants of America. In every nation where the fame of this Church has spread, and where its Elders have appeared to teach their faith, one feature which stands preeminent is the bitterness with which they are opposed, without even the opportunity of being heard, principally by professed believers in Christianity.

Some there are who are practical in their adherence to the doctrine of religious toleration, and whose expansive minds lead them to refrain from passing judgment till they hear the case fairly stated. They hesitate to follow popular clamor, preferring to ascertain the truth for themselves, rather than give assent to the voice of prejudice and bigotry which demanded the life of Jesus of Nazareth because He claimed to be the Son of God. But these are the exception; the rule has been to accept without question assertions made against the Latter-day Saints, and to decline to listen to anything in the way of denial or justification. With this prominent fact before us, it is beyond dispute that to this organization above all others in this generation must be applied the saying, "For as concerning this sect, we know that everywhere it is spoken against."

Doubtless much of this antagonism is due to ignorance of the true belief, aims and condition of the Latter-day Saints. Certainly it is largely because of gross misrepresentations by  those who have constituted themselves their enemies. The reason for assuming this position can be left for explanation to those who occupy it. The purpose of the present occasion is not to consider that branch of the subject, but rather to present the doctrines believed in by the Latter-day Saints, and the reason for that belief. The limited time at our disposal will admit of only a brief exposition of those doctrines; all who are desirous of more elaborate explanation may obtain it from the published works of the Church, and from its Elders, who will be pleased to present to investigators the Gospel message which they are proclaiming to the world. The present opportunity is sufficient for but an abridged statement, in plain and simple language, of the religious system under consideration.

This Church presents no formula of religious dogmas. Its creed is: The direct revelation of God to His children. As He is without variableness, and is no respecter of persons, so His laws are unchangeable; and whatsoever He gives by the voice of revelation is a law unto the Saints. The organization of this Church was effected at Fayette, New York, on Sunday, the sixth day of April, 1830. Shortly after this event, its presiding Apostle and Prophet, Joseph Smith, was asked for a concise statement of what he and his people believed, and in reply he wrote the following:

ARTICLES OF FAITH OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.

    1. We believe in God, the Eternal Father, and in His Son, Jesus
    Christ, and in the Holy Ghost.

    2. We believe that men will be punished for their own sins and not
    for Adam's transgression.

    3. We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may
    be saved, by obedience to the laws, and ordinances of the Gospel.

    4. We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the
    Gospel are: First, Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; second,
    Repentance; third, Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins;
    fourth, Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

    5. We believe that a man must be called of God by "prophecy, and by
    the laying on of hands," by those who are in authority, to preach
    the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof.

    6. We believe in the same organization that existed in the
    primitive Church, viz: Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers,
    Evangelists, etc.

     7. We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation,
    visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc.

    8. We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is
    translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the
    word of God.

    9. We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now
    reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and
    important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

    10. We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the
    restoration of the Ten Tribes. That Zion will be built upon this
    continent. That Christ will reign personally upon the earth, and
    that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisaic glory.

    11. We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according
    to the dictates of our conscience, and allow all men the same
    privilege, let them worship how, where or what they may.

    12. We believe in being subjects to kings, presidents, rulers and
    magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law.

    13. We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous,
    and in doing good to all men; indeed we may say that we follow the
    admonition of Paul, "We believe all things, we hope all things,"
    we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all
    things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely or of good report or
    praiseworthy, we seek after these things.

The position taken by the Prophet Joseph Smith and those who have given heed to the doctrines he presented is that they have no new system of religion to offer to the world, but that their message is the fulness of the everlasting Gospel; the Gospel which Paul said was "the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believeth;" the Gospel of which the Bible bears record, and which the Lord Jesus Christ and His disciples taught as the commandment of God to His children. While they testify that it is a new revelation to them in this dispensation, "the latter days," and that they received through heavenly messengers sent from the throne of the great Jehovah all the knowledge they possess of the plan of salvation, and also the authority to preach the Gospel and administer in its ordinances, they point out that it is the same Gospel and divine message that was revealed to man in ancient days; the "one faith" of which Paul spake to the Ephesians; the Everlasting Gospel, the plan instituted by God for the salvation of His children--unchangeable, eternal, and transcendently perfect.

Upon this presentation of the case, then, are they to be judged. They thus place every principle or doctrine within the field of comparison with the Holy Scriptures, both in the Old and the New Testament.

THE GODHEAD.

The first of the Articles of Faith declares a belief "in God the Eternal Father, and in His Son Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost." That is, that the Father is a personage of spirit, glory and power, possessing all perfection and fulness; the Son a personage of tabernacle also, who is the express image of His Father, and possesses the same fulness with the Father, in whose image also man is created; and the Holy Ghost, that which bears record of the Father and the Son, the life-giving element in all nature, the agent of God's power, by which, through faith, all things are controlled. These three constitute the Supreme governing power, the Godhead, and are one--above all, and in all, and through all--omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent.

The idea thus set forth is that in form man is the image of his Creator. The Bible contains no suggestion of a similarity in form with any of the other creations of the Almighty. But with respect to man it is distinctly expressed in Genesis i: 26, 27: "And God said, Let us make man in our own image, after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. So God created man in His own image; in the image of God created He him; male and female created He them."

Paul, in writing of God, says that Jesus was the "express image of His person" (Hebrews i: 3), being "in the form of God" (Phil. ii: 6). In the record which Matthew has made of the Lord's baptism, he describes the action of the three who constitute the Godhead: Jesus receiving the baptism of water, the "Spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting upon Him," and a voice--the voice of the Father--uttering from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt, iii: 16, 17). The Redeemer of the world Himself testifies of their individuality: "For as the Father hath life in Himself; so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself; and hath given Him authority to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of man" (John v: 26, 27); "Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I" (John xiv: 28); "Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will  send him unto you" (John xviii: 7); "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the Father, He shall testify of me" (John xv: 26).

In the solemn prayer offered up before His betrayal, the Divine Master besought His Father, in behalf of His disciples, "That they all may be one; as Thou, Father, art in me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that Thou hast sent me. And the glory which Thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one" (John xvii: 21, 22). The unity of purpose and action in all things constitutes the oneness. This union Jesus sought to bring to His Apostles, that, each having his distinct personality, they might be one, "even as we are one."

MEN JUDGED BY THEIR WORKS.

"We believe that men will be punished for their own sins, and not for Adam's transgression."

By this transgression death came into the world, that men might gain the experience of a mortal probation. But that man should be held responsible for an act in which he had no agency would evidently be an injustice. Our Father, being a just God, must therefore deal justly with His children. What is the doctrine of the Scriptures respecting the responsibility of men? In Jeremiah xvii: 10, it is announced: "I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings." As the laws of truth and justice are inflexible in their operation and effect, judgment as certainly follows evil as blessings result from good deeds.

The beloved Apostle, in recording his vision of the judgment, tells us: "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man according to their works" (Rev. xx: 12, 13). Language can be no plainer to inform mankind of the evidence that will be adduced for or against them at the judgment-seat of Christ. It will be their deeds; and from the judgment they will make no appeal, for they cannot but realize its justice.

By the divine law, man is answerable for his own sins.

He is not compelled to bear the wrongs of another in the reward which he will receive at God's judgment. The transgression of Adam was not ours, and can have no ill effects upon us; it rather becomes a blessing by the mercy of Jehovah. The Latter-day Saints believe that, as by Adam death came into the world, without our action, so is life the free gift to all men, through the atonement of the Lord Jesus. This is the doctrine of the Bible. Paul expresses it thus: "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life" (Romans v: 12, 18). The Lord has permitted no doubt to remain respecting the sins for which men will be punished and the good for which they will be rewarded. His word is: "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels; and then He shall reward every man according to his works" (Matt. xvi: 27). The testimony which He gave to John the Divine on the Isle of Patmos was: "I will give every one of you according to your works" (Rev. ii: 23). "And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be" (Rev. xxii: 12).

THE ATONEMENT.

"We believe that through the atonement of Christ all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel."

By this atonement is brought the victory over death; the resurrection of the body to life; the raising of man to a position where he is not subject to death. But it goes farther in the article of faith read. It brings salvation by obedience to the Gospel. Salvation, then, is more than a redemption from the fall. The latter comes to man without his agency, so far as the mere restoration to life is concerned. That is the doctrine which the Apostles taught: "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. xv: 21, 22). Since the Savior brought to pass the resurrection and the life, His atonement has a universal application, and "there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust" (Acts xxiv: 15).

Does the atonement do more? The Latter-day Saints reply in the affirmative. Matthew (chap. i: 21) records that the  angel declared to Joseph, when foretelling the birth of the infant Jesus, "For He shall save His people from their sins." The Apostle Peter says: "Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts iv: 12). By obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel, salvation comes to man; it is that which is added to the children of men by the atoning blood of the Redeemer, when the requirements of His Gospel are complied with. Until this is done, there is no salvation from sin. The Apostle John makes this unequivocal declaration: "This then is the message which we have heard of Him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth; but if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all sin" (1 John i: 5, 7). If we would be cleansed from all sin by the blood of Christ Jesus, the condition is that "we walk in the light as He is in the light." If this be not our course, the Apostle says, "we lie and do not the truth." To these teachings is placed the seal and testimony of the Divine Master Himself, in His sermon on the mount: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven" (Matt. vii: 21). "In vain do ye worship me," said He to those who followed the tradition of men instead of keeping "the commandment of God" (Mark vii: 7, 8).

THE GOSPEL ORDINANCES--FAITH.

"We believe that the first principles and ordinances of the Gospel are: First--Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ."

The principle of faith is the moving cause of all action in intelligent beings. Faith in the Lord is the fundamental principle leading to obedience to His will. It is the assurance which we have of unseen things. By its exercise we are alone able to approach the throne of grace. "Without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." (Heb. xi: 6). It is not a mere passive belief; but being a principle of action and power, it inculcates works in harmony with itself. The Savior says: "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the  works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go unto my Father" (John xiv: 1, 12).

It is the belief of the Latter-day Saints that the Gospel is the working law of Christ; that faith in Him, to have life, must be accompanied by works in accord with the mental exercise of faith. As the Apostle James says: "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves" (i: 22). This Apostle writes, "For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also;" and in the second chapter of his epistle (verse 14-24) he states: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? Can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect? And the scripture was fulfilled which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and he was called the Friend of God. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only."

The Lord said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment" (Matt, xxii: 37, 38). He also explains what it is to love God: "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John xiv: 21). This is faith in and love of God: keeping His commandments.

REPENTANCE.

"Second--Repentance."

To those who, on the day of Pentecost, believed on the Apostles' words, and had awakened within their hearts faith in the Lord Jesus, Peter gave the law of the Gospel: "Repent,  and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call" (Acts ii: 38, 39). This law was universal in its application. It was "to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call."

When John the Baptist came in the wilderness of Judea, as the messenger before the Lord, preaching "the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God," he proclaimed, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand" (Matt. iii: 2). Of those who presented themselves for baptism he required conformity to the doctrine which preceded it. If they had not repented, the ordinance of baptism was refused to them. When many of the Pharisees and Sadducees came, he called them a "generation of vipers," and demanded that they "bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance" (Matt. iii: 7, 8). God "commandeth all men everywhere to repent"--to turn from evil and walk in righteousness, for therein only is salvation. The Lord says, "Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish" (Luke xiii: 3).

BAPTISM.

"Third--Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins." To the repentant believer this is the "baptism of repentance for the remission of sins" taught by John the Baptist (Mark i: 4). On the day of Pentecost, Peter pointed the way to salvation, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (Acts ii: 38). When the jailer sought to be saved, Paul and Silas "spake unto him the word of the Lord," and he "was baptized, he and all his, straightway" (Acts xvi: 30-33).

So important is this ordinance for admission into the Church of God, that the Lord Jesus insisted on receiving it at the hands of John the Baptist, who was authorized to administer it. John had preached that there should come after him One who should baptize "with the Holy Ghost and with fire," and when Jesus presented Himself on Jordan's banks, the Prophet recognized that mightier One. He felt his own weakness in the presence of the Son of God, and said, "I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?" But Jesus knew the law of God. He knew that it was necessary for even the Son of Man to enter at the door, and obey the ordinance which His Father had appointed. Therefore He answered  John, "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" (Matt. iii: 15). Then the Savior of the world went down into the river Jordan, and was baptized of John. When He came out of the water, there was given that glorious manifestation of the approval by His Father of the act of submission to the divine law, "and lo, the heavens were opened unto Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon Him: and lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt. iii: 16, 17).

If it was necessary for the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world, to receive the ordinance of baptism at the hands of one having authority to administer it, that He might "fulfil all righteousness," wherein can sinful man hope to enter by any other way? And when that act of obedience to law on the part of the Divine Master was signalized by the glorious descent upon Him of the Holy Ghost, and brought forth from the Eternal Father the solemn declaration that He was well pleased with the Son who had just passed through the baptism of water, who among men dare say that the ordinance is vain, and useless, and non-essential; that it is not of paramount importance to those who would do the will of the Father?

The Lord also declared that the baptism of John was "the counsel of God"--this ordinance that was "the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." Said Jesus: "All the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John; but the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him" (Luke vii: 29, 30). As the Lord went forth in His ministry, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, there came to Him Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. To him Jesus said: "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John iii: 3). Nicodemus did not fully comprehend this saying, and made further inquiry, receiving a reply in language that none need misunderstand: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (John iii: 5). Therefore, when the Master commissioned His disciples and sent them out, after they had been "endowed with power from on high," the command which they received and obeyed was: "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world" (Matt, xxviii: 19, 20).

In this labor of the ministry, to which they had been called and ordained of the Lord, He fulfilled His promise, and was with them: "And they went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following" (Mark xvi: 20). The Apostles taught: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (Acts ii: 38); "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death? Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection" (Romans vi: 3-5); "Buried with Him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with Him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised Him from the dead" (Col. ii: 12). Here, then, is the Gospel doctrine: Baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, performed by one having authority; the birth, the burial, the planting in the watery element, without which ordinance the Lord has said that no man can enter the kingdom of heaven.

BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD.

It may be suggested that there are millions of the human family who have not had the opportunity of receiving of the baptism of repentance by one having divine authority--millions who never even heard of the name of Jesus Christ. The Latter-day Saints believe that the Gospel provides for all; that there is and can be no exception; that every one who will may partake of the waters of life freely; that God is no respecter of persons, but judges men by their works. A plan of salvation that is adapted to the few, that does not open the door to every being within the great brotherhood of man, is unworthy of the Creator and God of the universe. The Gospel of the Lord must be perfect, even as He is perfect, and reach to all humanity.

The query is made, How did the thief who died on the cross enter the Kingdom of Heaven; there is no record of his baptism? Let the Scriptures give the answer: "And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke xxiii: 42, 43). The Lord did not say he could enter His Kingdom, for He told Nicodemus that to do that is was necessary to be "born of the water and of the Spirit;" but He promised the penitent thief that on that day he should be with Him in paradise. Is that not heaven? Let us examine and see, for on the proper ascertainment of this fact depends a great principle of truth.

The body of Jesus was three days in the tomb, when the spirit again entered into it. When the Redeemer had risen, Mary came to the sepulchre and found that the body of her Master was not there. She began to inquire, when she heard a voice which she recognized as that of the Lord, to whom she turned. "Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God" (John xx: 17). Here is the testimony of Jesus Himself, that during the three days subsequent to His crucifixion, while His body lay in the tomb, His spirit did not go to heaven or the presence of His Father. Logically, it must follow, neither did that of the thief.

Where, then, did He go? As Jesus was not in His Father's presence during these three days, where was He? The Scriptures have not left us in doubt upon this point. Jesus transferred to Peter the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and placed him at the head of the Twelve Apostles. Surely he is a competent witness; he says: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison" (1 Peter iii: 18, 19). During the time of His absence from the body He was preaching "unto the spirits in prison"--the place where the thief also went.

This doctrine of preaching the Gospel to the dead was taught by the Lord to His Apostles, just previous to His crucifixion: "Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice" (John v: 25, 28). On the same subject, the chief Apostle says: "For for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit" (1 Peter iv: 6).

The dead are to be "judged according to men in the flesh;" and, as the Lord has declared that "except a man be born of the water and of the Spirit" he cannot enter the Kingdom, what shall the dead who "hear the voice of the Son of God" do? Is the Gospel plan imperfect in that it does not provide a way  for those who have had no opportunity to receive that birth? God forbid. Such an injustice cannot be. Paul, writing to the Corinthians respecting the resurrection, says: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why then are they baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor. xv: 29). The answer is complete: The dead may be officiated for by those who dwell in the flesh.

This is the doctrine of salvation for the dead, an important part of the glorious Gospel that is as broad as the universe, and from everlasting to everlasting. By receiving the baptism for the dead, those who have passed into the spirit world have opened to them the door of the Kingdom of Heaven. "But one man cannot act in the place of another," is the suggestion that comes. The objector has surely forgotten, or has not contemplated the great truth that the whole Gospel plan taught in the Scriptures rests upon the vicarious atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ.

THE HOLY GHOST.

"Fourth--Laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost."

When the Apostle Peter preached to those who sought salvation, he said: "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call" (Acts ii: 38, 39). Here is the offer to all of this blessed boon, the gift of the Holy Ghost, after baptism for the remission of sins. It was to them, and their children, and to all that are afar off. There was no exclusiveness in this; the Gospel was open to all. By conforming to its laws, men receive the benefits of their own obedience. It is the great natural order of cause and effect. Comply with the conditions, the result must follow. The sincerely repentant believer, baptized in the proper manner, and by an authorized servant of God, is entitled to the gift of the Holy Ghost as a matter of right.

How is he to receive it? Just as did the baptized believers under the ministry of the Apostles: "Now, when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: (for as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy  Ghost" (Acts viii: 14-17); "through laying on of the Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given" (v. 18). The Ephesians also "were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues and prophesied" (Acts xix: 5,6).

Of the office of the Holy Ghost the Lord says: "Howbeit when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you" (John xvi: 13, 14). Here is the promise of guidance and revelation by the Holy Ghost. Its gifts are wisdom, knowledge, faith, healing, working of miracles, discernment of spirits, divers kinds of tongues, etc. (1 Cor. xii: 4-11). Wherever the Holy Ghost is bestowed, there are its gifts and graces manifest.

DIVINE AUTHORITY.

"We believe that a man must be called of God, by 'prophecy, and by the laying on of hands,' by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof."

The testimony of Scripture upon this is that Jesus "ordained twelve, that they should be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach, and to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils" (Mark iii: 14, 15). To His Apostles He said: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you shall ask of the Father in my name, He may give it you" (John xv: 16); and of them, in praying to His Father, He testified: "As Thou has sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world" (John xvii: 18). His Father had sent Him and had "given Him authority," and in like manner He gave authority to His Apostles. They in turn commissioned others to act in the ministry--"they ordained them Elders in every church" (Acts xiv: 23). As Paul has said, "No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron" (Heb. v: 4). Aaron was called by the voice of God, through Moses (Exodus iv: 14, 15).

The acts of those who are authorized to officiate in the ordinances of the Gospel--to whom are committed the keys of the Kingdom--are recognized by the Lord, and are given full force. "Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be  loosed in heaven" (Matt, xvi: 19). But those not authorized receive no such recognition.

OFFICERS.

"We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive Church, viz.: Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Evangelists, etc."

The Apostle Paul taught that there was "one Lord, one faith, one baptism," and said of the Redeemer, "Wherefore He saith, when He ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And He gave some, Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and some, Pastors and Teachers" (Eph. iv: 8, 11). He also preached: "Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues" (1 Cor. xii: 27, 28).

God set these in the Church, is the Apostle's testimony. Shall man say that they are not proper? The Lord has never changed the organization; on the contrary, these officers were given "for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive" (Eph. iv: 12-14).

Is there work for the ministry? Are the Saints yet to be perfected? Are we still far from the unity of the faith? Are we less than the stature of the fulness of Christ in the knowledge of God? With the present spectacle of jarring sects, religious discords, and disputations of doctrines, no intelligent person would venture to give other than an affirmative reply to these inquiries. There is evidently abundant work for the ministry, and therefore a necessity for Apostles, Prophets, and all the officers that God has set in His Church. Wherever that Church is organized upon the earth, there will these officers be found, with all the authority, gifts and powers that accompany the offices. The church which has them not is not the Church of Christ, according to the evidence presented by the word of God.

SPIRITUAL GIFTS.

"We believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, etc."

These are the gifts of the Spirit, which Christ promised should follow the believers. They are the signs which confirmed the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles: "And He said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, He was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following" (Mark xvi: 15-20).

Of these are the miracles wrought by our Lord and Savior. God hath set in the Church "miracles, gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues" (1 Cor. xii: 26). Never at any time has He said they should be done away. He is an unchangeable being, a God of miracles to-day as much as at any period of the world's history. He cannot be otherwise and still occupy His exalted position. He cannot be shorn of His power to manifest the gifts of His Spirit among the children of men, when the latter comply with His laws. His arm is not shortened, or His power to save diminished. If miracles, and healings, and prophecy, and the other gifts of the Spirit do not exist among men, it is for the same reason that in ancient days the Lord Jesus, in "His own country," "could do no mighty work, save that He laid His hands on a few sick folk, and healed them," namely, "because of their unbelief" (Mark vi: 6, 7).

Those who dwell on the earth to-day are equally the children of our Father with those who lived nineteen centuries ago, and have an equal claim on His blessings if they observe His laws and exercise the same faith in Him as did His disciples anciently. "For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off," said Peter, in his proclamation of the Gospel, of which Paul said, "But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed" (Gal. i: 8).

THE APOSTASY.

The Latter-day Saints believe that but for the apostasy of the primitive Christian Church, it would have remained with the same organization, powers and ordinances; with Apostles, Prophets, healings, miracles, and all the gifts of the Spirit, up to the present time. That these ceased to exist among men is proof that there has been a departure from the Gospel. If the organization had remained it would have been in the same form as God placed it, and the true successors to the Apostles would have followed their example when they filled the vacancy made in the Twelve by Judas's apostasy--by selecting Matthias to be numbered with the Apostles (Acts i: 26). But there was no succession to the Twelve through the generations which succeeded them, therefore the organization ceased to exist among men.

If there was to be an event of such importance in the world's history as a great apostasy, surely the disciples would have had an intimation of it through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. By reference to their writings we find that they had this knowledge, and prophesied concerning it. Paul wrote to Timothy that the time would come when men would not endure sound doctrine, but would heap to themselves teachers, and turn away from the truth. (2 Tim. iv: 3, 4). He also taught that in the last days perilous times should come, when men should be "lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof" (2 Tim. iii: 1-5).

To the Thessalonians was borne this testimony respecting the great apostasy: "Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto Him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way" (2 Thess. ii: 1-7). The "mystery of iniquity" was making its influence felt at that early day. Paul had warned  the people of what was coming; as he says, "When I was yet with you I told you these things."

In the record of the vision given to the Apostle John, which he says was "the revelation of Jesus Christ," we are informed that John was shown "things which shall be hereafter." Of one of the beasts which he saw as typical of a power which should rise up in the earth, it is said, "And it was given to him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations" (Rev. xiii: 7).

This is some of the scriptural evidence concerning the great power which was to deceive the nations of the earth and pervert the Gospel by teaching men and women that Apostles and Prophets were not necessary, and that the gifts of the Holy Ghost were done away, till Christendom has been brought to the apostate condition in which it is to-day. So complete was the work of this "mystery of iniquity," of the beast that "made war with the Saints and overcame them," that it was necessary for an angel to be sent from heaven with the Gospel message for mankind. John says of this event: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people" (Rev. xiv: 6).

THE BOOK OF MORMON.

"We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is translated correctly; we also believe the Book of Mormon to be the word of God."

For people who believe the Bible to be the word of God to also believe that another record is His word, the two must be consistent with each other. There can be no conflict between them. For both to be the word of God, they must be divinely inspired, and their teachings be in perfect harmony. While it would by no means be certain that a record which has passed through so many hands as have the Bible manuscripts, with a loss of some, at least, of the sacred writings, would contain a reference to another record which was to be made by a separate branch of the House of Israel, yet it would not be unreasonable to hope that possibly an allusion to it might be found in some of the prophetic writings.

This hope is not without foundation with respect to the Book of Mormon, which is a history of a part of the House of Israel, on the American continent. The Prophet Ezekiel says:  "The word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the House of Israel his companions: and join them one to another into one stick: and they shall become one in thine hand. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not show unto us what thou meanest by these? Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God: Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and they shall be one in mine hand" (Ezekiel xxxvii: 15-19).

The "stick of Judah" is the record which we have of the Jews--the Bible; the "stick of Ephraim" is the other record, which we have in the Book of Mormon; and both records have become one in the hand of the Lord. Hosea says that to Ephraim had been written the great things of the law (Hosea xiii: 12), and the Savior informed His disciples of others that He must visit: "And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd" (John x: 16). These other sheep were to hear His voice--to receive a personal visit from Him.

The history of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is, briefly stated, that its existence and whereabouts were revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith by an angel sent from heaven. This angel said his name was Moroni, and that in the year A.D. 420 he had buried the sacred record in the hill Cumorah, which is located in the northern part of the State of New York. After Joseph had received several visits and had been instructed by the heavenly messenger, the plates were entrusted to his care, with a Urim and Thummim for their translation. Each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long, and not quite as thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume, as the leaves of a book, with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of it being sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small and beautifully engraved. The whole book exhibited many marks of antiquity in its construction, and much skill in the art of engraving. The Urim and Thummim consisted of two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate. The unsealed portion of the plates was  translated, and the whole were again taken charge of by the angel. The part which had been translated was published early in 1830, as the Book of Mormon, according to the command of God. It is an abridgment made by the Prophet Mormon, father of Moroni, from the records of his forefathers. On the title page is this statement:

    Wherefore it is an abridgment of the record of the people of
    Nephi, and also of the Lamanites; written to the Lamanites who are
    a remnant of the house of Israel; and also to Jew and Gentile:
    written by way of commandment, and also by the Spirit of prophecy
    and of revelation. Written and sealed up, and hid up unto the Lord,
    that they might not be destroyed; to come forth by the gift and
    power of God unto the interpretation thereof; sealed by the hand of
    Moroni, and hid up unto the Lord, to come forth in due time by the
    way of Gentile; the interpretation thereof by the gift of God.

    An abridgment taken from the book of Ether also; which is a record
    of the people of Jared; who were scattered at the time the Lord
    confounded the language of the people when they were building a
    tower to get to heaven; which is to shew unto the remnant of the
    House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their
    fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that
    they are not cast off forever; and also to the convincing of
    the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the CHRIST, the ETERNAL GOD,
    manifesting Himself unto all nations. And now if there are faults,
    they are the mistakes of men: wherefore condemn not the things of
    God, that ye may be found spotless at the judgment-seat of Christ.

Several persons were permitted to view the plates, among the number being the "Three Witnesses," who thus testify of what they saw and heard:

    The Testimony of Three Witnesses.--Be it known unto all nations,
    kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that
    we, through the grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
    have seen the plates which contain this record, which is a record
    of the people of Nephi, and also of the Lamanites, their brethren,
    and also of the people of Jared, who came from the tower of which
    hath been spoken; and we also know that they have been translated
    by the gift and the power of God, for His voice hath declared it
    unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true. And
    we also testify that we have seen the engravings which are upon
    the plates; and they have been shewn unto us by the power of God,
    and not of man. And we declare with words of soberness, that an
    angel of God came down from heaven, and he brought and laid before
    our eyes, that we beheld and saw the plates, and the engravings
    thereon; and we know that it is by the grace of God the Father, and
    our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld and bear record that these
    things are true; and it is marvellous in our eyes, nevertheless the
    voice of the Lord commanded us that we should bear record of it;
    wherefore, to be obedient unto the commandments of God, we bear
    testimony of these things. And we know that if we are faithful in
    Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be
    found spotless  before the judgment-seat of Christ, and shall
    dwell with Him eternally in the heavens. And the honor be to the
    Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, which is one God.
    Amen.

    Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris.

From that testimony they never varied. They were separated from the Latter-day Saints, having departed from the Church, to which they belonged for a time after its organization. But nothing could induce them to change their statement. It was true, and they knew it. In their old age Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris returned to the Church. David Whitmer never did. He was the last to survive, his death having occurred in January, 1888, at Richmond, Missouri. When on his deathbed he called his family and friends around him, and made to them a solemn declaration that he knew the Book of Mormon, and his testimony thereto, to be true.

Eight others also testify as follows:

    The Testimony of Eight Witnesses.--Be it known unto all nations,
    kindreds, tongues, and people unto whom this work shall come, that
    Joseph Smith, Jun., the translator of this work, has shewn unto us
    the plates of which hath been spoken, which have the appearance of
    gold; and as many of the leaves as the said Smith has translated,
    we did handle with our hands; and we also saw the engravings
    thereon, all of which has the appearance of ancient work, and
    of curious workmanship. And this we bear record with words of
    soberness, that the saith Smith has shewn unto us, for we have
    seen and hefted, and know of a surety that the said Smith has got
    the plates of which we have spoken. And we give our names unto the
    world, to witness unto the world that which we have seen, and we
    lie not, God bearing witness of it.

    Christian Whitmer, Hiram Page, Jacob Whitmer, Joseph Smith, Sen.,
    Peter Whitmer, Jun., Hyrum Smith, John Whitmer, Samuel H. Smith.

Like the three, they never faltered in maintaining that what they had subscribed to respecting the Book of Mormon was the truth, and was with them an absolute knowledge.

Of further evidence concerning the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, there is in this sketch an opportunity of saying but little. Regarding the external proof, it must suffice to merely call attention to the developments of archaeological research on the American continent. When the Book of Mormon was first published it was the accepted theory of the civilized world that  America was not peopled by any nation of ancient times which had made marked progress in civilization. But subsequently, from the appearance of Captain Dupaix's book in 1834-5, followed by the evidence of Lord Kingsborough, Stevens and Catherwood, Powell, and other well-known archaeologists and explorers, a change came with respect to this matter, until now there is no doubt of the advanced position reached by ancient American civilization, as well as of the great antiquity of the native American races. The ruined temples and crumbling palaces of the ancient cities of Uxmal, Copan, Palenque, Quiche, and scores of others, whose architecture rivals that of any contemporaneous cities of the Old World, bear silent but incontrovertible testimony to the historical truth of the Book of Mormon.

With internal evidence of its divine authenticity, the volume is amply provided. It presents a code of ethics whose purity and godliness are unexcelled by any publication that has seen the light of day. In its pages there are no anachronisms and no contradictions. The various writers are in perfect accord. Compared with the great truths of science and nature, there are no absurdities and no inconsistencies. Between it and the Bible there is complete harmony in doctrine and in prophecy. It is a book that would be profitable reading to any thoughtful person. No intelligent, honest and sincere seeker after truth can give it thorough examination and consideration, with an understanding of the circumstances under which it was brought forth, without being convinced that in giving to the world the Book of Mormon, God has wrought one of the greatest miracles of any age or time.

REVELATION.

"We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the kingdom of God."

When the Lord promised His disciples the Holy Ghost, He informed them that it would teach them all things (John xiv: 20); "He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you" (John xvi: 14). This was a direct promise of revelation through the medium of the Holy Ghost, therefore belief in revelation is a scriptural doctrine. It is the communication to men of knowledge from God: "Howbeit. when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come, He will guide you into all truth: for He shall not speak of Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He speak; and He will show you things to come" (John  xvi: 13). This is the word of the Lord--that the Holy Ghost should reveal things to come. The same condition which caused the withdrawal of the other gifts of the Spirit also caused the withdrawal of the gift of revelation. It was because of the apostasy--the unbelief of man. Never has the Lord said that He would reveal no more to the children of men. But He has forbidden men to add to or take from that which He reveals (Rev. xxii: 18, 19). Whenever the Almighty has authorized servants upon the earth, there is with them the gift of revelation. "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but He revealeth His secret unto His servants the Prophets" (Amos iii: 7). The Apostle says that if a man lacks wisdom, and asks in faith for God to bestow it on him, He will do so liberally (James i: 5, 6).

RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL.

The tidings which the Latter-day Saints bear to the world are, that the Gospel has been restored to earth in this dispensation; that the present is the time of which Paul wrote, "that in the dispensation of the fulness of times He might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth; even in Him" (Eph. i: 10). It is this restoration which John the Revelator saw in vision on the Isle of Patmos, and of which he says: "And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come: and worship Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters" (Rev. xiv: 6, 7).

The Latter-day Saints testify that this angel has appeared, and has restored the Gospel, which is now being preached to the nations. It is the same now as anciently, with all the gifts, powers and blessings. Nothing is lacking. It is presented to all people for their consideration. The most thorough investigation is invited. There is nothing to conceal or hold back. It is not the province of the Gospel to put its light under a bushel, but to entreat all men to come forward and test its truth. "Prove all things; hold fast that which is good," was the admonition of the Apostle Paul; the same invitation is extended to-day.

Men are given intelligence; they are in possession of reasoning power. It is an insult to Deity to say that He forbids us to use these in seeking for knowledge. He asks for intelligent  conformity to the eternal laws of truth, not for blind obedience to the dogmas of men. He has given to man his free agency. As expressed in the hymn:

  "Know this, that every soul is free
  To choose his life and what he'll be;
  For this eternal truth is given,
  That God will force no man to heaven.

  "He'll call, persuade, direct aright--
  Bless him with wisdom, love and light--
  In nameless ways be good and kind,
  But never force the human mind.

  "Freedom and reason make us men;
  Take these away, what are we then?
  Mere animals, and just as well
  The beasts may think of heaven or hell."

This free agency was recognized by the Divine Master who said to the Jews, "Search the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me" (John v: 39). To this testimony and counsel of the Lord the Latter-day Saints direct attention.

OTHER DOCTRINES.

Of the other principles believed in by the Latter-day Saints there is not upon this occasion opportunity to speak at length. These are: The gathering of Israel; the Restoration of the Ten Tribes; the support of Earthly Governments for the Protection of Human Rights; the Building up of Zion and Rebuilding of Jerusalem; the Resurrection; the Second Coming of Christ to reign as Lord of lords and King of kings--all of which are doctrines of the Bible, as clearly maintained in its teachings as those which have been spoken of.

The Latter-day Saints believe--indeed testify that they know they are fulfilling the predicted gathering of Israel in the last days by the command and power of God; that their gathering on the American continent is upon the land of Zion, the land of Joseph, whose blessings have prevailed "unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills" (Gen. xlix: 26); that the mountain of the house of the Lord is "established in the top of the mountains" (Micah iv: 1). With implicit faith that the Lord will confirm their testimony, they declare that He has sent His messenger before Him in latter days, to prepare the way for His coming (Mala. iii: 1).

It may be well to refer to their ordinance of marriage, of which there appears to be such a misunderstanding in the world. This can be briefly stated. The Latter-day Saints believe  that marriage is ordained of God; that He has revealed to them its everlasting covenant; that when the ceremony is performed by His authority, the union of husband and wife is eternal--that it is bound on earth and bound in the heavens. "And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder" (Mark x: 8, 9). It is a covenant that is entered into voluntarily by the parties; there can be no compulsion in this, or in any of the ordinances of the Gospel.

With the Latter-day Saints the principle of celestial marriage is the union of husband and wife for time and eternity. They believe the family relation exists in the celestial kingdom of God. They also have pronounced views upon the purpose of the union of the sexes. They do not believe that its object is the gratification of passion, but that such an idea is wicked in its inception and damning in its practice. They believe that a departure from the paths of virtue is punishable by the severest penalties, and that the violation of the marriage covenant is an offense which ranks next to the crime of murder.

A GLANCE AT HISTORY.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was born at Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont, U. S. A., December 23, 1805, his father being a farmer. In the spring of the year 1820, when Joseph was a little over fourteen years of age, he became deeply interested in religious matters. He read the passage in James i: 5: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him." With full reliance upon that promise in the Divine Word, this humble lad prayed to God and received the heavenly manifestation. He continued faithful and was instructed by messengers from heaven, and received and brought forth the Book of Mormon. When these facts became known to the people in the vicinity of where he resided, he was made the object of false and slanderous reports, and severe persecutions. Many attempts were made to kill him, and every device was used to get the plates from him; but the Lord protected him, and people began to believe his testimony. In 1829, John the Baptist came and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood; in the same year the Apostles Peter, James and John ordained him to the Apostleship.

In obedience to the command of God, the Church of Jesus Christ was once more organized on the earth, with the promise from the Lord that it would never again be taken from among  men; that it was restored preparatory to the ushering in of Christ's millennial reign on earth. Some of its members were ordained and sent out to preach. Those who received their testimony and were baptized were filled with the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and the word was confirmed with signs following. The Church rapidly increased in membership, and branches were organized in many of the States. A Temple was erected in Kirtland, Ohio. The State of Missouri became the principal place for the gathering of the people; but because they would not join in the practices of the lawless element there, and were believers in an unpopular religion, an organized mob drove them from their habitations, contrary to law, justice and humanity, to wander on the bleak prairies, in wintry weather, till they left the tracks of their bleeding feet on the frozen ground. Men, women and children were subjected to the most fiendish outrages--starved, tortured, butchered. This was in a land that boasted of religious freedom and tolerance!

Finally, about twelve thousand who had escaped the exterminating order of Missouri's mob found a resting place in Illinois, and built up the beautiful city of Nauvoo. But the refuge was only temporary, for the bigot and the criminal united in a relentless and bloody warfare upon them. Less than six years after their expulsion from Missouri, their Prophet was assassinated in Carthage jail, while in the hands of the officers of the law, and under the pledged protection of the governor of the State, Thomas Ford. This was on June 27, 1844. Joseph Smith had committed no offense; he was guilty of no wrong. "The law cannot reach him, but powder and ball shall!" was the cry of his murderers. The blood of the martyred Prophet and his fellow-religionists still cries to God for vengeance!

The enemies of the Saints, however, were doomed to disappointment, for the death of the Prophet did not stop the work, or break up the Church organization. The leadership devolved on the Twelve Apostles, with Brigham Young as their President; even greater energy was displayed than before, and the Temple at Nauvoo was soon completed. Fiendish plots were laid, and barbarous plans adopted to blacken the character of the "Mormon" people, and make them appear abominable in the eyes of the public. Numerous atrocities were committed by the mobocrats, who falsely attributed them to the Saints, and thus aroused public indignation against them.

Hoping to secure immunity from these unjustifiable attacks, they consented to move from the State, the mob agreeing to  allow them to remain in peace a given time, so the exodus could be accomplished. This agreement was soon disregarded by the persecutors, who were reckless, and impatient to despoil the Saints. When a portion of the latter had left Nauvoo, the remnant was attacked by an armed force, and driven into Iowa in a destitute condition. General Thomas L. Kane, of Philadelphia, who passed that way a few days afterward, related his experience in a lecture before the Historical Society of Pennsylvania. The following is an extract from his address: "Dreadful, indeed, was the suffering of these forsaken beings; bowed and cramped by cold and sunburn, alternating as each weary day and night dragged on, they were, almost all of them, the crippled victims of disease. They were there because they had no homes, nor hospital, nor poor-house, nor friends to offer them any. They could not satisfy the feeble cravings of their sick; they had not bread to quiet the fractious hunger-cries of their children. Mothers and babes, daughters and grandparents, all of them alike, were bivouacked in tatters, wanting even covering to comfort those whom the sick shivers of fever were searching to the marrow. These were Mormons, famishing in Lee County, Iowa, in the fourth week of the month of September, in the year of our Lord 1846. The city--it was Nauvoo, Illinois. The Mormons were the owners of that city, and the smiling country around. And those who had stopped their plows, who had silenced their hammers, their axes, their shuttles, and their workshop wheels; those who had put out their fires, who had eaten their food, spoiled their orchards, and trampled under foot their thousands of acres of unharvested bread--these were the keepers of their dwellings, the carousers in their Temple, whose drunken riot insulted the ears of their dying."

Out into the trackless American wilds, into an Indian country, the "Mormons" wended their way, weary and destitute, for more than fifteen hundred miles, their pathway being marked by the graves of their dead. The history of their privations and sufferings is harrowing in the extreme. The lives of not less than a thousand of their number were sacrificed in the relentless persecutions connected with the exodus from Illinois. But God opened their way, and as a result of their unity, humility and faith through severe tribulations and deep sorrows, they were guided to a refuge in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. Three years later, in 1850, Congress created the Territory of Utah. Under the territorial form of government, the governor, secretary, judges, marshals, postmasters, election and other territorial officers, are appointed by the President of the United States.

In their new home, the Saints increased in numbers and were beginning to enjoy some of the comforts of life, as a reward of their toil, when, in 1857, the national government was induced, through the misrepresentations of some of its officials, to send an army against the "Mormons," who prepared for another exodus, and to defend themselves. But the time required in such an undertaking gave the government an opportunity to discover that it had been misled and to change its course. The record of the expedition, with its expenditure of twenty millions of dollars, stands as a monument of the folly of judging a matter hastily.

The current of popular opinion, however, had set in strongly against the Saints, and it is difficult to change it; but the majority of those with whom they are now in contact are not the lawless element of Missouri and Illinois, so that the violence of former times is no longer used against the body of the people where they are known. But the adverse feeling caused legislation hostile to them. They bowed to the law, content to leave the issue between those who raised their hands against them and the God of Israel, in whose justice, mercy and omnipotence they have perfect confidence. Their Church property was seized by the government--property which was the voluntary gift of Church members, for the support of the poor, the building of Temples, and similar purposes. But with a better understanding of the motives and lives of the Saints, the government recognized the great wrong done, and sought to right it. The forfeited property not wasted in litigation was restored, adverse legislation ceased, friendliness superseded an unjust, mistaken antagonism, and in 1896 Utah was admitted to statehood.

PRESENT CONDITION.

The results of the industry, integrity and thrift of the Saints, as shown by their present condition, are a complete refutation of the accusations of evil made against them. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Utah, the chief centre of their gathering place, has a population of 270,000, seventy-five per cent, being "Mormons." Ninety percent of the heads of families live in their own houses and on their own lands. The fruitful orchards, rich fields and farms, successful industries and beautiful cities, towns and villages, present to the view a paradise upon earth; while the vigor and cheerfulness of old and middle-aged and young betoken the health, prosperity and happiness which are God's own gifts to this people, in whose hearts dwells more abundantly than in those  of any other community that love of God and of their fellow men which is the fruit of a pure and noble life in the service of the great Creator.

Not alone in Utah do the Latter-day Saints find a home. Their hundreds of settlements bedeck the mountain valleys from the province of Alberta, in Canada, through Montana, Oregon, Idaho, Nevada, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico, in the United States, to Chihuahua, in Old Mexico, on either side of a line which reaches fifteen hundred miles along the backbone of the American continent.

As an ecclesiastical organization, the first officers in the Church are divinely commissioned Apostles of the Lord Jesus, and divine authority is possessed by the whole body of Priesthood, down to the office of Deacon. Almost the entire male membership of the Church is included in this classification; while there are organizations for the women and children. Over four hundred districts, or wards, are united in larger organizations called Stakes of Zion, all combining in a perfect system.

FUTURE DESTINY.

The Saints have an abiding faith in the future glorious destiny of the work in which they are engaged. From its inception there has been steady and rapid progress. Its Elders have carried the glad tidings to the nations as God has given them strength. They have not preached for money nor divined for hire. Freely they have received; freely they give. Persecution has followed those who have obeyed the Gospel, just as it did anciently. But with each wave of adversity the Church has grown stronger, and its opponents have been restricted in their ability to inflict injuries on its members. Each successive blow of its foes has fallen more lightly than the one which preceded it; while the Saints have been brightened and made better by the experience gained in drawing nearer to the Lord. No Latter-day Saint has any doubt of the ultimate triumph of the principles he has received in the Gospel. They form the plan of life, the power of God unto salvation. The Church is organized never again to be overcome. Its destiny is to continue to increase until its Founder and Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, will establish His eternal kingdom, and righteousness shall rule from the rivers to the ends of the earth.

THE GOSPEL MESSAGE.

The purpose of the Gospel is to lead us back to God, improved by the knowledge and experience we have gained.  There is no truth in any department of life that is without its pale; no knowledge that is beyond its reach. Its truth is the sum of all existence, the knowledge of things that have been, that are, and that will be. God is truth, and His Gospel is the plan whereby we may be saved in His presence. This is the doctrine that our Lord and Savior taught; this is the message given to the Latter-day Saints, and which they proclaim to the world. They call upon all men to repent and do the will of God. They invite sincere seekers after truth everywhere. They present to the world an example of the marvelous power of the Gospel they have obeyed. By their fruits they show its effects. They have solved the problem of a happy, prosperous and contented life, free from sin and sorrow, from poverty and idleness, from hatred and hypocrisy. They present to the rest of mankind the example of a people who put into practice their belief in being honest, industrious, true, chaste, benevolent, and in doing good to all men. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report, or praiseworthy, they seek after those things.

To all men they bear the message of the Gospel which has made them thus. They leave no room for deceit and delusion. They claim to have divine authority and divine principles, and they offer the proof, which is in the reach of every true, honest, virtuous man and woman. It is the test which the Lord has commanded them to proffer to mankind, the same that He applied to Himself: "My doctrine is not mine, but His that sent me. If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John vii: 16, 17).

There can be no mistake about it, for if it be not of God, He will not give the knowledge. But tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints bear witness that they have received the testimony from Him. It is true, and we bear you witness now of its truth. Hereby we know that we know Him, that we keep His commandments. The Apostle John says: "Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds" (2 John: 9-11).

That we do bring this doctrine, and that it is true, is the testimony which we now give, and which we will meet before  the pleasing bar of the Great Jehovah, the eternal judge of both quick and dead. And may the grace of God the Father, whose throne is high in the heavens, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who sitteth on the right hand of His power until all things shall become subject unto Him, be and abide forever with those who seek to serve Him in spirit and in truth. Amen.

    "When the day comes in which the Kingdom of God will bear rule,
    the flag of the United States will proudly flutter unsullied on
    the flagstaff of liberty and equal rights, without a spot to sully
    its fair surface; the glorious flag our fathers have bequeathed to
    us will then be unfurled to the breeze by those who have power to
    hoist it aloft and defend its sanctity."

    --Brigham Young.

    "How consoling to the mourners, when they are called to part with
    a husband, wife, father, mother, child or dear relative, to know
    that although the earthly tabernacle is laid down and dissolved,
    they shall rise again to dwell in everlasting burnings in immortal
    glory, not to sorrow, suffer or die any more; but they shall be
    heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ."

    --Joseph Smith, The Prophet.

A WORD ABOUT SUCCESSION. (1907.)

(From Saturday's "News.")

A correspondent writing from Parker, Idaho, requests a reply, through the columns of the "News," to the question, by whom was President Young ordained to the presidency of the Church? It appears that the emissaries of the Reorganite faction have discovered in that question a fruitful source of sophistical controversy, and that they are triumphantly asking it wherever they go.

The proper reply is, he was ordained by the Prophet Joseph to that calling, when the Prophet, prompted by the Holy Spirit, conferred upon the Twelve Apostles the power and authority he himself had received. The following statement of facts by Elder Joseph F. Smith, Jr., can be verified by the authentic records of the Church:

The Prophet Joseph earnestly desired that his brother Hyrum should live to succeed him in the presidency of the Church. In the year 1841, by command of the Lord, he ordained him to this exalted position, as is quite evident from the following, section 124, verses 94-5, of the Doctrine and Covenants:

    And from this time forth I appoint unto him (Hyrum Smith) that he
    may be a Prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my Church as
    well as my servant Joseph.

    That he may act in concert also with my servant Joseph, and that he
    shall receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto
    him the keys whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with
    the same blessing and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts
    of the priesthood, that once were put upon him that was my servant
    Oliver Cowdery.

From this revelation we learn that the Lord appointed Hyrum Smith both as Patriarch and to act in concert with his brother Joseph in the presidency of the Church. In accordance with this revelation, Hyrum was so ordained January 24, 1841. This was not in the sense of a counselor to  Joseph, for at this very appointment Hyrum was removed as counselor to the president, and William Law was ordained in his stead.

Joseph and Hyrum continued to so act from this time forth until their martyrdom, June 27, 1844. Shortly before the martyrdom the Prophet tried with all his power to persuade Hyrum not to accompany him to Carthage, knowing full well the fate that awaited them there. Had Hyrum stayed behind and thereby remained in mortality, he would, by virtue of his position and ordination received in 1841, have become the president of the Church. His brother intended that this should be (Times and Seasons 5: 683), but through his faithfulness to, and love for, his brother, Hyrum fell a martyr before the Prophet Joseph did.

Now mark! The Lord, who knew that Hyrum should receive a martyr's crown at Carthage, in the winter of 1843-4, commanded the Prophet to confer upon the heads of the twelve Apostles every key, power and principle that the Lord had sealed upon his head. The Prophet declared that he knew not why, but the Lord commanded him to endow the twelve with these keys and priesthood, and after it was done, he rejoiced very much, saying in substance, "Now, if they kill me, you have all the keys and all the ordinances and you can confer them upon others and the powers of Satan will not be able to tear down the kingdom as fast as you will be able to build it up, and upon your shoulders will the responsibility of leading this people rest." (Times and Seasons 5: 651.)

In this manner the Prophet ordained the twelve Apostles, which body constitutes the second quorum of the Church, equal in authority with the first presidency. Doc. and Cov. 107: 23-24, with the keys of the kingdom. Brigham Young was president of the twelve, and upon him devolved the duty of presiding.

Therefore, after the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, the twelve assumed, by authority of their office, the duty to preside over the Church. Later, when through revelation the quorum of the first presidency was reorganized with three presidents--Brigham Young and Counselors Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, they claimed, and rightfully, that since they were ordained under the hands of Joseph Smith and from him had received all the keys and powers of the priesthood which the Prophet held, it would have been superfluous to have been ordained again. They were in this capacity, however, sustained by the unanimous vote of the Saints,  which was essential to make such ordination of force in the Church.

There is an abundance of testimony to prove that the Prophet did so ordain the twelve, some of which can be found in the Times and Seasons, volume 5, pages, 561, 664 and 698; also in the Millennial Star, volume 10, page 115.

We repeat that Brigham Young received all the keys, powers, authority and priesthood, that were held by Joseph Smith, that enabled him to preside over the high priesthood, from the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo in the winter of 1843-4.

This important question was settled long ago by the entire body of the Saints who accepted the leadership of the twelve, after the departure of the Prophet and Patriarch, and sustained President Young in his office. It was settled by the approval of the Almighty of the marvelous work he accomplished, and which could not have been done without divine aid and guidance. To ascribe the mighty deeds Brigham Young performed through the power of the divine Spirit which rested upon him, to the spirit that is the originator of secession, rebellion, apostasy, and falsehood, is to come dangerously near blasphemy. What is it but a repetition of the sin of the adversaries of our Lord, who, although they knew that "no man can do the miracles that Thou doest, except God be with him (John, 3: 2); yet proclaimed to the people: "He hath an unclean spirit." (Mark 3: 30.) What is it but to assail the disciple with a weapon that was in vain directed against the Master? There was some excuse for difference of opinion on the subject of succession, immediately after the martyrdom, because the people were not in possession of full information, but there is no excuse now. To use a familiar illustration: At the time of an election citizens are expected to have different opinions as to candidates for office; they are expected to work for those whose views and principles they support. But when the question is settled at the polls, loyalty demands that all accept the verdict and work together for the common interests of the community. The body of the Latter-day Saints having accepted, as guided by the Holy Spirit, the leadership of the twelve, there was no longer any valid reason for seeking the leadership of other shepherds.

The trouble with some of our reorganized brethren is that they look upon the members of the Church as a flock of sheep, that, like other property, can be inherited. This is entirely contrary to the fundamental principles of the Gospel. The Church belongs to Christ. The leaders and officers are the servants of the Lord and the people of the Lord. It follows  that the Lord raises up whoever He pleases, to perform the services necessary from time to time. Brigham Young was every way equipped for the peculiar work needed during his time. Who could have done what he did? Sidney Rigdon? Lyman Wight? James J. Strang? Or the founders of the so-called reorganized church? Let the reader reflect on the facts history records, and then decide for himself, remembering that every tree is known by its fruit.

    "Love is one of the chief characteristics of Deity, and ought to
    be manifested by those who aspire to be the sons of God, A man
    filled with the love of God is not content with blessing his family
    alone, but ranges through the whole world, anxious to bless the
    whole human race."

    --Joseph Smith.

    "If children have sinned against their parents, or husbands
    against their wives, or wives against their husbands, let them
    confess their faults one to another and forgive each other, and
    there let the confession stop, and then let them ask pardon from
    their God. Confess your sins to whoever you have sinned against,
    and let it stop there."

    --Brigham Young.

THE GOSPEL PIONEER.

BY WM. JEFFERIES, AN ELDER OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY
SAINTS.

  FAITH.

  Faith is the key to knowledge rare,
  God's choice and priceless gift to man;
  It is obtained by humble prayer
  And practice of the gospel plan.
  It opes the door to secrets deep--
  Communes with God in nature's sleep.
  Prevails with God, till mortal man
  The glory of the Lord can scan.

A thorough knowledge of the first principles is absolutely essential to the acquirement of a complete understanding of any art or science. For example: How can the student of arithmetic extract the cube root of any given number, or find the fifth power of another, without a knowledge of the first or key principles of the science of numbers? Now, if this is true of the arts and sciences, which, in the abstract, do not tend, directly, to save a person in the presence of God, how much more is it true in regard to the great science of theology, which must be well understood and faithfully practiced, to a given extent, in order to become a joint-heir with Jesus to the glory of the Father? And what science more important than this great science of all sciences? None. And a knowledge of its first principles ranks higher in importance to mortals than any other knowledge attainable by Adam's fallen race; for a knowledge of them, and honest obedience to them, together with subsequent faithfulness, will secure a person a knowledge of the Father and the Son, whom to know is life eternal--the greatest gift of God to man. Hence the great importance of a thorough knowledge of the first principles of the great science of salvation, which I will now make a feeble attempt to briefly explain.

The first initiatory principle of the glorious plan of salvation  is faith. The Apostle Paul thus defines this principle: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Heb. xi, 1.) Modern inspiration defines it thus: "Faith is the assurance which men have of the existence of things which they have not seen, and the principle of action in all intelligent beings." (Doc. & Cov. Lec. I, Sec. i., 9.) And the substance of these quotations--between which there is no conflict--I understand to be this: Faith is the assurance which men have of the existence of things not seen by them in the past, of the existence of things unseen by them at present, of the existence of things to be seen or unseen by them in the future, and the great first cause, or moving principle of action, and consequently, of power, in all intelligent beings, whether they are mortal or immortal. Now do not be startled, kind reader, at this explanation. The great apostle to the Gentiles says. "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God." (Heb. xi, 3.) This is plain. Who framed the world? God, of course; and Paul says He did it through faith; therefore, the assertion is correct, that faith is the principle of action and power in all intelligent beings whether they are mortal or immortal.

Faith is produced by evidence. This is true of a false faith as well as of a true faith. A false faith is the product of untrue or incorrect evidence, and a true faith is produced by truthful evidence; and, though there may be instances in which true evidence may fail to produce faith in the skeptical and unbelieving; and wherein false evidence may fail to create faith even in the over-credulous; yet when faith, be it true or false, is created, I reassert that it is produced by true or untrue evidence. In the attempt to inspire faith in these propositions, I will summon a few of the ancient worthies, who, like Abel, though dead, speak to us in their inspired testaments, giving us evidence which should be faith-creating.

When the Son of God tabernacled in the flesh, He went about doing good, healing the sick, cleansing the lepers, raising the dead, and doing many mighty works in fulfillment of the mission He was sent on by His Father; and while doing these things He was scoffed at, spit upon, reviled, and persecuted, and finally crucified on Calvary--suspended between Heaven and earth as though fit for neither. Bible-believers need no evidence adduced here to prove this, for the facts stated are plain and prominent in the New Testament scriptures, and are well known to them, no doubt.

On the day after the crucifixion, the Chief Priests and Pharisees felt somewhat troubled and anxious, and "came  together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, he is risen from the dead: so that the last error shall be worst than the first. Pilate said unto them, ye have a watch: go your way, make it as sure as you can. So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch." (Matt. xxvii, 62-66.)

How vain the schemes and operations of frail man! A few more hours pass away. The angel of the Lord came down from heaven, filled with the power of God, and armed with the keys of the resurrection. The watch which had been set, or the keepers, "became as dead men." The resurrection power of God was exercised. The lifeless, mangled body of the lowly Nazarene was celestialized. The active spirit, which had been on an important mission to the Antediluvians, entered its immortal house, and the triumphant Jesus came forth from the silent tomb, the first fruits of the resurrection, and the glorious conqueror of death, hell and the grave.

As soon as some of the watch had recovered sufficiently, they "came unto the city, and shewed unto the Chief Priests all the things that were done. And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, saying, say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept. And if this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you." So they took the money, and did as they were taught; and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day. (Matt. xxviii, 11-15.) And, according to the generally accepted chronology, Matthew wrote this account about five years after the events occurred.

Here prejudice, dishonesty and opposition to the purposes of Jehovah, prompted bribery, and bribery being assured protection from the human penalty for such a crime, published to the world a lie--a lie, too, respecting the most important event that had ever transpired upon this earth, as effecting the redemption of the fallen race of our great progenitor, Adam. Matthew says: "And this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day;" and I may add, to this day, too, for the Jews not only rejected the Messiah and put him to death, and subsequently believed the story of bribed and perjured Roman soldiers, but they still "deny the accomplishment of the prophecies in the person of Christ; alleging that the Messiah is not yet come;" and this also effects their belief in the first  resurrection, which is past, although, according to the thirteenth article of their creed, they believe there will be a "resurrection of the dead when God shall see fit."

This false evidence, given to the Jewish nation, produced in that tribe of Israel a false faith, which exists to-day, and which will continue to exist to a great extent among them, with all its dire consequences, till He shall come in power and glory and "stand upon the mount of Olives;" (Zech. xiv, 4.) and they shall "look upon" Him whom their fore-fathers "pierced;" (Zech. xii, 10.) and the inquiry shall be made: "What are those wounds in thine hands?" And he shall inform them that those were the wounds "with which he was wounded in the house of His friends." (Zech. xiii, 6.)

In view of these things how necessary it is that tradition should be truth. In the beginning the Lord said: "In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die;" and the serpent said: "Ye shall not surely die;" and both declarations went to posterity, some believing one and some the other. At the resurrection of the Son of God, the soldiers said: "His disciples stole him while we slept," and many believed them. Others said: "He rose again and ascended to His Father," and a few believed this testimony; and I will now introduce an illustration of this true evidence and true faith.

The Son of God had risen from the tomb. The first to discover this was several women, and the first evidence of the fact to them was, "they found not the body" in the sepulcher. The next was the testimony of "two angels in shining garments." Said they: "Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen," and they quoted the Savior's prediction of Himself, that He should be crucified, and on the third day He should rise again, which the women remembered. These women reported to the eleven apostles, who could hardly believe the report, but Peter visited the sepulcher, and found that the body of Jesus was not there. Jesus showed Himself to some on the way to Emmaus, after which, and on the same day, He appeared to the eleven apostles, who were somewhat terrified, and He said unto them: "Why are ye troubled? And why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself, handle me and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." He further said: "Have ye here any meat? And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he took it and did eat before them." He also referred them to His own words, to the words of Moses and the prophets, which were fulfilled in His crucifixion and resurrection,  and said He, "Ye are all witnesses of these things." He then instructed them to tarry at Jerusalem till they were endued with power from on high, lifted up His hands and blessed them, and ascended into heaven. (Luke xxiv.)

Here was an accumulation of evidence that Jesus was resurrected from the dead. He was with the apostles more or less for forty days after His resurrection. (Acts i, 3.) They knew most unmistakably that Jesus had been resurrected. The evidences were accumulative. They knew also by the revelations of God. They were prepared to testify. The day of Pentecost arrived. The Holy Ghost descended upon them in great power--it filled them; and they stood forth boldly, as the champions of the risen Jesus, as His friends and true representatives, and as men of God, filled with truth and the revelations and power of God, to give the lie to a bribed and perjured soldiery, and all their accessories, and to proclaim the truth concerning the resurrection, the atonement, the redemption, and the true plan of salvation for the exaltation of the obedient of all mankind. And Peter, as the chief apostle, is represented as testifying the most in this matter, and among other things he said this: "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses." (Acts ii.)

Here were eleven men in one body, besides others, who were all witnesses of the resurrection of the Savior of the world. Compare their testimony with the testimony of scared, bribed, and perjured guards--and what a testimony the latter was! "His disciples stole his body while we slept!" What wondrous wisdom, consistency, and veracity, characterized the suggestors and buyers of this infamous subterfuge! What elevated manhood was exhibited by these valiant military cat-paws of the ancient anti-Christians! What do men know of things which transpire when they are fast asleep? A parallel need not be sought for only in the history of the highly-enlightened anti-"Mormons" of the nineteenth century.

What was the result of the inspired testimonies of these eleven apostles--Peter standing forth boldly as their principal, and proclaiming the truth in much power? Why, many were convinced by the power of the Holy Ghost, and the inquiry was made by them: "Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." Now, did any of them show further evidence of conviction? Yes, about three thousand souls were added to the church by baptism, on that day, and the Lord added to the church daily such as  should be saved. (Acts ii.) Herein was true evidence and true faith clearly illustrated, and I will now draw an illustration from modern times.

In the year of our Lord, eighteen hundred and twenty, the Lord spoke from the heavens to the boy, Joseph Smith, then in his fifteenth year. After a seven years' training, and particularly during the last four of the seven, the Lord by His angel delivered to him the sacred plates from which was translated the Book of Mormon. Nearly three years additional schooling was given him in the science of theology, during which time he translated the Book of Mormon by the gift and power of God; and, on the 6th day of April, 1830, he, by command of God, organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Previous to this time, he had testified more or less, of his visions and calling, but from now till his cruel martyrdom in 1844, he boldly proclaimed his divine mission, and taught the true gospel to the children of men. Others associated themselves with him in this glorious testimony and proclamation. Many believed their words, and cast their lot with the much-persecuted people of God. This testimony and proclamation of the elders of Israel have continued; a people have been gathered together in the tops of the mountains, in fulfillment of the words of Isaiah (Chap. ii); and of the words of Micah (Chap. iv); and in Utah and other Territories; in many States of the American Union; and in many other parts of the earth can be found much true faith, as the result of correct evidence given by inspiration in these last days.

But while this work of presenting true evidence and inspiring true faith has been going on, the adversary has not been idle. It has been declared that Joseph Smith was not a true prophet, but an impostor. That the Book of Mormon was not translated from plates given to Joseph by an angel of God, but was simply a Spaulding romance. That, in short the whole system of Mormonism is a monster humbug and imposture, and all its adherents are either deceivers or deceived. Editors, incited by popular clamor and prejudice, and priests, inspired by their sable master, have befouled the filthy stream of misrepresentation, by publishing dirty falsehoods and sending them broadcast on the earth during the last half a century, till millions of the human family are prejudiced and misled; and their responsibility in this matter is equal to that of their prototypes, the ancient Scribes, priests, and elders who framed the lie and paid their dupes to testify to it--that Jesus was not resurrected, but that His disciples stole the body while they slept; and heaven's condemnation rests upon them for thus using the power of press and pulpit. Hence, to-day there is a vast amount of false faith on the earth, which has been produced by incorrect evidence concerning some of the most important events which have transpired preparatory to the coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven in power and great glory.

These facts, culled from ancient and modern history, I consider sufficient to prove clearly to honest hearts and enlightened minds, that faith is produced by evidence--a false faith by false evidence, and a true faith by true evidence.

In the foregoing an attempt has been made to show that faith is produced by evidence; that this is true both of a false faith and a true one; and that the results are good or bad according as the faith is true or false. And in doing this the principle of faith itself has been taught more or less, but a few more remarks are necessary.

Faith in God is necessary. "But without faith it is impossible to please Him: for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." (Heb. xi, 6.) And who can expect to receive salvation from God, if they do not believe in Him?

Faith in Jesus Christ is necessary. "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abideth on him." (John iii, 36.) Who can expect the glorious benefits of the atonement, if they do not believe in the Savior of the world, nor in the great atonement which He made for poor fallen man?

Faith in the servants of God is necessary, also. When Jesus sent His servants forth to preach the gospel, He said unto them: "He that heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth me, and he that despiseth me despiseth Him that sent me." (Luke x, 16.) "He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth Him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward." (Matt. x, 40, 41.) "And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city." (Matt. x, 14, 15.) Neither God the Father nor God the Son travel among us now to preach and administer  for the benefit of Adam's race, but they authorize mortal men to do this work; hence it is necessary to receive them, treat them kindly, and have faith in them as the representatives of the Father and the Son.

Faith in the plan of salvation is necessary. The principles of the gospel must be believed in order to obtain their benefits; some of those principles are set forth briefly in this little pamphlet; and when these are tested and proven to be of divine origin, conferring many glorious blessings upon those who obey them, others can be found suitable to advanced students in the Lord's school of divinity. The gospel is unchangeable and eternal. It is filled with blessings that are temporal, spiritual and eternal. It is free for all. "And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come." (Matt. xxiv, 14.) "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel, which is not another, but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed." (Gal. i, 6-9.)

Blessed are they who believe and live the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, for they shall obtain eternal life in the celestial kingdom of God!

  REPENTANCE.

  Repentance is an evidence
  Of living, saving faith in God.
  The sinner manifesting sense
  In turning from the path he trod--
  Not a sentimental sorrow,
  Felt to-day and gone to-morrow;
  But--by God's help I will do right,
  And shun all wrong with all my might.

Repentance is the second principle of the gospel of the Son of God. And here it would be well, perhaps, to dispose of an objection which some may raise in regard to this being the second principle of the gospel. There are religionists who hold and teach that repentance precedes faith, and this error I will briefly refer to and correct.

In the first place, let the test of reason be applied. If a man does not believe in the existence of a God; nor in the  existence of the laws of God; nor in the penalties for violating those laws; nor in his own existence after what is believed by him to be the death of both body and spirit; nor consequently, if he does not believe in either the power or opportunity to punish him for what some people may call sin, but which he does not believe is a sin against anybody or anything; will he be likely to be sorry for anything he has done? Will he reform through hope of reward or fear of punishment, or both combined? Will such a man repent of his sins? Every reasonable man, who studies this principle, will answer with an emphatic, No!

But if a man is taught that there is a God; that He has revealed laws for the government of the actions of His earthly children; that those laws embody rewards for obedience and punishments for disobedience; that there is an existence after death has separated body and spirit; that none can escape the results of their acts, that all will be judged, and then rewarded or punished, according to the deeds done in the body; and if he believes these teachings, then he will be likely to cease to do evil and learn to do well--he will repent of his sins, and strive to serve his God faithfully. But if, after he has been taught as before stated, he should fail to believe, then he will not repent, for he is not prompted by that living faith which produces sincere repentance. And this conclusion is legitimate and clear, no doubt, to the unbeclouded and unprejudiced mind of every intelligent and reasonable man.

But the testimony of inspiration as well as reason shall be given in this matter, and this should be conclusive. After the crucifixion of the Savior, Peter became president of the church. To him were given the keys of the kingdom, and he, certainly, understood the order of the principles of the gospel, just as well as an arithmetician understands the order of the first principles of arithmetic. And what position did he give repentance? Did he make it precede faith? On the day of Pentecost Peter preached to the assembled multitude. He taught the word of God; he quoted the Old Testament scriptures; he showed that some of them were fulfilled; he testified that Jesus was the Christ; he declared that they had crucified the Son of God; he taught the glorious principle of the resurrection; said he: "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we are all witnesses." and he told them "that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ." This testimony of Peter, which was accompanied by the convincing power of the Holy Ghost, inspired them with faith in what he taught and prompted the question: "Men and brethren,  what shall we do?" Said Peter, in reply: "Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." They had faith. The preaching had created it. Peter knew this. And he then taught them the second, third and fourth principles of the gospel in their order, viz.: Repentance, remission of sins, and the reception of the Holy Ghost, thus establishing the order of those principles beyond all cavil or controversy, and for all time, for the benefit of Bible-believers in all their generations throughout the earth.

Repentance, then, is the second principle of the great gospel plan of salvation, as taught by Jesus Christ and His apostles. And what is repentance? Is it merely sorrow for sin? No. Sorrow is a part of it, but it must be the right kind of sorrow. There is a sorrow which leadeth unto death, and a sorrow which produces true repentance. Read the testimony of the apostle Paul on this point: "For a godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of; but the sorrow of the world worketh death." (II Cor. vii, 10.)

Real sorrow for sin produces true repentance, and a genuine repentance is a forsaking of sin, coupled with a burning desire and a strong determination to keep the commandments of God, which will be shown in reformation of life and conduct, in a prayerful spirit, and a reliance upon God for strength to overcome in every hour of trial and temptation. Isaiah taught repentance in these words: "Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and He will have mercy upon him; and to our God for He will abundantly pardon." (Isa. lv, 7.)

The scriptures contain much evidence showing what true repentance is, and what its fruits are; and they present us with evidence concerning the repentance which is not genuine, as instance Simon the sorcerer. He had believed Philip's preaching, and had been baptized; but Peter found him "in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity," and called upon him to repent of his "wickedness."

Repentance means forsaking sin. Let him that steals steal no more. Let him that has done wrong in any way, do so no more, but do right before God and man. In the language of the able Apostle, Orson Pratt, "It would be of no use for a sinner to confess his sins to God, unless he were determined to forsake them; it would be of no benefit to him to feel sorry that he had done wrong, unless he intended to do wrong no more, it would be folly for him to confess before God that he had injured his fellow-man, unless he were determined to do  all in his power to make restitution. Repentance, then, is not only a confession of sins, with a sorrowful, contrite heart, but a fixed, settled purpose to refrain from every evil way."

BAPTISM.

  Earth's noon arrived! The Savior came!
  And was by John of ancient fame,
  Baptized in Jordan's sacred tide,
  A righteous law to thus abide--
  Example setting to all men
  How they must all be born again:
  Born of water--people hear it!
  If God's kingdom they'd inherit.

There are several things connected with baptism which should be well understood before the candidate yields obedience to it. The mode, the object and the necessity of it.

First, then, the mode. Is sprinkling the correct way to baptize? Jesus was the great exemplar. Was He sprinkled? John the Baptist baptized by immersion. Did John baptize in the right way? Certainly he did. Would Jesus have gone to an impostor for baptism? Would He have demanded baptism by immersion of John, if sprinkling were the correct method? And if immersion had been the incorrect method, would the Spirit of God have descended like a dove upon Him, and His Father have uttered His approval in these words: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased?" I think not. John baptized a great many in the river Jordan. He baptized Jesus there. "And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up straightway out of the water." (Matt. iii, 16.) "John baptized in Aenon near to Salim because there was much water there." (John iii, 23.) Philip, acting under the direction of the apostles, baptized by immersion. In baptizing the eunuch, "They went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him. And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more." (Acts, viii, 38, 39.) If sprinkling were all that was necessary, Paul and Silas need not have taken the jailor and his household out of their house just after midnight to baptize them; for they could have performed the ordinance in the house, and a half pint of water would have been plenty for the purpose. (Acts, xvi.) Paul tells the Romans, "that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into His death; therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even  so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection." (Rom. vi, 3, 4, 5.)

Now why represent the death of the Savior, by becoming dead unto sin? Or His burial, by being buried in water in baptism? Or His resurrection, by being raised from the liquid grave in baptism, to walk in newness of life?--Why all this, if sprinkling were the proper mode of baptism? And these remarks and quotations apply to the erroneous principle of pouring as well as to sprinkling. Does either sprinkling or pouring represent a death, a burial, or a resurrection? Not in the least. But immersion does, and it is an actual burial in water.

Jesus said to Nicodemus: "Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John iii, 5.) Does sprinkling or pouring represent a birth? No! but immersion does. Coming out of the element of water into the element of air, is a fair representation of a birth, and the words of the Apostle, Orson Pratt, are very appropriate here. He wrote thus upon this subject: "As the embryo must first be immersed in water before it can receive the quickening of the human spirit, so a man must first be immersed in water before he has the promise of the quickening or life-giving power of the Holy Spirit. As the infant is born, or comes forth from the watery element into a new kingdom or world of existence, so a man in baptism comes forth from the liquid element of water into the kingdom of God's dear Son, which is a new state of existence."

The New Testament scriptures do not furnish any authority for administering baptism by a sprinkling or pouring; but the evidences therein contained show most conclusively, that immersion was the proper mode of baptism as administered to Jesus, and practiced by His apostles--and who but God has authority to change this ordinance? And where is the proof that He has ever changed it? It cannot be found; and immersion stands to-day, unchanged and unchangeable, as the proper mode of administering the gospel ordinance of baptism for the benefit of believing and repentant candidates for salvation in the kingdom of God.

The object of baptism next claims our attention. And what is this ordinance administered for? Is it simply "an outward sign of an inward grace?" Baptism was instituted for the remission of sins. John went "into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." (Luke iii, 3.) After the crucifixion of the Savior, He  appeared unto the Eleven and gave them the mission to preach the gospel to every creature; (Luke xvi, 15-18.) and on the day of Pentecost, after being filled with the Holy Ghost, according to the promise of the Father, they commenced their great mission. On this occasion they preached to the assembled thousands of many nationalities, baptism for the remission of sins, and about three thousand souls were baptized on that day for the special purpose of obtaining the remission of their sins. The testimony of Paul concerning himself is this: that Ananias said unto him: "Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins." (Acts xxii, 16.)

Thus it is clearly established, and that, too, by evidence which no Bible-believer can controvert, that the ordinance of baptism was established for the remission of sins.

The necessity of baptism must be understood. It is taught by some that the observance of this ordinance is optional on the part of the candidate for celestial glory. This is dangerous doctrine. There is no authority for it in the scriptures, Jesus and His apostles never taught it. It is contrary to their teachings. Jesus never included a non-essential principle in the great plan of salvation. Had not baptism been necessary, He would not have said to His apostles: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved," (Mark xvi, 16). Neither would He have said to them: "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." (Luke xxviii, 19.)

Baptism is as necessary as remission of sins. It was instituted and placed in the great system of salvation as the ordinance of remission. It was taught, accepted and administered as such, on the day of Pentecost, to the joy of three thousand souls.

Paul, after the light of heaven shone upon him, and the Lord said unto him: "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" was blind, repenting, fasting and praying for three days; and why did not the Lord have compassion upon the poor sinner in this deplorable condition, and forgive him, without sending him to Ananias to have the ordinance of baptism administered to him? Because Paul was a sinner. He needed remission of sins. He needed the birth of the water to admit him into the kingdom. And Jesus honored the law of remission by sending him to one who could administer it effectually, which Jesus never would have done if it had not been necessary for Paul's salvation. (Acts ix.)

It is believed by many that a good man will certainly be saved without baptism--the Lord would not be just if he did  not save him, even if he were not baptized. Now, I presume that but few men can be found who are better, in a great many respects, than was Cornelius of old. He was "a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway." (Acts ix., 2.) The Lord had so much respect for him on account of his goodness, that He sent an angel to him, who said to him: "Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God." (Acts x, 4.) Certainly, he was a good man; and, according to the notions of many religionists, such a man ought to be saved, and will be, independent of any ordinances. But wait a little. What more did the angel say unto him? Said he: "And now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is Peter; he lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose house is by the sea-side, he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do." (Acts x, 3, 4).

What! Is it possible that a good man like Cornelius needed to do anything more than he was doing, in order to be accepted and justified before God? It appears that the Lord thought so; and it was of such importance, too, that He sent an angel to tell him what his further duty was. And what was it? Peter preached the gospel to him and his household, after his arrival among them. The Holy Ghost fell upon them to bear testimony to Peter's words, and as an evidence to Peter of the favor they enjoyed with the Lord, and then "he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord." (Acts x, 4, 8.)

Now, suppose that Cornelius and his house had disregarded Peter's command to be baptized, could they have been saved? No. Why? Because the angel told him that Peter should tell him words whereby he and all his household should be saved. (Acts xi. 14). It is very evident, therefore, that baptism for the remission of sins is necessary unto salvation.

Infant baptism, as it is erroneously termed, or infant sprinkling, should receive a brief notice here. This is not authorized in the scriptures, neither have any of the New Testament writers alluded to it. Some have supposed because in a few instances whole households were baptized, that possibly there were some infants among them. But this supposition is a very weak foundation upon which to establish an important principle of salvation. In the households of Lydia, Cornelius and the jailor, there were no infants--at least, we cannot learn that there were from the history given of them in the Acts of the Apostles. In fact, the evidence is to the contrary. In the case of the jailor, Paul and Silas taught him, and all that were in his house, the word of the Lord. (Acts xvi, 32.) In the  household of Cornelius, the Holy Ghost fell upon them which heard the words of Peter, and they spoke with tongues and magnified God. (Acts x.) And in the household of Lydia it is evident there were no infants any more than there were in the other two households, for these reasons: The gospel is to be preached to individuals. What is the use to preach to infants? They cannot understand it; they cannot have faith in it; they cannot repent, for they have not sinned; it is no use to baptize them, for there are no sins to remit. Sin is a transgression of the law. They have not transgressed any law, therefore, they are without sin. And even had infants any sins to remit, they could not be remitted by baptism alone, for faith and repentance must be exercised in connection with baptism, but infants cannot exercise either. Therefore, it is unreasonable to suppose that the apostles would attempt to teach or baptize infants in the households referred to, or in any other households--they knew better than to act so foolishly in the sight of God.

There are others who have supposed that the baptism of infants is in the place of circumcision. But this is merely a conjecture of impostors to deceive the ignorant. The scriptures do not substitute infant baptism for circumcision. There is no connection or similarity between the two principles. They are no more alike than truth and error, or darkness and light, or heaven and hell. Circumcision is an ancient ceremony or operation performed exclusively on male infants at eight days old; but baptism is an immersion in water, of both male and female, when they have reached an age to be capable of sinning, believing the gospel when it is taught them, and repenting of their sins, so that they may have their past sins remitted according to the laws of God. These evidences should be conclusive to all Bible-believers.

LAYING ON OF HANDS FOR IMPARTING THE HOLY GHOST

  True faith in God, repentance true,
  Sins remitted by immersion;
  The humble soul is born anew,
  And the spirit takes possession.
  By laying on of holy hands,
  Of God's own servants here on earth;
  Those who've obeyed the Lord's commands,
  Will realize the Spirit's birth.

After the candidate for eternal life has been baptized for the remission of his sins, and has sought unto the Lord in faith, honestly repenting of his sins, and has obtained the forgiveness  of all his past transgressions, he is entitled to the gift of the Holy Ghost. He should seek for it, for the Lord has promised that he shall receive it, but He has established a certain ordinance through which He bestows this precious gift. That ordinance is the "Laying on of hands." Many may question this, but the scriptures should decide the matter. Let us see how Paul received the Holy Ghost. Ananias received a mission to visit Paul, and entered into the house where he was staying, "and putting his hands on him said: Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Acts ix. 17.) But why not fill him with the Holy Ghost without any administration of Ananias, seeing that he had faith, and was repenting and fasting and praying before the Lord? Because the Lord had established an order in the plan of salvation. He had authorized His servants to observe that order in ministering the spirit as well as the water, and they were to minister the spirit by the laying on of hands.

How did Paul administer the spirit? It is possible that he obtained his first lesson, in the administration of baptism and the laying on of hands, from Ananias when he himself was baptized and confirmed; but, whether this was his first lesson or not, he, no doubt, learned to administer the ordinances of the gospel correctly. And when he came to Ephesus and found about twelve men who had been baptized "unto John's baptism," "they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus," "and when Paul laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spake with tongues, and prophesied." (Acts xix. 1-6.) Thus, we see Paul administered the Holy Ghost by "the laying on of hands."

When Philip preached to the Samaritans, they believed and were baptized both men and women. "Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John, who when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost; (for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). Then laid they their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost. (Acts viii, 14-17.)

Now, as they were apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ, faithful men whose prayers God would hear and answer, why did not the Lord bestow upon those Samaritans the gift of the Holy Ghost in answer to the earnest prayers of His faithful servants, without the ordinance of the laying on of hands?  Because that would have been contrary to the law laid down for the ministering of the spirit. Peter and John were anxious that the Lord should bless their administration for the benefit of those baptized believers. They desired that the Holy Ghost should rest down upon them in mighty power. But they could not exercise the authority of the apostleship in and of themselves, and independently of the Lord, hence they prayed for themselves, no doubt, and that the Samaritans "might receive the Holy Ghost." Then they performed the proper ordinance, God honored the administration in answer to their prayer, and those baptized believers "received the Holy Ghost." (Acts viii, 17).

The laying on of hands, then, is the Lord's ordinance for imparting the Holy Ghost to His believing, repentant, and baptized children, and He has never made it void, or authorized any man to change it, or to teach the inhabitants of the earth that it is done away and no longer needed.

AUTHORITY TO PREACH AND ADMINISTER.

  God's Priesthood once dwelt here on earth,
  And gave to men their gospel birth;
  Many who held it martyrs fell;
  On earth in peace it could not dwell.
  But thanks to God He has again,
  Bestowed His Priesthood upon men;
  And His decree has now gone forth--
  It shall henceforth remain on earth!

The authority to preach the gospel and administer its ordinances, is a very important matter to be considered in connection with the first principles of the gospel. If those ordinances are administered by divine authority, the blessings of God will attend those administrations; but if they are not, it is unreasonable to expect the Lord will bestow such blessings; hence, it is well to ascertain who is in the possession of the authority of God, to act in the name of His son Jesus Christ, as ministers of salvation and eternal life to the children of men here on the earth.

A man, to be a servant of God, must be called, authorized, and empowered by the Lord in some way, or how can he be a servant of God? Man does not recognize any other man as his servant unless he has appointed and authorized him in some way, neither does the Lord.

Jesus was sent by His Father. (John v. 23-24, vi. 38-40, xvii, 21.) The first officers in the Church of Christ are apostles. (Eph. iv, 11.) Jesus was an apostle. (Heb. iii, v.) He  called other apostles. Said He to His apostles, "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit." (John xv, 16.) Jesus being sent of God, and being an apostle, he had a right under the authority of His Father, to call and ordain other apostles, and this is the way the apostles obtained the authority of God, to act in the name of Jesus Christ, for the benefit of the human family. Under the direction of the Father and His Son Jesus Christ they had authority to call and ordain others; but without similar authority no man has a right to call and ordain others, or officiate in any of the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. "No man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron." (Heb. v, 4.) And how was Aaron called? The Lord told Moses to take him to assist in performing a certain work. (Exod. iv, 14-16.) And no man taketh the honor unto himself, for he must be called by the voice of God through a prophet as Aaron was; or by Jesus Christ as His apostles were, or by an angel of God, as in the case of the calling of Gideon to deliver Israel from the Midianites, (Judges vi); or by the Holy Ghost, as were Barnabas and Saul, (Acts xiii, 2); or by the direction of the Almighty, through the spirit of inspiration, operating in some legitimate channel.

A man must be called, ordained, authorized and empowered from on high, or he is not a servant of God. And the calling, ordaining, or authorizing, of one man, does not call, ordain, or authorize another. It takes new revelation in each case. God must designate, in some way, the man for His service. A man must go forth with authority to preach, to call to repentance, to baptize for the remission of sins, to impart the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; and if sins are not remitted, and the Holy Ghost is not imparted, when the conditions are faithfully observed, then the administrator is an impostor, or he is not authorized to preach the fullness of the gospel to the children of men. A man who is commissioned of Jesus Christ to proclaim the fullness of the gospel, and officiate in its ordinances for the benefit of our race, will promise remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost, in the name of Jesus Christ, and his promise never fails when the conditions are faithfully observed; but an impostor dare not make any such a promise to the sons of men. He has no authority from God to do so, and if he did make any such promise, he knows that God would not honor it and fulfill it, for He did not authorize him to make it.

Therefore, ye sons and daughters of men, be careful on this question of authority. Try to learn where the true authority exists. Be assured that the administrations of a person unauthorized of God will be of no benefit to you in time nor in eternity; but the administrations of a man who is sent of God by new revelation, will bless you in this life, and you will realize it; and they will lay the foundation for blessings, glory, honor, power and exaltation, in the celestial worlds for ever and ever.

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

The first or initiatory principles of the gospel, as herein set forth, are but very briefly alluded to the treatment of them herein was not designed to be exhaustive. The object was merely to give a few hints, and by so doing cause curiosity and interest and faith to spring up, and prompt honest research and prayerful investigation, which would lead to humble obedience to the laws of God.

The writer did not prepare this because he had anything new or original to offer. Every man who is warned must warn his neighbor. This is the word of God. My testimony must be heard. I am not justified before the Lord if it is not. I must try to clear my garments of the blood of this generation; hence this little work.

I bear my humble testimony that God has spoken from the heavens in these last days. The true gospel of salvation is being taught to the children of men by the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. They taught that gospel to me. I believed it with all my heart. I embraced it with a sincere and honest purpose to do the will of God on the earth. My sins were forgiven through the ordinance of baptism. The Holy Ghost was sent down from heaven and rested mightily upon me through the laying on of the hands of the servants of God. By that spirit I was taught of God, and I learned by revelation through its agency that God lived, that He had spoken from the heavens, and that He had raised up a mighty prophet in the person of Joseph Smith. I knew that the work he had established through that prophet's instrumentality was true, and that nothing could overthrow it. The holy Priesthood was conferred upon me. I preached to others, and officiated in the ordinances of the gospel for their benefit. They also received the remission of sins and the gift of the Holy Ghost through my administrations, and rejoiced in the Lord. And I know that all who will yield humble obedience to the principles of the gospel, as taught by the Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, will receive  the remission of sins and the testimony of Jesus through the gift of the Holy Ghost; and by this spirit they shall know of the truth of the doctrines they have obeyed. They shall know that the faithful Elders of Israel are clothed with the authority of Almighty God, and they shall bear testimony of these things to the children of men.

I bear my humble testimony of these things. God lives. His gospel and authority and plan of salvation are restored to the earth by the administration of holy angels. The heavens are open. Man communes with his God. The Millennium dawn is near. The Son of God will soon come in clouds of heaven in power and great glory. He will reward the righteous, and take vengeance on the wicked, as saith the scriptures. Blessed are they who hear the warning voice of the good shepherds of Israel, for they shall escape the judgments the Lord is about to pour out upon the ungodly; they shall have joy unspeakable in this life; and in the life to come they shall enjoy the blessings of immortality in the presence of the Father and the Son in the celestial worlds.

    "Be virtuous and pure; be men of integrity and truth; keep the
    commandments of God, then you will be able more perfectly to
    understand the difference between right and wrong--between the
    things of God and the things of men; and your path will be like
    that of the just, which shineth brighter and brighter unto the
    perfect day."

    --Joseph Smith, The Prophet.

GLAD TIDINGS OF GREAT JOY.

GEORGE TEASDALE.

    "Wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead."
    --James ii. 20.

We take this means of visiting you, at your hearths and homes, to testify to you of the restoration of the Everlasting Gospel and the Holy Priesthood, by the visitation of an holy angel in fulfilment of the predictions of the prophets; to usher in the dispensation of the fullness of times and the establishment of the kingdom of God.

The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation. (Rom. i, 16, 17). "And being made perfect He (Christ) became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him," (Heb. v. 9). Its first principles are, faith, repentance, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost.

FAITH IN GOD.

    "But without faith it is impossible to please him: for he that
    cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder
    of them that diligently seek him" (Heb. xi. 6). "He that heareth
    my word, and believed on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life"
    (John v. 24). "For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach,
    because we trust in the living God" (I. Tim. iv. 10).

FAITH IN JESUS CHRIST.

    "And this is His commandment; that we should believe on the name of
    his son Jesus Christ" (John iii. 23). And this is life eternal,
    that they might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
    thou has sent" (John xvii. 3). "Jesus said unto her, I am the
    resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were
    dead, yet shall he live" (John ix. 25). "For the wages of sin is
    death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ
    our Lord" (Rom. vi. 23). "For there is none other name under
    heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts iv. 12).

REPENTANCE.

    "Repent and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so
    iniquity shall not be your ruin" (Ezekiel xviii. 30). "And they
    went out and preached that men should repent" (Mark vi. 12).
    Jesus Christ preached, "repent ye and believe the gospel" (Mark i.
    15).

BAPTISM.

    "Ye must be born again (John iii. 7). "Verily, verily, I say unto
    thee, except a man be born of water, and of the spirit he cannot
    enter into the kingdom of God" (John iii. 5). "Go ye into all the
    world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth
    and is baptized shall be saved" (Mark xvi. 15, 16). Peter said
    unto them, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of
    Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (Acts ii. 38). "And now
    why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
    calling on the name of the Lord" (Acts xxii. 16). "Therefore we
    are buried with Him by baptism" (Rom. vi. 4). "Buried with him in
    baptism" (Col. ii. 12). "The like figure whereunto even baptism
    doth now save us" (I Peter iii. 21). "One Lord, one faith, one
    baptism" (Eph. iv. 5).

THE HOLY GHOST.

    "And ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Acts ii. 38).
    "But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
    send in my name, he will teach you all things" (John xiv. 26).
    "Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy
    Ghost. And when Simon saw that when through laying on of the
    Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given" (Acts viii. 17, 18).
    "And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on
    them" (Acts xix. 6). "Therefore, leaving the principles of the
    doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again
    the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith towards
    God. Of the doctrine of baptism, and of laying on of hands" (Heb.
    vi. 2).

ORGANIZATION.

    "Now therefore ye (the Saints) are no more strangers and
    foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
    household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
    and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone"
    (Eph. ii. 20).

    "And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some,
    evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of
    the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
    body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of
    the knowledge of the Son of God" (Eph. iv. 11-13).

    "Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God
    hath set some in the Church, first apostles, secondarily prophets,
    thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings,
    helps, governments, diversities of tongues" (I Cor. xii. 27, 28).

    "And no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called
    God, as was Aaron: so also Christ glorified not Himself to be an
    high priest; but he that said unto Him, Thou art my Son, to-day
    have I begotten thee" (Heb. v. 4, 5).

    "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,
    consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ
    Jesus" (Heb. iii. 1).

WE BELIEVE IN CONTINUOUS REVELATIONS FROM GOD.

    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally" (James i. 5, 6). No man knoweth the Father but by
     revelation from the Son (Luke x. 22). "Where there is no
    vision, the people perish" (Prov. xxix. 18). "Surely the Lord
    will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the
    prophets" (Amos iii. 7).

    We believe it is essential to salvation to

OBEY THE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST.

    "Being made perfect, He became the author of eternal salvation unto
    all them that obey Him" (Heb. v. ix).

    "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices
    as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than
    sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as
    the sin of witchcraft and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry"
    (I Sam. xv. 22).

    "And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
    shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming
    fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
    the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with
    everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
    glory of His power" (II Thess. i. 7-9).

    "If we walk in the light as He (God) is in the light, we have
    fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
    cleanseth us from all sin" (I John i. 7).

    "And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even
    as he is pure" (I John iii. 3).

    "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
    nor standeth in the way of the sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of
    the scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord: and in His
    law doth he meditate day and night" (Psalm i. 1, 2).

When John, the Revelator, was upon the Isle of Patmos the Lord revealed the principal events that were to happen upon this earth before His second coming. It was "The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave to him, to show unto His servants things which must shortly come to pass; and He sent and signified it by His angel unto His servant John" (Rev. i. 1). After showing him the apostasy of the primitive church, and the rise of false systems (Rev xxii. and xxiii.) and the fear of God being taught by the precepts of men, as foretold by Isaiah (xxix. 13, 14), he showed him the restoration of the gospel. He said, "and I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell upon the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear, God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship Him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of water."

Daniel declared that "in the last days, the God of heaven would set up a kingdom that should never be destroyed"  (Dan. ii. 44). Isaiah (ii. 2, 3) and Micah (iv. 1, 2) have both declared that in the last days, the mountain of the Lord's house should be established in the tops of the mountains, and many should say, let us go up to the house of the God of Jacob, that they might learn of His ways and walk in His paths. It is the testimony of the thousands of Latter-day Saints, gathered to the mountains, that God has restored to the earth the everlasting gospel; that angels have visited the earth, restoring the Holy Priesthood; that Joseph Smith the Prophet-martyr of the nineteenth century, was the man honored of God, with others, to usher in the dispensation of the fullness of times and the restitution of all things, in fulfillment of the prophets.

The Church of Christ was again established upon the earth on the 6th day of April, 1830; and, from that day to the present, has steadily increased, notwithstanding the prejudice, caused by misrepresentation and the "refuge of lies," brought to bear against it, and the persecution it has gone through. It has been guided to the tops of the mountains, and is being established in power, gathering the seed of Israel from all nations where they have been scattered, teaching them "the ways of the Lord," preparing them for the second coming of Christ, and offering a home for the oppressed of all nations.

All mankind are required to repent, to "seek the Lord while He may be found," to be baptized for the remission of their sins, that they may receive the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, in God's appointed way, by the laying on of hands; that they may know these things are true for themselves, by the revelations of God, and gain a living testimony. "If any man will do His will (that of the Father) he shall know of the doctrine" (John vii. 17), and no more be carried about by "every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive" (Eph. iv. 14).

Then flee to Zion for safety; as it is written "come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues" (Rev. xviii. 4, 5), "For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together" (Matt. xxiv. 28).

Your kind, prayerful consideration of these truths is earnestly invited. Search the scriptures; surely the signs of the times proclaim the second coming of our Lord and Savior to be right at hand, but who shall stand when he appeareth?

SUGGESTIONS TO ELDERS.

BY ELDER B. H. ROBERTS, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1888.

In the concluding paragraphs of a revelation on the subject of priesthood, the Lord says:

"Now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in which he is appointed, in all diligence. He that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that learns not his duty and shows himself not approved, shall not be counted worthy to stand." (Doc. and Cov., sec. cvii. 99, 100.)

We have no doubt but there is a general desire among the brethren of the priesthood to know their duty and then do it; especially is this the case with the Elders who have been sent to these lands to preach the Gospel. The duties and labors of these brethren are varied, consisting not only of preaching the Gospel, but also administering in all the ordinances and ceremonies pertaining to it. They are required at times to baptize people for the remission of their sins, and to confirm the members of the Church and bestow upon them the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. At other times they are called upon to anoint the sick with oil, or to confirm the anointing performed by others, and rebuke the sickness or disease, and bless with life and health those who are afflicted. Then they are called upon to administer the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and all these things should be done decently, intelligently, and in order that no reproach or derision may be thrown upon the work of God by reason of their awkwardness in any of these things.

Nor is the derision from strangers, who may witness any bungling administration in these ceremonies, the worst evil feared. But any blundering on the part of those who administer is very apt to have an evil effect upon the mind of those receiving the administration, and sometimes the adversary takes advantage of these things and creates doubts or suspicions in those receiving the ordinance as to the validity or power of the administration. We are acquainted with several  circumstances where the most disastrous results have grown out of this very thing. Too much care cannot be exercised in these matters.

So far as the ceremony connected with baptism is concerned, the words to be used are given in the Scriptures (see Book of Mormon, III Nephi xi, 24-26, Doc. and Cov., sec. xx, 72-74); so also in blessing the sacrament; but in the matter of confirming people members of the Church and bestowing upon them the Holy Ghost, anointing or blessing the sick, naming and blessing children, or even of ordaining men to the priesthood and assigning to them their position or office in that priesthood, we know of no formula that is given in the Scriptures. The matter seems to be left to the good taste and judgment of those who administer, without binding them to any set forms. On the whole, we rather like the idea of these things being so left, since we can see it gives more liberty for the operations of the spirit of God; that is, the mind of the administrator being free from stereotyped forms, he is at liberty to pronounce whatever the Spirit of the Lord may put into his heart to say. And where the Elder has learned his duty and has given these matters careful consideration, a beautiful and powerful administration is usually the result.

But, unfortunately, it sometimes happens the Elders who have never learned well their duty nor considered these things carefully, are called upon to administer; and neither judgment nor good taste is liable to dictate what they should say; and much evil may result from their not knowing how to perform properly these duties.

For the benefit of the young and inexperienced Elders, and for the older ones, too, who may have been careless hitherto in respect to these matters, we offer the following suggestions:

While the form of words are for any ordinance, as in baptism and the administration of the sacrament, it should be carefully learned by the Elders, that they may be always ready when called upon to officiate. And where no formula is given, then the objects to be accomplished by the ordinance should be noted, and such a form of words fixed in the mind as will in the most direct and simple manner attain those objects. We say direct and simple because these are qualities, excellencies, we may say, which enter into all the administrations in the Gospel. They are characteristics of the whole plan of salvation. In proof of this we ask what could be more simple or direct, than the ceremony said at baptism: "Having been commissioned of Jesus Christ, I baptize you in the name of  Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen." There is not a superfluous word in it, nor is anything omitted necessary to be said. So with the prayer that is given to be said in blessing the bread and water to be used in the sacrament. So, too, these characteristics of directness and simplicity are found in the great model prayer taught by the Savior to His disciples, and to our own mind this beautiful simplicity and directness of everything associated with the Gospel is part of its divinity, and one of the greatest evidences that it emanated from God, who sustains and governs the great universe by the simplest means. In those ordinances, then, where the form of words to be used is left for the administrator to choose, we would say let such a choice be made as will keep those administrations in harmony with the whole spirit of the Gospel--let simplicity mark their outline; and let such words be employed as will at once accomplish the object of the ordinance. To illustrate: In confirming a person a member of the Church, the Elder, calling the person by name, as he should do, and then in the name of the Messiah, sometimes says: "We lay our hands on your head to confirm you a member of the Church, etc., and that you may receive the Holy Ghost," and then goes on and pronounces a number of blessings on the person; but he neither, technically speaking, confirms him a member of the Church nor bestows on him the Holy Ghost. It would be much better to make use of such words as will at once accomplish the object. Say, for example, after calling the person by name, "In the name of Jesus Christ we confirm you a member of the Church, etc., and say unto you, receive ye the Holy Ghost." That really covers the ground. But if an Elder's heart is filled with blessing for the persons to whom he administers, and the Spirit prompts him to pronounce blessings upon them for their encouragement, or the strengthening of their hope and faith and virtue; or if he is prompted to tell them what particular gift the Holy Ghost will develop within them, or to admonish them against evil, all well and good; with one of old we say, "Quench not the Spirit, neither despise prophecy," but let good taste and judgment and the Spirit of God preside in these things.

Now, as to administering to the sick. Here, from the very nature of things, the manner of administration is left to the judgment of the Elders officiating. Still there are general outlines that may be pointed out even here. The law of the Lord to the Saints is that if any of them are sick, they are to call for the Elders of the Church; and they shall pray  for them, and anoint them with oil, and the promise is made that the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and God will raise them up. (James 5: 13-16.)

It is customary for the Elders, when called upon for two or more of them to go, and anoint with oil, and it is understood that another will confirm the anointing, and perhaps will be moved upon to rebuke the disease and bless the sick with life and health. But the one who anoints the sick sometimes not only does what he is appointed to do, but a great deal more. He both anoints and confirms the anointing, and pronounces every conceivable blessing upon the head of the one to whom he administers. This would be all right, if he were alone, but when another is to follow him it is most perplexing to that Elder, as he feels that there is nothing for him to do. Let those who are called upon to anoint do that, and do it in the name of the Lord, and to the end that the person may be restored to health; but let him leave the rebuking of the sickness and the confirming of the anointing to him who shall be assigned to perform that part of the ceremony.

Another remark, in passing, respecting anointing. The law of the Lord is that the sick should be anointed with oil. We know of no commandment that they should take the oil internally, and through the anointing the Spirit of the Lord will be conducted to the whole system and renovate it and make it whole, and there is no need of taking it internally. Then again some potter around with a spoon as if they were afraid that a drop too much might be used. Never mind the spoon. Pour on oil from the vessel in which it was consecrated, and don't be too careful in using it. Aaron was anointed with oil, according to David, until it ran down upon his beard on the skirts of his garments, and we have no account of his complaining about it. We do not make this reference in order to have the Elders too lavish in the use of oil, but we do think more than a drop or two should be used, and it should not be used as if they were afraid of it.

We have not made these remarks for the purpose of binding up the Elders in their feelings when administering in the ordinances we have named, but to the end that they may learn their duty in respect of these things, and have greater liberty of the Spirit in the administrations, which can only come by having a consciousness of the ability to do them properly and well.

THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST.

BY ELDER ORSON F. WHITNEY, IN MILLENNIUM STAR, 1882.

The Gospel of Christ is the science of salvation. Like any other genuine science, it is based upon eternal truth, and is the compiled, epitomized result of experience, profound research and intelligent reflection. It is the condensed product of divine wisdom, the summum bonum of celestial knowledge, the key to all heavenly mysteries, and the only way that leadeth unto everlasting life. It embraces all truth, whether known or unknown. It incorporates all intelligence, both past and prospective. No righteous principle will ever be revealed, no truth can possibly be discovered, either in time or in eternity, that does not in some manner, directly or indirectly, pertain to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. It is the way of salvation in this life; it is the means of exaltation in the life to come. It can never be dispensed with, for it will never cease to be necessary. It is a medium of never-ending exaltation and advancement. It encompasses all virtue, and precludes all vice. Error cannot invade its dominions, nor truth transcend its boundaries. Eternal life, because it includes all other gifts, is called the greatest gift of God. The Gospel of Jesus Christ, because it comprehends all principles of progression, is the only means by which eternal life may be attained and perpetuated.

The principles which compose the Gospel--not merely the first principles, but all that have been or will ever be revealed--are self-existent and everlasting in their nature. They have existed from all eternity, and will endure through all the eternities to come, for they are absolute, essential, uncreated truths, without beginning of days or end of years, the same yesterday, today and forever. Concerning the time, place and method of their compilation--if we may with propriety assume such an event ever to have occurred--the legislative process of appropriation, arrangement and systemization, whereby these self-existent laws were rendered subservient to the designs of Deity, and made applicable to and operative in  the salvation and exaltation of human souls and worlds, it is not man's present province to inquire. Such a question would necessarily involve the consideration of the beginning of God's limitless creations, the beginning of things which to us have no beginning, a subject so vast and incalculably comprehensive as to be beyond the conception of any intellect of inferior capacity to that Master mind which designed and organized the heavens and the earths, and numbered by and known unto whom, alone, are all the creations which His mighty hand hath made. It should, therefore, suffice us to know that the Gospel in its present form is of inconceivable antiquity; that ages on ages before the foundations of this earth were laid, ere the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy, at the hour of its nativity, this everlasting scheme has been adopted by the heavenly powers as the means of its predestined sanctification; and moreover that through the application and operations of this same unchangeable, puissant plan, millions on millions of worlds, with all their countless hosts of human and other inhabitants, had been redeemed and glorified prior to the period when this little planet, our mother earth, was numbered among the creations of God.

Nothing could be more at variance with all correct ideas concerning the character and attributes of the great Creator, than to suppose the plan of life and salvation to be the peculiar property of any one planet, of any one people or of any particular period of human history. The simple fact of there being but one such plan in existence--a point which is not conceded as self-evident, is susceptible of the plainest possible proof--should be sufficient to refute all such attenuated notions. For, with this fact once admitted, and a moment's reflection being given to the bewildering myriads of worlds which the Creator has called into existence, the numberless multitudes of His creatures which people them, and the almost universally acknowledged love, providence, care, protection and solicitude which the eternal parent continually evinces for the humblest of His offspring and all the workmanship of His hands, where is the soul so narrow and so bigoted, not to say irreverent and profane, that would dare to deliberately ascribe to such being--a being so wise, powerful, impartial, merciful and magnanimous as God is known and recognized to be--so unwise, weak, petty, puny, unjust and unmerciful a policy as the one we have in reference! And yet, strange to say, there are millions of souls who have held, and other millions who still hold--unless we marvelously misinterpret them --opinions of this very character. There are many doubtless who would declare, without giving the matter a second thought, that the foregoing arguments in support of the scope and antiquity of the Gospel were nothing more nor less than stupid nonsense and blasphemous presumption, and in the same breath would asseverate the truth and consistency of the petty theory which we denounce--and we maintain with good reason--as false and flimsy in every particular, wholly unfounded in reason or in revelation, and altogether unworthy of belief. There are those who, not content with the supposition that the Gospel is solely the property of this planet, are as resolutely of the opinion that it dates its origin from that momentous period in the history of the world when the Son of God came down to perform His mighty mission, in the midst of the children of men, and that previous to that memorable epoch there had been no such plan known, in any age, by any portion of the human family. Consequently their position, if they have any, must be that the all-wise Legislator who framed the only code of laws whereby eternal life is made obtainable, allowed four thousand years to pass away, taking with them into endless torment, multitudes of His begotten sons and daughters, many of them among the most righteous men and women that have ever walked the earth, before He placed within the reach of fallen humanity the only way possible for men to be saved. Such a theory might have done for the dark ages, or at the present time may suit the narrow views of such as "know not God nor the things of God," but to all whose understandings have been quickened and enlightened by the high-soaring, deep-searching Spirit of Truth, such absurd notions are not overfraught with sense and consistency.

The idea which seems to prevail that the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that marvel of all that is wise, just, comprehensive and powerful, was devised for the redemption of a solitary world, or for the benefit of one, to the exclusion of another portion of its inhabitants, is on a par with the ancient but long since exploded hypothesis that the sun, moon and stars were only temporary luminaries, hung up in the midst of the firmament, for the purpose of lighting this little earth through its mortal probation, and which, like so many lamps, whose "occupation would be gone," having survived the necessity of their invention, would be extinguished and put away forever, as soon as the earth had completed its temporal career. But happily the light of divine truth, beaming through the atmosphere of science, has dispelled that senseless delusion.  Furthermore, it is now known, thanks be to God for reopening the long closed oracles of eternity, that not only are there other worlds than this, but like this, those other worlds are inhabited, peopled by beings similar to the occupants of earth, the population of one planet differing only from those of others in the various degrees of perfection which they have severally attained through the principles of the Gospel of unceasing progression. By those who have bowed in humility before the fountain of all truth and intelligence, and taken a fresh draught of the renovating waters of life, it is now understood that that God who never spoke or wrought in vain, or created anything to subserve a puerile purpose, instituted the plan of salvation for the temporal and spiritual regeneration, not only of His offspring upon this planet, but likewise of those upon multitudes of similar planets, which have been or will yet be brought forth, redeemed and celestialized by the application of its wonder-making power. It is now definitely known that the Everlasting Gospel did not originate on this earth at all, nor for the first time appear in the midst of mankind when John the Baptist came forth proclaiming its initiatory principles in the wilderness of Judea. However strange it may have appeared to the bigoted and benighted Jews, who for centuries, through unbelief and hardness of heart, had been deprived of its gifts and blessings, it was not by any means "a new thing under the sun." Its introduction in those days was simply a restoration of the Gospel, and that highly favored period was but one among many such dispensations, and neither the first nor the last which the descendants of Adam were destined to receive. It was simply the dispensation of the meridian of time, during which the sacrificial Lamb, "slain from the foundation of the world," descended from celestial glory to pay the penalty of man's original sin, and by the retroactive and proactive virtue of His atonement, make it possible, through obedience to His Gospel, for all men in all ages to be saved.

Is it a thing so strange and unaccountable to the Christian world, that such men as Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham and other ancient worthies who walked and talked with God, as friend to friend, and were clothed upon with the fullness of the authority of His Holy Priesthood, should have been vouch-safed the precious privilege of yielding obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ--"the only name given under heaven whereby man can be saved?" Were Peter, James, John, Paul and others who happened to be living upon the earth when the Savior came and were permitted to partake of the blessings  which flow from obedience to the principles of eternal life, more worthy of that privilege than their predecessors, the more ancient patriarchs and prophets of God? Such an idea is repugnant to reason, and utterly unentitled to credence or respect. Let those continue to cherish such thoughts who persist in rejecting the genuine faith and perpetuate the narrowness of their minds by shutting out the soul expanding influences of the gift of the Holy Ghost. For our own part we prefer to know otherwise, to rejoice in the conviction obtained through compliance with the Gospel of the Son of God, that this same everlasting, unchangeable plan of redemption, without which no man can be elevated to the presence of his Maker, was known to the human family at various times during the intervening ages between the creation and the coming of Christ, and in every instance was revealed and established for the identical purposes which induced its institution in the days of the Savior, and for which it has again, for the last time, been brought back to earth in this the dispensation of the fullness of times. It is true that the Holy Bible, which all Christians profess to believe, and which so far as correctly translated, the Latter-day Saints actually do believe, though plainly foretelling the Gospel's restoration in the latter days, is more or less silent upon the subject of the dispensations preceding the meridian of time. But it is also true that that good old book is silent upon a great many other important points, thanks to the interpolations, erasions, alterations and rejections of uninspired translators, commentators and compilers, to whose unauthorized, blind and blundering administrations in the premises, are largely due the endless divisions, discords and differences, which have raked and rent asunder the religious world for centuries. But independent of the taciturnity of the Scriptures, and aside from the incontrovertible evidence furnished by modern revelation, we respectfully submit to the consideration of all candid, unbiased believers in God and the Gospel of Salvation, whether the views we maintain, compared with the opinions we oppose, are not more consistent with reason, more harmonious with the Spirit of Holy Writ, and more perfectly in unison with all advanced ideas respecting the wisdom, power, justice, mercy and magnanimity of Almighty God?

From the foregoing observations concerning the character, origin, object, powers and possibilities of the great science of salvation, the inquiring mind would naturally be led to the consideration of the question, What is the Gospel of Jesus Christ? or, in other words--since the impracticability of completely  answering so comprehensive an interrogation has already been shown--what are its initiatory principles? At the risk of wearying some of our veteran readers, already conversant with the subject, but with a sincere desire to benefit them, as well as others who are less fortunate with respect to the information involved, we here propose to present a brief digest of what are familiarly known to the Latter-day Saints as the first principles of the Gospel; the code of laws which constitute the beginning of salvation's endless system; the preface, as it were, to the book of everlasting progression; the four primitive archways by which the path of eternal progress is attained, and through which the souls of all men must pass in order to reach the celestial presence of their Maker. These four principles, it will be seen, are serial and progressive in their nature, each one naturally leading into its successor, paving the way before and preparing the soul for its reception.

FAITH.

The Holy Bible informs us that without faith it is impossible to please God. Such a declaration even from a source less sacred, need occasion no surprise whatever; for without faith it is impossible to do anything. From the smallest act to the mightiest achievement, all things are the effects of faith. It is the cause of every consequence, the power by which all things possible are performed. Nothing was ever accomplished either in heaven or on earth that was not preceded and accompanied by the exercise of faith. The insect creeps, the bird flies, the fish swims, by faith; the flowers spring, the grasses grow, the trees bloom and bear, by faith; the infant prattles, the man toils, the God creates, upholds, redeems and glorifies His workmanship, by faith. It is the main-spring of life, the motive power of creation, the active principle of the entire universe. Hence it is necessarily the first principle of the Gospel, the initial element of salvation, the basic principle or foundation law upon which all other laws and principles rest. The soul that would attain salvation must first believe salvation possible. He must believe in God as the Giver of salvation. He must believe in Christ, as its Author and Mediator. He must believe in the Gospel, as the medium through which salvation is secured, and in the divine authority of the individual who as a servant of God administers the ordinances of the Gospel in His behalf. Having exercised faith to the extent thus indicated, he is in a position to undertake the succeeding  venture, to ascend the next step higher upon the grand stairway leading to eternal life.

REPENTANCE.

Sin cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. It is so entirely opposed, so essentially antagonistic to the spirit of righteousness, that the two cannot possibly dwell together. God does not look upon sin with the least degree of allowance. Consequently the soul which aspires to His presence, which expects to behold His face and be able to endure His glory, must be previously cleansed and purified from all sin. Now, no soul was ever successful in getting rid of its sins that did not first sincerely repent of them. No fault was ever corrected that was not first discovered and confessed; no habit was ever reformed that had not first been freely acknowledged; and no sin can in any wise be remitted until its perpetration has been truly repented of, and its perpetrator is resolutely resolved against its repetition. It is useless for any accountable being to say that he is without sin. The Scriptures declare that all men are sinful and that no man can truthfully claim exemption from the universal imputation. Little children (under eight years) are not responsible for their acts, and being sinless and therefore unable to repent, are redeemed by the blood of Christ from the foundation of the world. But all accountable souls, to whom the Gospel of salvation is sent, must repent of and forsake their evil ways, habits, deeds and desires, if they wish to make any headway in the pursuit of the precious prize of everlasting exaltation.

BAPTISM BY IMMERSION.

Baptism is symbolical of the burial and resurrection of Christ, and as an ordinance of the Gospel was instituted for the remission of sins. The only proper mode of its administration is by immersion, whereby the two events above mentioned may be illustrated. "We are buried with Him by baptism into death," says Paul, "that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together (buried in water) in the likeness of His death, we shall be also (by coming forth out of the water) in the likeness of His resurrection." Even as Christ, by descending into death, put off the mortality in which He was clothed, and rose triumphant to a higher sphere of action, so we by going down  into the liquid grave, put away the sins and follies of the flesh, and are brought forth to "a life divinely new." Hence it is that baptism is also called a birth, and Christ, in declaring to Nicodemus that a man must be "born of the water and of the spirit," plainly signified emergence from the womb of the waters as a prerequisite to His entrance into the Kingdom of God. He not only pointed this out as the way in which others should walk, but by submitting to baptism himself, He set the example of "fulfilling all righteousness," and was greeted from the heavens, as the result of His obedience, by the voice of God, declaring: "This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased." Nevertheless, water of itself cannot wash away sins. Not even immersion, though in strict accordance with the method prescribed, could have the slightest effect upon the soul of the penitent sinner, unless performed by a person holding authority from on High. God recognizes no administrations but those of His chosen and commissioned servants, clothed upon with the power of the Holy Priesthood, as was John the Baptist; "called of God as was Aaron," and sent forth by the voice of divine revelation to open wide the portals of eternal life to all who are willing to walk in that straight and narrow way which, on account of worldly pride and perversity, but few souls are able to find. But all repentant believers, who are baptized in the proper manner and by the proper authority, are acceptable in the sight of high heaven, and can confidently rely upon the promise made by Peter to the believing portion of the Pentecostal multitude: "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of your sins, and ye shall receive the

GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST."

The Spirit of God, in certain measure, is universally distributed. It is the light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. By it and through it all things live, move and have their being. It

  "Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze, Glows in the stars, and
  blossoms in the trees, Lives through all life, extends through all
  extent, Spreads undivided, operates unspent."

But the Gift of the Holy Ghost--bestowed by the "laying on of hands" upon every faithful, penitent, baptized believer in the true Church of Christ--is a special endowment for  special purposes. It may possibly be a superior quality, or it may be only an increased quantity of that universal essence which pervades all animated nature throughout the illimitable realms of space. But be that as it may, it is certain that this Gift, this Comforter, this Spirit of Truth, which sustains the soul, enlightens the mind, leads into all truth, and enables the spirit of man to comprehend the otherwise incomprehensible things of God, is an important addition to the original possession and like it is susceptible of further increase, cultivation and development. Through obedience and righteousness it may be made to grow and expand, until sin is entirely banished, until the eye is made single to the glory of God, and the whole body is filled with life and light. By disobedience and unrighteousness it will readily decrease and diminish until the light of the soul is utterly extinguished, and darkness, despair and spiritual death ensue. A fullness of God's Holy Spirit should, therefore, be the grand object of human existence, for by it alone can the soul of man be eternally exalted and glorified. Still there are various kinds of "fullness," even as there are different degrees of glory, corresponding to the various merits and capacities of those who rise in the resurrection. The fullness which each soul obtains will be of that particular glory--either Celestial, Terrestrial or Telestial--by which its body is quickened from the grave. The "fullness of the Father" constitutes Celestial exaltation, and this, though not a thing to be suddenly attained, should be the soul-absorbing aim and ambition of every son and daughter of God. We should begin to acquire it now, for all may rest assured that the dispensation of these eternal awards will be strictly in accordance with and regulated by the deeds done in the body. Christ, our Savior, it appears, acquired and possessed a fullness while on earth. But pure and spotless though He was, He did not receive that fullness at first, but afterwards received it. By constantly growing in grace and godliness, living from day to day by every word that proceeded forth from the mouth of God, He gradually became entitled to the steadily increasing possession of the Holy Spirit, till finally "it pleased the Father that in Him should all fullness dwell." We all have it in our power to do and become likewise. He is our great Guide and Exemplar. As He was pure, we must be pure; as He was obedient, we must likewise be; as He became perfect and was found free from all fault or blemish before the throne of God, even so we must become, if we expect to be conformed to His image, inherit His celestial glory, possess a fullness of His  Spirit, become heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, and have an eternal residence in those heavenly mansions prepared for the righteous and the faithful before the foundation of the world.

That the Gospel of Jesus Christ is necessarily one and unchangeable, and with the foregoing as its first or initiatory principles, a perfect and therefore exclusive system of salvation is a proposition which, however unpopular, is susceptible, as previously asserted, of the plainest possible proof. The Holy Scriptures abound in evidences of this fact, and reason amply supports revelation in confirmation of its truth. The Apostle Peter, the highest authority of his times, after the ascension of the Savior, declares (Acts 4: 4) that "there is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved." This passage alone is sufficient to prove the unity of Christ as the Savior of the world and likewise to substantiate the fact that even if there could be another Gospel possessing efficacy as a medium of salvation, it also would have to be a Gospel of Jesus Christ, since He is the sole author of salvation to all the inhabitants of the earth. But Paul, another Apostle, in the fourth chapter of his epistle to the Ephesians, testifies of "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one Spirit," and plainly demonstrates that one of the principal objects of the Gospel, by means of its inspired Priesthood and spiritual gifts, is the bringing of its believers to a "unity of the faith," previous to their being made perfect in Christ; and this, too, corresponds beautifully with the pathetic prayer of the Savior himself (John xvii.), that His disciples might be made "perfect in one," and become one with Him even as He was already one with His Father in heaven.

Paul also, in another place, denouncing the apostasy of the Galatian churches (Galatians i, 8, 9), and the efforts of certain persons to institute "another Gospel" and pervert the true Gospel of Christ, employs the following forcible language: "Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed!" and in order to render his meaning still more plain, unmistakable and emphatic, he repeats the injunction as follows: "If any man preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed." These inspired utterances are too obvious and intelligible to be misunderstood by any honest-hearted reader of the Holy Scriptures. They show as plainly as words can possibly show that the Gospel of Christ is one, and unchangeable in its nature, the same yesterday, today and forever; that its object is the temporal and eternal union of its converts, and that it was designed for the  benefit and blessing of all humanity, especially for such as would believe and faithfully obey its principles. And why should it be otherwise? God is not the author of strife and confusion. He is essentially a lover and promoter of union, and looks with no favor upon those who evince a contrary disposition. He would be the last to encourage, either by thought, word or action, anything having the slightest tendency towards discord, disunion and division. Peace and union are among the prevailing characteristics of His nature, and order, system and eternal harmony are widely manifest in all His wondrous workmanship. We cannot conceive of such a Being, whose avowed purpose is the bringing of His offspring to a oneness of profession and practice, engaging in the institution or promotion of any cause whose inclination would be directly inimical to the attainment of His fondest desires, and laying aside the basic principles of His union-loving, harmony-enhancing nature, to inaugurate strife and contention on earth, and engender difference and disputation among His children upon that greatest and most vitally important of all questions, the eternal salvation of their souls. And would not such consequences ensue, were He to reveal to the human family more than one method of attaining salvation?

The present religious aspect of the Christian world, with its heterogeneous multiplicity of jarring, contending sects, all differing, disputing and dividing among themselves, yet each one claiming to be the true Church of Christ should be a sufficient answer. For if puny man, by apostatizing from truth and concocting such a vast variety of ways and means for worshiping his Maker, can create such a pandemonium of doctrinal discord as that which ecclesiastical Christendom--to say nothing of heathendom--displays, then what might not the Almighty accomplish in the same direction, were it not in diametrical opposition to His principles to descend to the perpetration of such folly and wickedness, and thereby defeat the fulfillment of His most cherished designs, besides dooming unnumbered myriads of His begotten offspring to spiritual death and destruction!

We might continue this argument ad infinitum from a biblical point of view, but without going further into that divine record in quest of proofs which are scattered as thickly as summer sunbeams over its sacred pages, let us now survey the subject from another standpoint and see whether reason alone will not bear out the belief that "this Gospel of the Kingdom," which was to be and now is being "preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations,"  before the coming of "the end," is the one and only system of salvation that has ever been or ever will be revealed from heaven for the redemption and exaltation of the human family.

It is to be presumed that there are but few, if any, sincere believers in God or in any form of religion, bearing the name of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who would willingly assert that the letter could be anything else than a perfect plan of salvation. The Almighty, as a perfect being, is necessarily perfect in all His ways and works, and any system or science devised by Him for the temporal or spiritual regeneration of our race, would consequently be faultless in construction, consummate in operation and thoroughly capable of fulfilling every requirement of its existence. These facts being admitted, we must immediately concede the unity and exclusiveness of the Gospel of Christ. How so? it might be asked. For the following reasons: A perfect Gospel is of necessity an exclusive Gospel, for of any two such systems, which for argument's sake, we will say might be revealed, one of them must as a matter of course be inferior. No two things can be created exactly alike, and therefore, speaking in the strictest sense of the term, no such thing as equality can possibly exist. But even if it could, in the present instance, what would be the use of two Gospels made exactly alike for precisely the same purpose? The Creator is a wise economist, but such an act would be superfluous and extravagant in the highest degree. But they could not be exactly alike. One of them, as explained, would have to be inferior, for only one of the twain could be perfect, and hence completely competent to fulfill the exact measure of their mutual formation. The superior Gospel would be the creation of God, and it alone; for the inferior one, being imperfect and therefore defective in its organization and capacity, could not possibly proceed from Him, since there is no such thing as imperfection extant in all His handiwork. It is true, His creature, man, is at present very imperfect, but not so originally. God made man upright, says Solomon, "but they have sought out many inventions." On the morning of creation, he, with all the rest of the Creator's great workmanship, was made perfect and pronounced "very good," but he afterward fell into transgression, which is always the downward path, and through his own sins and follies has steadily degenerated to his present fallen condition. Now it is only by means of a perfect Gospel that he can be regenerated  and raised to the high and perfect position from which he fell, and such a one is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the subject we are now considering.

A perfect Gospel comprehending all truth, all intelligence, all principles of progression, is necessarily sole and exclusive in its nature. It actually precludes, not only the necessity, but likewise the possibility of the existence of any other Gospel having genuine efficacy and saving virtue. For being complete and perfect in all its parts, all inclusive, all absorbent, all powerful, all sufficient in character and capability, as the greater, it would certainly comprehend the less, and not only deprive it, if existing, of any room or occasion to operate, but if not existing, would leave no extra, unusual material for its construction. So that whichever alternative is chosen, by such as may be disposed to question the validity of our position, it is clearly the case that any other Gospel, besides the only one that ever did, ever will, or in the very nature of things ever can exist, would either be superfluous or impossible; and to accuse the all-wise Creator of committing either folly, would be an insult to His intelligence and a profanation of His character. Mankind may invent, as mankind has already invented, systems upon systems of so-called religion, and falsely call them, to his greater condemnation, by the sacred name of Him who died that all men might live, and some of these man-made methods of worship, or rather idolatry, though all are imperfect and defective, like their clay creators, may be exceedingly plausible and popular with their professors, nor yet entirely devoid of grains and particles of truth. Nevertheless they are all illegal and unauthorized of God, who will utterly refuse to recognize the usurped authority, unlawful establishment and unhallowed administrations, or to accept of the fruits of any faith or form of worship, whatsoever, aside from those of the everlasting, unchangeable Gospel of His Son Jesus Christ. The Gospel of Jesus Christ! That sole and exclusive system of salvation, that perfect and perpetual science of progression, that marvelous and mysterious plan, so plain, so simple, and withal so powerful; so admirably adapted to the needs and capacity of every soul, from the highest to the humblest intelligence ever tabernacled in mortal flesh, and so amply capable of subserving the far-reaching purposes of Omnipotent Creator, as to be the all essential method of salvation in this life, and the indispensable medium of unceasing exaltation in the life to come!

It is a matter of easy comprehension in the ordinary affairs of life, why obedience to any natural law must of necessity  precede the attainment of its legitimate result. The accountant at his desk knows perfectly well that in order to obtain the sum of a column of figures he must first employ one of the fundamental rules of the science of mathematics; the chemist in his laboratory is equally aware that the blending of certain elements, in accordance with established rules of the science with which he is operating, is absolutely essential to the formation of the compound which he desires; the student at school who aspires to honors and efficiency in the course he is pursuing, is fully as well satisfied that faithful application and a certain line of deportment is indispensable to insure him a successful examination, with its subsequent reward or recognition of merit; the alien desiring citizenship, when once informed of the fact, seldom, if ever, hesitates to question the advisability of "taking out his papers," or going through certain forms of law, in order that he may be qualified to exercise the rights and privileges of a member of the commonwealth; and it is self-evident that the traveler, who wishes to arrive with all possible speed and security at his destination, must previously select and intently pursue the shortest, safest and most feasible route leading in the right direction. These facts are patent to the poorest comprehension.

Why is it, then, that so many, to whom the above illustrations are so simple and self-evident, fail to see the analogy which exists with reference to the great Gospel or science of salvation, and the obedience to its laws, principles and requirements so imperatively essential to admission into an eternal inheritance in the Celestial Kingdom of God? Why is it that so many millions, notwithstanding the plainest and most pointed declarations of inspired Scripture, the examples and testimonies of the Savior and holy men of old, corroborated by the God-given human reason, profanely and recklessly insist on asserting that compliance with the sacred and everlasting laws and ordinances of salvation is no longer necessary to accomplish the very object of their institution, and vainly imagine or assume to suppose that it is possible to reach the presence of their Maker without putting into practice the immutable principles upon which all celestial promises are predicated, and responding fully and faithfully to the requirements invariably made of those who become possessed of this inestimable privilege? Why is it that the accountant cannot see that eternal life is the sum of all existence, and that all who would obtain it must add together faith and good works, unceasingly, employing all rules, both fundamental  and superstructive, of salvation's endless science, in order to solve the otherwise insoluble problem of this life and acquire the grand total of life everlasting in the world to come? Why is it that the chemist cannot perceive that the all-containing compound of eternal happiness is only to be produced by the careful and judicious mixture of the elements of eternal salvation while man yet lingers in the laboratory of his mortal probation? How can the student in the precious school of earthly experience, who fails to improve his time and learn well the lessons assigned to him in this intermediate department of God's great University, hope to pass a successful examination at His Judgment Seat, to merit or attain possession of the "greatest gift of God," and be blessed with the opportunities of entering upon a higher course of studies in a never ending future of education and experience, if he does not win and present a properly signed and attested certificate of good conduct while here, and of complete and thorough preparation for the ineffable and interminable hereafter? Why does the alien of the world, who professes to seek Citizenship in the Celestial Commonwealth, foolishly doubt the necessity of taking the oath of naturalization, renouncing all foreign allegiance, responsibilities and relationship, and conforming to the plain and positive regulations by means of which alone he can even so much as enter into the Gates of the Golden City, to say nothing of exercising and enjoying the rights, privileges and possessions accorded to its humble, faithful, obedient and law-abiding inhabitants? Or why should the traveler of time, the pilgrim to a promised paradise, as he journeys through this weary wilderness, entertain the expectation that he can avoid the pitfalls, snares and dangers which beset his pathway at every step, and arrive with safety and all possible expedition to the flowery outskirts of the dark and dreary desert, where the arms of a loving and sympathetic Savior are waiting open and ready to receive him, if he does not pursue the straight, narrow and only practicable route tending in the proper direction?--in the direction of Him who explored the waste, pioneered and opened up the way, brushing and clearing it with His own bleeding hands and feet, of many of its sharpest rocks and crudest thorns and brambles, planting innumerable guideposts and danger signals along the line of the perilous probation, thereby making it not only possible, but comparatively easy for all men to follow in His footsteps, to inherit bowers of eternal bliss and gardens of unspeakable glory beyond, but solemnly and repeatedly asseverating, both before and after  the close of his brave and remarkable career, that there is none other way under the whole heaven whereby the same pilgrimage can be accomplished and the devoutedly wished for consummation attained.

Some will doubtless contend that the cases above mentioned, though capable of parabolical comparison, are not practically analogous in their nature; that the ordinary process employed by the accountant, the chemist, the student, the alien and the traveler, are matters of plain and practical fact, self-evident truths, susceptible of the easiest elucidation, and do not therefore demand, for their acceptance, the exercise of that faith or far-reaching credulity, so indispensably pre-requisite to the investigation of the Gospel, and the acknowledgment of implicit obedience to its principles as the sole alternative to the sacrifice of all hopes of celestial exaltation. In reply to this argument, since to all who would put it forth it would be waste of time and trouble to quote Scripture, we desire to propound two questions. By what means have the so-called self-evident truths of modern science, art, invention, philosophy, etc.--now, but not always, so easily explained and understood--become the plainly proved and firmly established facts that we find them at the present time? Does not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the perfect and perpetual plan of salvation, purposely made simple and comprehensible--as great things invariably are--in order that even the wayfaring man, though a fool, might not needfully err therein--does it not exhibit upon its face ample and indubitable evidences of the power and efficacy which it claims, and has been proven by unnumbered millions to possess? To the first question we unhesitatingly assert, without fear of successful contradiction, that every truth now known to mortal man has at some period in its history been more or less the subject of his doubt and conjecture, if not of his open and avowed hostility and unbelief, and that without any exception their adoption, establishment and development on earth have been directly due to the exercise of what some people are pleased to confound with the term credulity, but which we prefer to designate by the more dignified and appropriate title of faith, all-powerful faith, a principle whose necessity as the foundation or mainspring of all action and success, is as self-evident as any other fact under heaven, and without which, as a necessary consequence, no truth whatever could have been brought forth, proven and perpetuated in the mind and memory of man. The exercise of faith, the humility and willingness to make experiments, the honesty and courage to proclaim results,  the fortitude and patience to endure the taunts, the sneers, the threats and even persecutive violence of the ignorant, unprincipled, selfish, skeptical, unthinking and depraved--the latter incited by Satan, the resister and would-be destroyer of right, and the former pushed on and inspired by Almighty God, the great leader of the vanguard in the eternal march of human progress;--these and these alone are the invincible agencies which have converted popular opinion and transformed the once "crazy notions," "impossible theories," "wild speculations" and "manifest absurdities" of "crack-brained" genius and philosophy, into the since time-honored maxims, venerable proverbs, world-accepted facts and self-evident propositions, and the many marvelous artistic triumphs and scientific achievements now so popular and prevalent in the world, and of which the world that formerly despised and persecuted their incipiency, with its customary conceit and inconsistency, is at present so vainglorious and proud. Faith and good works, those inseparable, Siamese twins of Gospel efficacy, have done all that ever has been or ever will be done, in heaven or on earth, for the benefit and blessing of humanity, while blind, bigoted unbelief and cold-hearted skepticism, though always the loudest to boast of the world's advancement, especially if it advances in wickedness, have as invariably been the persistent opposers and stumbling-blocks in the way of all righteous progress and development. As to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, every principle of which, on fair and honest investigation, will be found abundantly capable of demonstrating its own power and saving virtue, we dare and do maintain, from ample observation and individual experience, that it requires far more credulity to disbelieve the validity of its claim to being "the power of God unto salvation," than faith for its acceptance and acknowledgment as the one and only medium through which the souls of men and the planet upon which they dwell can be saved, sanctified and celestialized forevermore.

Hear it, ye nations and inhabitants of the earth! Hear it and give heed, while yet the Gospel trump is sounding through the streets of your cities, and its receding echoes are ringing and reverberating from your hills and highways! Hear it and heed it, while the lingering twilight of hope keeps back the fast descending night of despair; while the "swift messengers" of salvation are still going forth, and the acceptance of their warning message will avail. Despise not the humble testimonies of those unlettered oracles of God, for every word they deliver is rife with the fate of men and nations, and simultaneous  with their utterance on earth, the busy pens of recording angels are enrolling them upon the archives of eternal judgment. Remember that from humblest and apparently weakest causes, have ofttimes sprung the highest, wisest and mightiest results, and if the Gospel is plain and simple in construction, and its advocates and adherents among the poorest and most illiterate of men, that the Almighty has purposely made them so, that the faith of the proud world might be tested, that its population, high and low, rich and poor, learned and unlearned, might be left without excuse for its rejection, and that to God, not man, might redound all honor and glory for the triumph which His omnipotent truth is destined to achieve. Put away all prejudice and narrow pre-conceptions, close your ears against the voice of misrepresentation and calumny, shake off the cloak and coil of cowardice, smother the selfish promptings of worldly interest, and while you sacrifice the paltry things of earth, remember that you are laying up eternal treasures in heaven. "Choose ye this day whom ye will serve!" The line of demarkation is being drawn, the times of separating, sifting and sorting are at hand, and the worshipers of God and Mammom henceforth must cease to mingle and commune. The night of doubt is ended. The day of decision has dawned. Truth and Error have taken the field, their hostile hosts are already in battle array, and the trumpets of both sides are sounding loudly for volunteers, summoning the earth's inhabitants to the Armogeddon of Almighty God. On which side will you fight? Which cause are you willing to be found defending to the death? Be wise in choice. Be instant in decision! But above all things be not dazzled and deceived.

  "Truth, crushed to earth, will rise again,
  The eternal years of God are hers;
  But error, wounded, writhes with pain,
  And dies amid his worshipers."

THE MISUSE OF POWER.

BY ELDER ORSON F. WHITNEY, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1882.

The severest test to which human virtue may possibly be subjected is the possession of unlimited power. Man may be ruled and wronged, persecuted and trampled upon, and the vitality and sweetness of his character will survive the tyranny of his oppressors, and like the shamrock of Ireland, which is said to take root and flourish when trodden under foot, gain strength and endurance from the very means employed for its destruction. But give him his own way, remove all restraints and barriers between him and the gratification of his selfish desires, and he is a strong man indeed who completely withstands the temptation.

The term power may imply lofty and influential position, boundless wealth, or intellectual eminence, or it may embrace in its definition all sources of dominion together; but whether considered singly or collectively, it can make no material difference. The rule finds general application. History is replete with examples of individuals and communities, kings and kingdoms, chiefs and armies, priests and churches, presidents and peoples, illustrative of the almost inevitable misfortune which results from investing mankind with extraordinary power and authority. Heroes have risen and fallen, dynasties have flourished and decayed, races have bloomed and withered, empires have been founded and destroyed; and in nearly every instance, either directly or indirectly, their downfall and destruction have been due to an improper use of the gifts and powers they were permitted to exercise. The opportunities afforded for the indulgence of pride and selfishness, the unbridled facilities presented for the gratification of passion, and the perpetration of every species of wickedness, with the thousand and one historical proofs of the proneness even of the greatest and most virtuous to succumb to these allurements of vice, to say nothing of the incumbent labors and responsibilities, are sufficient, it would seem, to make the tenure of earthly authority, or the possession of vast wealth, among the most undesirable attainments.

Let it not be inferred that we regard such things as essentially evil, or consider all aims and efforts in their direction as necessarily debasing in their tendency. Far from it. It is not wealth, but the inordinate love of it, that is "the root of all evil;" it is not the possession, but the perversion of power, that is the bane of man's happiness and prosperity. It is no more of an evil to hold power than to possess wealth, and no more of a sin to possess wealth than to enjoy any other blessing which flows from the Giver of all good; for as long as heaven has gifts to bestow, there must needs be those who will receive them and those who are best entitled to be the recipients are those who endeavor to deserve them and are qualified to use them in wisdom and righteousness, for the glory of God and the welfare of their fellow men. It is not the honest aim for, nor the proper exercise of these advantages, that are deserving subjects of deprecation and disparagement, but it is the misuse of power, the prostitution of wealth, the neglect or abuse of any of the blessings of life, and the unhallowed methods employed in their acquisition, that are and ever will be, legitimate objects of denunciation and discouragement. So far from its being wrong to aim for superiority and excellence in any righteous direction, it is exactly the reverse. Our Father in heaven expects it of us. He demands that His children advance unceasingly towards power, wealth and intelligence illimitable. His motto is upward and onward, His course is one eternal round of progression, and His constant exhortation is, to follow in His footsteps; and as long as we have in view the exaltation that He has attained and confine ourselves strictly to the methods which He has ordained for its accomplishment, there is no danger of our being too ambitious or of making an improper use of the powers He will eventually bestow. But it is here in this weak mortal state, where our eyes are dazzled by the tinsel of earthly vanities, where our ears are enchanted by the dulcet but delusive notes of fame, and our feet are so apt to be seduced from the paths of virtue by the gilded snares of vice; it is here that there is an ever present danger of misusing the gifts and blessings we are privileged to enjoy, and it is this continuous and extreme liability that should render the acquisition of earthly power and wealth, to the great majority of mankind, exceedingly undesirable. All men who hold position do not abuse its privileges, and the man who serves God humbly and faithfully never will, for the moment he yielded to the temptation so to do, that moment would he cease to serve the Lord; but there are many, alas! who sadly misuse  the functions of their office, and prostitute every power and privilege to the gratification of self and the injury and embarrassment of their fellow men. It is dangerous to put some men into power. They swell up and become so distended with the ideas of their greatness and importance, that we are forcibly reminded of so many inflated toy balloons, which the slightest prick of a pin would burst and ruin forever. A very small office and a very little authority is sufficient to intoxicate some men and render them entirely unfit for duty.

The Prophet Joseph, in the course of a prophecy uttered in March, 1839, speaks as follows:

    "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and
    disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little
    brief authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to
    exercise unrighteous dominion;" and in two preceding paragraphs
    of the same, these words occur: "The rights of the priesthood are
    inseparably connected with the powers of heaven, and the powers of
    heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles
    of righteousness. That they may be conferred upon us, it is
    true; but when we undertake to cover our sins, or to gratify our
    pride, our vain ambition, or to exercise control, or dominion, or
    compulsion upon the souls of the children of men, in any degree
    of unrighteousness, behold the heavens withdraw themselves, the
    Spirit of the Lord is grieved and when it is withdrawn, Amen to the
    Priesthood or the authority of that man."

It is a certain indication of a weak mind when it can be overturned by a brief draught of authority. Like a ship which spreads sail, but lacks the necessary tonnage to hold it level with the sea, the individual who hoists his pride on high and is devoid of the indispensable ballast of common sense, will speedily run on to ruin and oblivion. Solomon never said a wiser thing than that "Pride goeth beside destruction; and an haughty spirit before a fall." But the truly great man is never so affected. Too broad and deep and sensible to be dazzled by terrestrial splendor and too intent upon his purpose to be swayed or directed by the flattery of the fawning multitude, instead of being elevated, he is more apt to be humbled by promotion to power, or if he ever feels its influence, it is like new wine refreshing a giant, not like a seltzer draught overcoming a dwarf.

Some men evidently deem it their duty to be ambitious for distinction, on the principle, we suppose, that if the mountain will not come to Mahomet, Mahomet must go to the mountain. While this may be measurably true with regard to worldly matters, it is not so respecting the things of the Kingdom of God. No Latter-day Saint need aim for power or position in the Church of Jesus Christ. If he be destined to  hold office in the Priesthood, or to occupy any post of honor within the gift of that Priesthood, he can afford to wait in patience for it to come to him, for come it will, in the due time of the Lord, Mahomet's mountain to the contrary notwithstanding; but if he is not destined for the position to which he aspires, despite his most strenuous efforts he will be the victim of disappointment; or if permitted to reach the height of the ambition, it will be but to fall therefrom when his folly and his weakness shall have been made fully manifest. It is madness to rush needlessly into peril. Duty and necessity are the only motives which should impel any one into an encounter with temptation. The only assurance of complete victory over sin, after bravely meeting and conquering the temptations that can be safely met and resisted, is in avoiding all others which God never intended us to meet, and which as a consequence, we would find it impossible to overcome. A little done well brings a much higher blessing than a great deal undertaken and unworthily performed. Let him who lusts after wealth and aspires to earthly honors beyond the station in which it has pleased the Almighty to place him, ponder this well in his heart. Let him ask himself if he is qualified to make a wise use of the things he covets, if he is able to bear up under the heavy responsibilities they entail, and strong enough to resist successfully the temptations which would assail him on every hand; and if he is satisfied of this, let him recollect that God selects for His rulers those who have been humble and faithful in subordinate capacities, and that it is far more admirable to wait for, than to openly invite recognition and promotion. By the faithful discharge of the duties of his humbler calling, let him prove himself worthy of the honors of a higher, and having attained the summit of his hopes, the possession of the power, the wealth and the intelligence he craved, let him carefully exercise those gifts in the fear of the Lord and the love of his fellowmen, lest he prove recreant to his trust, turn traitor to his God and be hurled from his exaltation like Lucifer from Heaven.

HAPPINESS FOR THE SORROWFUL.

BY APOSTLE ORSON PRATT, IN MILLENNIAL STAR, 1866.

Who is the happy man? Is it the king upon his throne? Is it the mighty emperor who sways the destiny of millions? Does happiness consist in ruling, in judging, in politics, in thrones, in palaces, in earthly grandeur? Does it consist in the honor which man renders to his fellowman? Is it found in high titles, such as Right Honorable Lord Bishop, his Holiness--the Pope, his Majesty--the King, or Emperor, his Lordship, etc., etc.? Does happiness seek the mansions of the rich, the splendid habitations and beautiful parks of the noblemen? Does happiness seek the companionship of the learned, and select its abode in academies, colleges and universities? Has the philosopher, the astronomer, the chemist, the optician, the mathematician, the learned in any science, sought out its desirable dwelling place? Tell me, ye swarming millions of bygone generations, who among you were happy? Tell me, O sons of earth, has happiness been found by mortals? Whither shall I go for an answer? Let creation speak; let the earth open her mouth and testify. Listen! What sounds are those I hear? Can it be the low murmurings of distant thunder? It cannot be! It proceeds as if from the bowels of the earth! But hark! Did I not hear words, articulated in a deep, low, mournful sound? Has the earth, indeed, a language? Can she also express her sorrows? But, listen again! She sighs! She mourns! She exclaims: "Woe, woe is me, the mother of men! I am pained! I am weary because of the wickedness of my children! When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which has gone out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" Who could listen to this sorrowful, painful lamentation, this earnest, solemn, appeal to the Creator, and not be moved? Who could reflect upon the bitterness and anguish of our great common mother, and not weep over the untold miseries she has endured for six thousand years? Who so dead to sympathy, that he could not join with an intensity of desire' unutterable, for the emancipation  of the groaning captive? Oh, let the chains of old earth be burst asunder; let her arise and shake her very foundations; let her put on the strength and power of her Omnipotent Creator; let her gather the mighty waters into one place; let her unite the islands and the continents into one land, into an eternal bond of union; let the everlasting mountains bow their lofty heads; let the sanctifying fire of the Lord cleanse corruption from her face; let the redeemed captive smile as at the creation's morn, and be blessed with the presence of her Creator, and be crowned with rest--everlasting rest.

But is there no rest for man? Must he seek, and seek in vain for happiness? Where, Oh, where can the sacred gem be found? Is man forever doomed to sorrow, lamentation, and ghastly death? Or is there hope? Shall the sons of mortality appeal to the earth for aid? No, verily no; she herself has need of aid. Whence, then, shall they look for help? From heaven! From the high and lofty One who sits upon the throne! From the Creator, the Redeemer, the great fountain and eternal source of happiness. To Him, O ye sons of sorrow, direct your cry; to Him lift up the voice of supplication and fervent prayer; to Him bow your stubborn hearts, and wills, and yield yourselves to the voice of inspiration, to the counsel of His messengers; obey the heavenly, angelic message of the restored Gospel, and you shall be filled with the Holy Ghost--the Comforter, and be born again into a kingdom of happiness. Let all who seek for happiness, know assuredly, that this is the only road that leads to her peaceful abode. Peace is being taken from among the nations. She has sought out a resting place among the mountains of Israel, in the new found world. There, and there only will the weary be at rest, and the sons of sorrow find an heavenly balm for every wound. There the great Physician will heal the soul, and the body, too. There the heavens will converse with the sons of earth, and pour down the rich treasures of wisdom to feast the hungry, longing soul. There the Lord has commanded the blessing, even life forever more. There, in the Lord's mountain, will He take away the veil that is over all flesh, and wipe away the tears of the sorrowful, and impart a fullness of life and everlasting joy.

THE STRAIGHT AND NARROW WAY.

DOCTRINES THE SAVIOR TAUGHT.

BY ELDER EPHRAIM H. NYE.

In the meridian of time, the Savior came and dwelt among the children of men. He was born in a stable and cradled in a manger. The days and years of His childhood and youth were spent with His parents in the ordinary walks and vocations of life. Many wonderful things occurred in relation to His conception and birth: Angelic choirs from the heavens descended, chanting glad tidings of great joy, peace on earth, good will toward men. Herod's cunning plans were baffled; his boundless rage, his cruel edict, the death of the innocents; Joseph's heavenly warning to flee to Egypt with the young child, his journey and return, his stay in Galilee that the Scriptures might be fulfilled; all these dropped out of the public mind, and, as the years rolled by, were forgotten and lost, except by his relatives and friends.

As He sojourned among men during the years of His youth and early manhood, there was little in His life to attract the attention of His fellows until he unostentatiously walked down into the waters of the river Jordan, and there was baptized by John; and though the Holy Ghost was seen to rest upon Him in the form of a dove, as He walked out of the water, and a voice from heaven was heard to say, "This is My beloved Son in whom I am well pleased;" yet men did not recognize in Him the Son of God.

Though He preached the gospel of repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, chose and ordained twelve Apostles and sent them forth to preach, and went forth healing all manner of sickness and dire disease, causing the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to walk and leap for joy, teaching as no other man had taught, healing as no other man had healed, rebuking as no other man had ever dared rebuke men for the sins they daily committed, yet they rejected Him and condemned Him to a cruel death, and though He rose again (which fact was noised abroad so that all the inhabitants of  Jerusalem were cognizant of it), still they could not see in Him the Savior of the world.

On the great day of Pentecost, when there were gathered together devout men of all the surrounding nations, "suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them (the Disciples) and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance."

The people of the multitude were all amazed, for they heard of the wonderful works of God, each in his own tongue. Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and said unto them: "Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words." Then, repeating the words of the Prophet Joel, he showed to them that Christ should come, and briefly sketched the history of His life, recounting His wonderful works and noble deeds, showed forth to the people that they had by cruel hands put Him to death, thus crucifying the Lord of Glory; that in fulfillment of the Prophet's words, God had raised Him from the dead; that on the third day He had been seen by the Apostles and many others with whom He had conversed, "whereof we are all witnesses. Therefore, being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received "of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, He hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear." "Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same Jesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ."

"Now when they heard this they were pricked in their hearts and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?" Not until this moment did they believe in Jesus of Nazareth as the Savior of the world. Though all His wonderful works had been performed in their midst, yet not until the story of His life, His terrible death, His glorious resurrection, and the wonderful outpouring of the Holy Ghost now manifested before their eyes, did faith spring up in their hearts, and a desire to be partakers of the heavenly gift, causing them to plead with the Apostles, "What shall we do?"

FAITH AND WORKS.

Faith is the main-spring of all action, a mighty moving power. By it Noah, Abraham and Moses performed their  wonderful works; the children of Israel passed through the Red Sea, the walls of Jericho fell, the harlot Rahab perished not; Gideon, Barak, David and others of the prophets subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises and stopped the mouths of lions.

The Apostle Paul understood the wonderful power of faith when he said (Heb. xi, 6), "But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." This verse is self-explanatory. If we did not believe that God lives and will reward those who diligently seek Him, we should not seek Him at all. The third verse reads, "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God." So then, not only could the wonderful works before recounted be performed by the old worthies, but even worlds could be framed when necessary through faith.

But will faith alone accomplish the salvation of the soul of men. As opinions differ, and he who risks his soul's salvation upon the uncertainties of men's opinions, has but a vain hope of being led aright; let the Scriptures answer the question. James 2nd ch. 14-26. This declaration of the great Apostle seems to set at rest for all time the theory that faith alone is sufficient to save mankind. In closing his speech, he very forcibly states that, "As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also." Shall we not say, then, that works are necessary, and if so, what are those works?

REPENTANCE.

Again let the Scriptures tell the tale. Math. 3, 2d, "In those days came John the Baptist--saying 'Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.'" Jesus came preaching the gospel of the Kingdom of God (Mark i, 15) "and saying, the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye and believe the Gospel." (Mark vi, 12.) "And they (the Apostles) went out, and preached that men should repent." Jesus was evidently determined that there should be no mistake upon this matter when he said (Luke xiii, 3-5): "I tell you Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Of those eighteen upon whom the tower of Siloam fell and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish." The word of the Lord to Israel in the days of Ezekiel was equally positive (Ezek. xviii, 30), "Therefore  I will judge you, O House of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord God. Repent and turn yourselves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin." Nor does it appear that conditions had at all changed in the days of the Apostle Paul, for we find him declaring in the most emphatic terms (Acts xvii, 30), "And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to repent." This, then, is the first grand step of preparatory work in securing salvation in the Kingdom of God.

But the question may arise in the mind of our reader, Wherein have I sinned? In what have I done wrong? I have complied with all the requirements of the decalogue, I have lived according to the golden rule, doing unto others as I would be done by. What have I to repent of? Have you not been guilty of following after and believing in man-made systems of religion and of worshiping in churches erected for the purpose of making merchandise of the souls of men? Look abroad upon the face of the earth, search in all the Christian world for the true Church of Christ as organized and recognized by Him, where do you find it? Like the shipwrecked mariner whose weary eye scans the vast horizon with a lingering hope that a friendly sail will come to his relief, till his heart grows faint and dies within him, so it is with many an honest soul seeking the way to eternal life, anon as he listens to the various creeds and examines the doctrines of the different sects, he discovers discrepancies everywhere. No one has a perfect form of worship; all have dwindled in unbelief; they have departed from the faith of the ancients; they have turned away from the true and living God, as the Apostle Paul said (2nd Tim. iv, 3), "For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned into fables. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. Preaching for doctrine the precepts of men."

Churches have been erected whose spires rise in every town and city, village and hamlet over all the land, in which men preach for hire and divine for money; thus making merchandise of the souls of men, having, as Isaiah says, "Transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant," and "it shall be as with the people, so with the priest," and as Jesus said in Luke, "Can the blind lead the blind? Shall they not both fall into the ditch?" We answer  by saying, as the Apostles of old said: "Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins." (Acts ii, 38.) Yes, for the fruits of repentance are a broken heart and a contrite spirit; and it is provided that such an one should walk in the footsteps of Jesus, down into the water, and, like Him, be buried beneath the liquid wave.

BAPTISM.

This was the first act that Jesus did preparatory to His ministerial labors, and the very last command He gave to His Apostles prior to His ascension into heaven (Matt, xxviii, 19-20), "Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." And what had He just commanded them?--to baptise all nations. The next witness testifies a little stronger (Mark xvi, 15-16), "And He said unto them, Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned."

Oh, what an opportunity to secure eternal life, what a glorious promise, and this, too, from the Author of our salvation! Many say that they believe on Him, that they have faith in Him, and yet persistently refuse to accept the conditions that He has offered for their salvation.

Surely no one will have the audacity to assert that He who gave His life and shed His blood that we may obtain eternal life, has not the right to establish the conditions upon which we may secure the benefits of that atoning blood. His promise is plain, and in language unmistakable, "He that believes and is baptized shall be saved." Let us not forget that the declaration is equally positive that, "He that believeth not shall be damned." Nor is John the Beloved less explicit in his statement of what the Savior said to Nicodemus (John iii, 5), "Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." Here is a declaration from the Great Master Himself, that ought to be a sufficient answer to all who fondly imagine that they can find some other way.

Again, there are those who believe that if they live a life of honor and integrity among men, and serve God according to the best light they have, that they will be entitled to an inheritance in the Kingdom of God. To all such, let the Scriptures once more declare the fact (Acts x, 1-6 and 48), "There  was a man in Caesarea called Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian Band, a devout man and one that feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people and prayed to God always. He saw in a vision, evidently about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him and saying unto him--Cornelius; and when he looked on him he was afraid and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God; and now send men to Joppa and call for one Simon whose surname is Peter; he lodgeth with one Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the seaside. He shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do." Ah! Cornelius, you God-fearing, alms-giving, prayerful man, there is something that you have not done! Though your faith has reached unto heaven, and your prayers have been heard and your alms-giving considered by the Almighty, yet there is something for you to do of such great importance that the windows of heaven were opened and an angel sent forth unto you as a messenger, to notify you of the fact. What is it, Cornelius? He sent for Peter, as he was commanded, and when Peter came, saw his faith, and that of his household, heard their words and that they believed on the Lord Jesus, "he commanded them to be baptized." This is the door into the Kingdom of God.

OBJECT OF BAPTISM.

Now there is a great diversity of opinion among men as to the grand object for which baptism was instituted; some believing that it should be performed in the presence of a great number of people as a testimony to them that the humble penitent has put on Christ; others, again, claiming that it is an "outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace," and still others, that it was intended as a witness before men of a "change of heart." Not a word can be found in the Scriptures to support any of these positions, but, on the other hand, evidence abounds in the sacred record to prove that the ordinance of baptism was for the purpose of "washing away" or "for the remission of sins." Let us take the testimony of Mark i, 4, "John did baptize in the wilderness and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;" of Luke iii, 3, "And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins;" Acts ii, 38, "Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized, every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins." Also Acts xxii, 16, "And now why tarriest thou? Arise  and be baptized and wash away thy sins." Here the grand question arises: of what does sin consist? Is it not the violation of law or the breaking of a command, and is not the sin of omission as great as the sin of commission? Surely the commandment, "Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy," is just as binding as the one that precedes it, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain," yet the failure to obey the one would be a sin of omission, while to break the other would be a sin of commission. And are not the commandments issued by the Savior and His Apostles as much the commands of God as those uttered on Mount Sinai? And, if so, a failure to comply when "God commands all men everywhere to repent," as in Acts xvii, 30, or where Peter commanded them to "repent and be baptized for the remission of sins," as in Acts ii, 38, brings us under the condemnation of a broken law and adjudges us as sinners before God.

Having now discovered the door of the straight and narrow way that leads to eternal life, which door is baptism, and the object of which is the remission or washing away of our sins, it now becomes particularly interesting to decide who are proper candidates for baptism.

SUBJECTS FIT FOR BAPTISM.

Among the various sects and creeds of modern Christendom, many believe in the practice of baptizing little children. We unhesitatingly say that no foundation or justification for such a practice can be found in the Scriptures. It has been shown beyond question, according to the Scriptures, that baptism is for the remission of sins. Sin is the breaking of a law or command of God. The child, until it comes to the years of understanding, is not able to comprehend law or understand the binding nature of a command; hence it is irresponsible. For where there is no comprehension there is no law; and where there is no law there can be no sin; and where there is no sin, baptism is uncalled for and out of place and is in direct violation of the commands of our Savior. For if by baptism one child who dies in its infancy may be ushered into the arms of Jesus, and for the lack of baptism another child dying in its infancy is forbidden His sacred presence, then is it not strange that He did not mention this important and essential ordinance of baptism when He said, as in Mark x, 13-16, "And they brought young children to Him that He should touch them and His disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, He was much displeased  and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto Me, and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. And He took them up in His arms, put His hands upon them and blessed them."

The testimony of St. Luke is almost identical. It reads as follows (Luke xviii, 15-17): "And they brought unto Him also infants, that He should touch them, but when His disciples saw it they rebuked them. But Jesus called them unto Him, and said, Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, shall in no wise enter therein." Clearly, then, baptism was never intended for little children, for baptism having been instituted for the purpose of washing away sins, sins already committed, and the child not having committed any, the ordinance would not apply. But what is more important, he that believes in and declares it necessary for the little child to be baptized, and baptizes it, is committing a most grievous sin in the sight of God; but it is not true, as claimed by many Christians, that the little infant that dies without baptism is shut out from the presence of God, that hell is paved with little unbaptized children, and they are erecting a barrier to those little infants in the form of the ordinance of baptism and "forbidding" all such to come unto Christ, thus breaking one of His most emphatic commands, uttered when "He was much displeased" at what the disciples were doing, and said, "Forbid them not, but suffer them to come unto Me."

The little child is pure and innocent because it can commit no sin until it comes to the years of accountability. Sin, then, conceives in its heart, and as it grows in years Satan tempts it and it becomes sinful and wicked, and the means provided by the Almighty to cleanse it and make it again as pure and as innocent as it was in the beginning of its mortal career, is the sacred ordinance of baptism. And thus may the repentant sinner become like the example that Jesus set before them, as shown by Matt, xviii, 2-4, "And Jesus called a little child unto Him and set him in the midst of them and said, Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore, shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." Thus the little child is given to us as a pattern of purity, a sample of innocence, by  the Savior Himself; and the bare theory of baptizing such little innocents to wash away their sins becomes revolting to the human mind when considered under the light of reason, and the practice of it is an abomination in the sight of God. Therefore, little children are not eligible for baptism.

This declaration stands out in bold relief when viewed in the light of the following passages, which plainly prove that all candidates for the Kingdom of God must be capable of being taught (Matt, xxviii, 13-20): "Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." All must have sufficient mental development to be capable of believing the doctrines taught, as shown by the Savior's commandment, and Mark xvi, 16, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned." "But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ they were baptized, both men and women" (Acts viii, 12). "And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water, and the Eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized? and Philip said, If thou believest with all thine heart, thou mayest, and he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God." (Acts viii, 36-37.)

A knowledge of the divine truths of revealed religion when once impressed upon the heart, causes faith to spring forth in the soul, and with admiration we reflect upon the life of Him whose wondrous love was manifested toward us when He offered His life as a sacrifice for our sins. By comparison we realize our own unworthiness; that our feet have strayed from the path of right and that we are steeped in iniquity.

With this conviction comes a resolution to turn, if possible, from our wicked ways and walk in newness of life. This brings repentance, a forsaking of sin, a reverence for Almighty God and an earnest desire to search after and serve Him in spirit and in truth. We resolve to tread the path in which our Savior walked, down into the waters of baptism, thus following Him through the door into the Kingdom of God, that where He is we may be also.

Sufficient mental capacity to be taught, to believe, to repent, and to voluntarily offer one's self for obedience to the succeeding principle of the Gospel, is a prerequisite to the ordinance of baptism. Little children have not this capacity, consequently there is no law of God requiring them to be baptized;  and all man-made systems to the contrary will be null and void in the day of judgment.

MODE OF BAPTISM.

There are so many conflicting opinions on this question. The orthodox Christian churches having departed from the faith of the Apostles, and built up churches to themselves, for the purpose of making merchandise of the souls of men, have instituted the practice of sprinkling or pouring, and call it baptism, to support which not one word can be found in the Holy Writ. The whole tenor of the Scriptures from the time that John the Baptist came preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, on through all the writings of the New Testament, conclusively prove the fact that baptism by immersion was the mode taught and practiced by Jesus and His Apostles. Jesus, when He was baptized, "Went up straightway out of the water." When Philip baptized the Eunuch "They went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him, and when they were come up out of the water," etc. All this clearly indicates immersion, or why go down into or come up out of the water? Paul says to the Romans, vi, 4: "Therefore, we are buried with Him by baptism into death," 5th, "For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death," certainly there is nothing in a sprinkling or a pouring that represents either a burial or a planting, but each of these passages point in unmistakable terms to a baptism by immersion. The Apostle Paul again makes this clear in his Epistle to the Colossians, ii, 12: "Buried with Him in baptism." When John baptized in the wilderness, "There went out unto him all the land of Judea and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins." (Mark i, 5.)

All the evidence contained in the sacred Scriptures points unmistakably to the fact that immersion was the only mode of baptism practiced by the Apostles and early Christians. Profane history gives conclusive evidence of this fact. Speaking of baptism of the first century, Dr. Mosheim says, "In this century baptism was administered in convenient places within the public assemblies, and by immersing the candidate wholly in water." (Mosheim's Church History [Murdock], Third Edition, Vol. 1, p. 87.) Of the second century, the same great author says: "Twice a year, namely, at Easter and Whitsuntide, * * * baptism was administered by the Bishop or by the Presbyters (Elders) acting by his command and authority.  The candidates for it were immersed wholly in water with the invocation of the sacred Trinity, according to the Savior's precept."

Indeed, the first deviation from baptizing by immersion occurs in a case recorded by Eusebius, as happening in the third century. He alludes to it in these detracting terms: "He (Novatian) fell into a grievous distemper, and it being supposed that he would die immediately, he received baptism (being sprinkled with water) on the bed where he lay (if that can be termed baptism), neither when he had escaped that sickness, did he afterwards receive the other things which the canon of the church enjoined should be received." (Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius, p. 113.) Even down to the close of the thirteenth century baptism by immersion was the rule, and sprinkling and pouring the exception. Yet the innovation thus made in the third century has worked its insidious way among the various divisions of Christianity until today a convert can have any kind of baptism he may desire; thus have they departed from the faith of the Apostles and are teaching for religion the commandments of men, having "Transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant," in fulfilment of the words of the prophet Isaiah. (Isaiah xxiv, 5.)

GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST.

The next step in the regular order of initiation into the fold of Christ is to secure the birth of the Spirit, or the baptism of the Holy Ghost; this being essential to enable us to pursue an acceptable course in the service of the Lord, that the Holy Ghost may be with us as an abiding gift, as a light to our feet and a lamp to our pathway through life. The Lord in His wonderful plan for the salvation of the souls of men has provided a way for the humble and penitent baptized believer to secure this blessed gift. (Mark i, 8.) "I indeed have baptized you with water, but He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost." (Acts i, 5.) "For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." Behold the promise fulfilled. (Acts ii, 2-4.) "And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind and it filled all the house where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance." But this precious gift was not to be given until after Jesus was glorified, as shown by  the following (John vii, 39), "* * * For the Holy Ghost was not yet given because that Jesus was not yet glorified." On that great Pentecostal day the Holy Ghost was given and a glorious manifestation of heavenly light appeared sitting upon each of the Apostles who had accompanied the Savior in all His travels and had witnessed His wonderful works, and by His divine favor had been made partakers of His holy ministry. They now received the promised blessing in rich abundance, and a way was provided by which they might transmit it to others by the imposition of hands, as shown by the following (Acts viii, 17): "Then laid they their hands on them and they received the Holy Ghost." Evidently the Holy Ghost came not as the result of the baptism, nor in answer to the prayer of the Apostles, but by the laying on of their hands, clearly showing that this was the mode the Lord had provided by which the Holy Ghost should be conferred upon baptized believers. This again is clearly set forth in Acts xix, 5-6, "When they heard this they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spake with tongues and prophesied."

THE BLOOD OF CHRIST.

We have now pointed out the path that leads to eternal life--the straight and narrow way, and carefully noted the inscriptions along the line, down into the water through the door into the Kingdom of God. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance of all sins, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands; this is the course marked out by the Father to prepare His children to receive the benefits of the atoning blood of Jesus Christ.

Earthly things are typical of heavenly things as set forth in the following (1 John v, 7-8): "For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one; and there are three that bear witness in the earth, the Spirit, the water and the blood, and these three agree in one." By the water we keep the commandment, by the Spirit are we justified, and by the blood are we sanctified; and thus we become saints. He who has fully repented of his sins and been baptized for the remission thereof, and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, may then partake of the emblems of the Savior's flesh and blood; and in that sacred ordinance eat and drink to his soul,  the benefits of that atoning blood. And such have the promise of the Savior that they shall never hunger nor thirst. There is no other way provided on earth by which mankind can secure the benefits of the atoning blood of Christ.

AUTHORITY.

Upon this question hinges the validity of all the acts of men. Every officer of our government must be elected or appointed according to the mode established by the Constitution of the United States, or his acts fall to the ground as null and void. The decisions of a court involving the validity of titles to land or other great interests would be void if it could be shown that the judge rendering the decisions had not been elected or appointed legally. Every deed issued by a sheriff at a sheriff's sale of real estate would be void if it could be shown that the sheriff was a usurper and not legally authorized to officiate in the duties of the office. All naturalization papers issued by a judge, if it could be shown that he had never been elected or appointed according to the constitutional requirements, would by a legal tribunal be declared worthless and the holder deprived of his citizenship. In fact, the question of authority to act in any office of the affairs of human life is so clearly understood by all persons of ordinary intelligence that time would seem to be wasted in discussing it; but not so in questions involving the future of the human soul. In these sacred and vastly more important matters upon which hang all our hopes of eternal life, the average man seems willing to trust to the opinions of a minister of some one of the orthodox sects or to the wild vagaries of an upstart who cries, "Lo, here is Christ, or "Lo, He is there," without for a single moment raising the question, Where is his authority to officiate in the sacred ordinances of the Gospel of Christ, or to initiate men into the Kingdom of God? The average merchant in conducting his regular business, when waited upon by one claiming to be an agent of a manufacturer, places his order with that agent fully expecting to receive the goods. As the time rolls on the goods come according to the sample shown and the order given. This fact alone is proof to the merchant that the agent was in touch with his principal and was a duly authorized agent. But if the goods come not, it is strong presumptive evidence that the agent was a fraud and was not authorized by the manufacturer to take orders for goods. If this test be applied to the ministers of the various sects of the Christian world, it will at once be found that they are self-appointed agents, not in touch with the principal whom they claim to represent, as their patrons receive not the goods. In other words, the signs promised by the Savior are lacking and do not follow the believer, which alone is sufficient evidence that the so-called ministers were never sent of God.

Jesus said, "Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; in My name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover." (Mark xvi, 15-18.) The promised blessings fail, the signs do not follow, they receive not the goods. The grand secret of it all is, God has not sent the agents through whom they seek these blessings; they hold no authority to officiate in the ordinances of His house; as agents they are not in touch with their principal. These ministers are self-appointed teachers of man-made systems of religion. They are teaching for doctrine the commandments of men.

From the time the Christian Fathers fell by persecution and death, down to the time the Emperor Constantine made the Christian faith universal through the Roman provinces in 323 A.D., the forms of the Christian religion were constantly undergoing a change. At that time there were incorporated in the Christian church heathen rites, which with the innovations added, down through the ages to the present time, stamps that church today as one entirely separate and apart from the original apostolic church. Without Apostles and Prophets through whom they might obtain the word of God, the church has steadily drifted from its moorings into the broad sea of men's opinions, until it is split and divided into hundreds of different sects and creeds, no one of which can today present an organization that even resembles the form of the Church of Christ. The most important features have been eliminated. Signs and wonders and miraculous gifts, together with the fruits of the Spirit, set forth by the Apostle Paul in I Cor. xii, have disappeared, and but the empty and powerless form is found among the children of men. The shadow alone remains, the substance has departed. And why? Because mankind have departed from the faith of the ancients. The rights, powers and privileges of the apostolic priesthood have long since been withdrawn from man, and all who officiate in religious rites do so without authority from the living God.

If we examine and see how the servants of God were called  to the ministry in other ages, we can discover a guide to direct us in obtaining authority in this age. From out of the midst of the burning bush the Lord called Moses (Ex. iii), and when he (Moses) was about to be succeeded by Joshua as leader, he conferred upon Joshua authority by the laying on of his hands. (See Deut. xxxiv, 9.) "And Joshua, the son of Nun, was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him." Jesus, when He entered upon His ministry, called twelve men and ordained them; "And He ordained twelve men that they should be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach." (Mark iii, 14.) Again He said, "Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you and ordained you." (John xv, 16.) Jesus said in His prayer unto His Father, "As thou hast sent Me into the world even so have I sent them into the world." (John xvii, 18.)

The Apostle Paul evidently had this question of authority to meet as he gave vent to his feelings in the following forcible language: "Whereunto I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle (I speak the truth in Christ and lie not), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity." (I Tim. ii, 7.) It was very gratifying, no doubt, to the Apostle Paul, to be able to declare with such emphasis the fact of his ordination; and no wonder, when we consider the way in which he was called. He was justly entitled to declare it, as will be seen by the manner of his calling. "As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said: Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away, so they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost," etc. (Acts xiii, 2-4.) Paul then was evidently called by direct revelation of the Holy Ghost, and when the hands of the Prophets were laid upon him, he was sent away, so also was his companion, Barnabas.

The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews makes a most positive declaration on this question. He says: "For every High Priest taken from among men is ordained for men, in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins; and no man taketh this honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron." (Heb. v, 1, 4.) A glance at Exodus iv, 14-16 and 27-28, will show us how Aaron was called: "And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and He said: Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well, and also behold he cometh forth to meet thee, and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him and put  words into his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do; and he shall be thy spokesman unto the people." Thus Aaron was called of God; and in all ages when God has had a people on the earth, His servants have been duly called of Him and ordained, and the stamp of His approval has been placed on their labors in signs and miraculous manifestations.

SALVATION FOR THE DEAD.

In this age of religious freedom, when every man is at liberty to worship how, where or what he pleases, when the Christian church is split and divided into innumerable sects and creeds, and is still dividing and subdividing; where the opinions of men, crystallized into creeds, pass current as systems of theological truths; while spiritualism in all its various forms is rampant upon the earth, and its younger and more delicately molded brother, theosophy, is gaining acceptance as a wonderful revelation from the unseen world; while darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the people, and men are continually seeking for that which borders upon the sensational--the word of God comes forth proclaiming the principles of salvation for the dead as well as for the living.

That there is but one faith, one hope, one baptism, one way to obtain eternal life, either for the living or for the dead, is clearly shown by the Scriptures. "To the law and to the testimony; if they speak not according to the word, it is because there is no light in them." (Isaiah viii, 20.) These shall be our guide. By this divine method we are willing that all shall be judged. Opinions of men are not the words of God, nor is the word of God to receive a private interpretation, as is clearly shown by the following (II Peter i, 20, 21): "Knowing this first that no prophecy of the Scriptures is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." Opinions of men shall not prevail, but we will take the word of God for our guide. "And when they shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits and unto wizards that peep and that mutter, should not a people seek unto their God for the living to the dead?" (Isaiah viii, 19.) Let us then go to the Scriptures, and seek the word of God for a knowledge of the dead.

After Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, fulfilled His mission among the living and was about to depart to the unseen world and perform His work for the salvation of the dead:  while He was suffering the pangs of death upon the cross between two malefactors, He was railed upon by one, yet worshipped by the other, to whom He said: "Today shalt thou be with Me in Paradise." This saying has created a belief in the Christian world that the vilest sinner on his death-bed or the murderer upon the gallows by confessing Christ at the last moment, can be saved. But let us find out where the Savior went. Did He go to His Father and God? Not if the Scriptures are true.

On the morning of the Savior's resurrection and Mary's visit to the sepulcher, she thought Jesus was the gardener. Yet when He said "Mary," she at once recognized Him, and in her joy evidently sought to embrace Him, for it is said, "Jesus saith unto her, touch Me not, for I am not yet ascended to My Father; but go to My brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto My Father and your Father, and to My God and your God." (John xx, 17.) If this be true, are we not justified in asking the question, "Lord, if Thou hast not been to Thy Father and God during these three days, where hast Thou been?" Let the Scriptures answer: "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit by which also He went and preached unto the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water." (I Peter iii, 18-20.) So then Christ went to the spirit world, and there preached the Gospel to the spirits in prison. And why? "For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the Spirit." (I Peter iv, 6.) It would seem that this can need no explanation, for by this rule all men are to be judged by the same law, whether they hear the Gospel in life or after death. And herein is the justice of Almighty God made manifest, for if it were not so, and if the modern Christian theory should prevail, viz., that all mankind who do not confess Christ are lost, what shall be said of four-fifths of the people on the earth today, and those that have lived in like circumstances in the heathen world, who never heard of Christ?

If, when all mankind are brought before the judgment-seat to be judged, and the heathen hears his sentence read by the great Judge, "Depart from Me, ye cursed, into the place prepared for the devil and his angels, because you never confessed  My name," would not the heathen be justified in saying, "Who art thou? I never heard of Jesus Christ. When I was on the earth I worshipped Joss and served him faithfully."

To punish the heathen for not confessing Christ when in fact he never heard of Him is contrary to the justice of an All-wise Creator. But God has provided a better way. All who have never heard the Gospel in life will have an opportunity after death, as clearly set forth in the above as in the following: "Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live." "But," says the objector, "that means all they that are dead in sin," but read a little farther: "Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear His voice." (John v, 25 and 28.) Again, "For as Jonas was three days and nights in the whale's belly, so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth." (Matt, xii, 40.) By these passages it is clearly apparent that the Savior fore-knew His mission to the spirit world in the heart of the earth, and that while there, all who were in their graves would hear His voice.

Not only was this understood by Jesus and His Apostles, but long prior to the Savior's day the Prophets foresaw the work He would do for the dead, "I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand and will keep thee, and give thee a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house." (Isaiah xlii, 6-7.) Here the prophet foretold the labors of the Savior. During His sojourn in the flesh, we have no account of His having brought out the prisoners from the prison, or proclaiming liberty to the captives, or the opening of the prison to them that are bound. Had He done so, the Roman government would have had a case against Him, yet Pilate found no fault in Him. Hence we must look elsewhere for the fulfilment of these passages.

"And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high and the kings of the earth upon the earth, and they shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be visited." (Isaiah xxiv, 21-2.) Here is the finale of a terrible picture of the earth's desolation, when it is to be empty, turned upside down, broken, dissolved, removed like a cottage, and the inhabitants thereof scattered. All are to be gathered, including the kings,  and the high ones, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, shut up in prison and after many days visited. What will be the object of this visitation? Peter has already told it: as Christ visited the antediluvians, so when these have suffered the vengeance of Almighty God in the spirit, some of His servants, ministering angels, will be sent to visit them and preach the Gospel to them as Jesus did.

"Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. Who is the King of Glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle." (Psalm xxiv, 7-8.) What was the subject of the vision thus portrayed by the prophet, and where was it to take place? He saw the Savior making His triumphal entry into the infernal regions, and with irresistible power the gate and doors are made to fly open and the immortal King stands in the midst of prisoners of the spirit world. Thus the full import of that beautiful passage of the psalmist David would read: "Lift up your heads, O ye gates of hell, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors of the prisons of the damned, and the King of Glory shall come into the regions of darkness proclaiming liberty to the captives and the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound in hell."

If the antediluvians after their long sojourn in the regions of darkness were had in remembrance before God so that He sent His beloved Son to preach to them the Gospel during the time His body lay in the tomb, what shall be done for those who have died since the Savior's visit to the spirit world? As His Apostles and all His faithful followers served Him in life, who shall say that after death they will not follow His example, and continue to serve Him by going to the spirit world and there preaching to the spirits in prison who have died without a knowledge of the Gospel? And when these poor benighted beings, after their long captivity under the reign of Lucifer, listen to the precious truths of the Gospel of Christ and become converted, straightway the question arises, How can I obey the ordinance of baptism? I am in a disembodied state of existence, yet my Savior has said: "Except ye are born of water and of the Spirit, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." Oh, wonderful plan provided by the Almighty! The living may be baptized for the dead. It is very plain that this great principle was understood by the ancient Saints, as will be seen by the words of the Apostle Paul, addressed to the Corinthians: "Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead arise not at all, why are they then baptized for the dead?" (I Cor. xv, 29.)

A MOTHER'S INFLUENCE.

A FEW WORDS ABOUT THE FIELDINGS AND THE BIRTH OF PRESIDENT JOSEPH F.
SMITH.

John Fielding and his wife, Rachel, were natives of Yorkshire, England, having been born in 1759 and 1768, respectively. They were married at that place, and afterwards moved to Bedfordshire, where they lived together for forty years in the humble and happy sphere of farm life. They were both devoted Methodists, Mr. Fielding having the distinction of being a local preacher, in which capacity he labored most faithfully, often riding from ten to thirty miles to fill his appointments, but never accepting a penny for his work from the society which voted to compensate him for his services. Together with his faithful wife, he lived a life of industry, sobriety and integrity before men, fearing God and keeping His commandments to the best of his knowledge with all the sincerity and humility of his soul. Nine children were born of this union, among whom were Joseph and Mary, whom we wish on this occasion particularly to single out in our sketch. The mother died in 1828, and in 1832 young Joseph left his nativity to go to America to prepare the way for the rest of the family to follow. He located in upper Canada, being subsequently joined by the members of his family from England, his two sisters among them, who, together with himself, and also other progressive spirits of the village, applied themselves closely to the Scriptures. A little body of seekers after truth was organized, in which was found John Taylor, who afterwards became president of the Church. The Society met several times a week in company with a Methodist preacher, to study the different religions, and to pray for the Lord to send them the Holy Ghost; for through their research they had been led to believe many of the principles of the Gospel contrary to the orthodox dogmas of the times. It was during this time that Apostle Parley P. Pratt went on his mission to Canada, and was directed to the home of Brother Taylor.  He was admitted into the association of investigators, and as a result Joseph Fielding, his two sisters and his family, and also John Taylor accepted the Gospel and subsequently moved to Kirtland. The Methodist minister being chided by his members, rejected the truth and became a persecutor of the Saints.

In 1837 the wife of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith died, leaving him with six small children. Later he married again, taking to wife Mary Fielding, one of Joseph Fielding's sisters, who had embraced the Gospel in Canada through the labors of Apostle Pratt.

In June, 1837, in company with Apostles Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, Joseph Fielding left Kirtland to open up the Gospel in England, being joined at New York by three other missionaries. Brother Fielding remained on his mission four years, during which time approximately 7,000 souls accepted the truth. It was while he was in England that he received the following letter from his sister Mary, whom it will be remembered was the wife of the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, in which she tells of the birth of her "dear little Joseph F.," as the devoted mother expressed it, who is now our worthy and honored president of the Church, the letter "F" being the initial of the surname of his uncle, Joseph Fielding. The letter is as follows:

    "Commerce, Illinois, N. America, June, 1839.

    "My Very Dear Brother--As the elders are expecting shortly to take
    their leave of us again to preach the Gospel in my native land, I
    feel as though I would not let the opportunity of writing you pass
    by unimproved. I believe it will give you pleasure to hear from us
    by our own hand; notwithstanding, you will see the brethren face to
    face, and have an opportunity of hearing all particulars respecting
    us and our families, from their mouths.

    "As it respects myself, it is now so long since I wrote to you,
    and so many important things have transpired, and so great have
    been my afflictions, etc., that I know not where to begin; but I
    can say, hitherto has the Lord preserved me, and I am still the
    living to praise Him, as I do this day. I have, to be sure, been
    called to drink deep of the bitter cup; but you know, my beloved
    brother, this makes the sweet the sweeter. I feel at this moment,
    while reflecting on the events of the past seven months, so full
    of matter, that I am ready to wish I could convey myself into your
    presence for a short time, so that I might communicate verbally
    more than I can possibly do by the pen.

    "You have, I suppose, heard of the imprisonment of my dear husband,
    with his brother Joseph, Elder Rigdon, and others, who were kept
    from us nearly six months; and I suppose no one felt the painful
    effects of their confinement more than myself. I was left in a
    way that called for the exercise of all the courage and grace I
    possessed. My  husband was taken from me by an armed force, at
    a time when I needed, in a particular manner, the kindest care and
    attention of such a friend, instead of which, the care of a large
    family was suddenly and unexpectedly left upon myself, and, in a
    few days after, my dear little Joseph F. was added to the number.
    Shortly after his birth I took a severe cold, which brought on
    chills and fever; this, together with the anxiety of mind I had
    to endure, threatened to bring me to the gates of death. I was at
    least four months entirely unable to take any care either of myself
    or child; but the Lord was merciful in so ordering things that
    my dear sister could be with me all the time. Her child was five
    months old when mine was born; so she had strength given her to
    nurse them both, so as to have them do well and grow fast.

    "You will also have heard of our being driven, as a people, from
    the state and from our homes; but you will hear all particulars
    from the elders, so as to render it not necessary for me to write
    them. This happened during my sickness, and I had to be removed
    more than two hundred miles, chiefly on my bed. I suffered much on
    my journey; but in three or four weeks after we got into Illinois,
    I began to amend, and my health is now as good as ever it was. It
    is now little more than a month since the Lord, in His marvellous
    power, returned my dear husband, with the rest of the brethren, to
    their families, in tolerable health. We are now living in Commerce,
    on the bank of the great Mississippi river. The situation is very
    pleasant; you would be much pleased to see it. How long we may be
    permitted to enjoy it I know not; but the Lord knows best what is
    best for us. I feel but little concerned about where I am, if I
    can but keep my mind staid upon God; for, you know in this there
    is perfect peace. I believe the Lord is overruling all things for
    our good. I suppose our enemies look upon us with astonishment and
    disappointment.

    "I greatly desire to see you, and I think you would be pleased to
    see our little ones: will you pray for us, that we may have grace
    to train them up in the way they should go, so that they may be a
    blessing to us and the world. I have a hope that our brothers and
    sisters will also embrace the fullness of the Gospel, and come into
    the new and everlasting covenant; I trust that their prejudices
    will give way to the power of truth. I would gladly have them
    with us here, even though they might have to endure all kind of
    tribulation and affliction with us and the rest of the children of
    God, in these last days, so that they might share in the glories
    of the Celestial Kingdom. As to myself, I can truly say that I
    would not give up the prospects of the latter-day glory for all
    that glitters in this world. O! my dear brother, I must tell you
    for your comfort, that my hope is full, and it is a glorious hope;
    and though I have been left for near six months, in widowhood, in
    the time of great affliction, and was called to take, joyfully or
    otherwise, the spoiling of almost all our goods, in the absence of
    my husband, and all unlawfully, just for the Gospel's sake (for
    the judge himself declared that he was kept in prison for no other
    reason than because he was a friend to his brother), yet I do not
    feel the least discouraged: no, though my sister and I are here
    together in a strange land, we have been enabled to rejoice in the
    midst of our privation and persecutions that we were counted worthy
    to suffer these things, so that we may, with the ancient Saints who
    suffered in the like manner, inherit the same glorious reward. If
    it had not been for this hope, I should have sunk before this; but,
    blessed be the God  and Rock of my salvation, here I am, and
    am perfectly satisfied and happy, having not the smallest desire to
    go one step backward.

    "Your last letter to Elder Kimball gave us great pleasure; we thank
    you for your expression of kindness, and pray God to bless you
    according to your desires for us.

    "The more I see of the dealings of our Heavenly Father with us as
    a people, the more I am constrained to rejoice that I was made
    acquainted with the everlasting covenant. O may the Lord keep me
    faithful till my change comes! I desire that you would write us,
    and let us know all particulars that would be interesting to us.
    O, my dear brother, why is it that our friends should stand out
    against the truth, and look on those that would show it to them as
    their enemies? The work here is prospering much; several men of
    respectability and intelligence, who have been acquainted with all
    our difficulties, are coming into the work.

    "Sister Mary will also write to you. My husband joins me in love to
    you. I remain, my dear brother and sister, your affectionate sister.

    "Mary Smith."

From the spirit of and the facts presented in the above communication one is able to see, not only the noble spirit and sterling character of that devoted and self-sacrificing mother and faithful wife, but he is also brought face to face with the truth too often concealed from deserving recognition, that within the ranks of God's soldiery there are none more valiant, none more brave, none more heroic; yea, none who endure more of the heat and brunt of the battle than do the courageous and loyal-hearted wives and mothers who remain at home alone to cope with the serious problems of life and to bear the responsibility of the family while the husband is abroad in the ministry. And when we understand this, and recognize, too, that every true and faithful wife and mother realizes the importance and the magnitude of her mission, then can we appreciate more fully the tenderness and sincerity of heart, the purity and nobility of soul revealed in woman--God's masterpiece of creation--as expressed in the exalting and pathetic appeal of Sister Smith to her brother Joseph, "I think you would be pleased to see our little ones. Will you pray for us, that we may have grace to train them up in the way they should go, so that they may be a blessing to us and the world?"

This noble mother stayed with the body of the Church, remaining loyal and true to its leaders, and firm and steadfast in the faith, and taught her children to follow in her footsteps. With the rest of the Saints, who were driven from their homes by cruel mobs incited by bitter apostates, and other despisers of the truth, she took her little family to the valleys  of the mountains--her son Joseph, although less than ten years of age, driving two yoke of oxen and a heavy wagon across the plains, a distance of one thousand miles.

Sister Smith devoted the few short years of her eventful life to the culture and training of her children, inculcating within their minds the necessity of their clinging to the faith and remaining loyal to the cause of God; and although she was taken away in the fall of 1852, yet she had implanted within the breasts of her children a thorough knowledge that the Church had been restored and perfectly organized with apostles and prophets, with a decree from God that it should stand forever and never be disorganized or thrown down, and with a love so strong for the truth that their lives and characters stand out before the world and before God as a monument for integrity, fidelity and obedience, whose every surface, polished as bright as the noon-day sun by the faith, the prayers and the tears of that loving and devoted mother, reflects honor and glory on her sacred name that will endure forever. What a contrast between the fruits of the influence exerted by this true daughter of God upon her husband's children, one of whom is the patriarch and the other the president of the Church of Christ on the earth today, and that exercised by other mothers who have instilled within the hearts of their children the spirit of dissension and rebellion against the stability of the restored Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ!

    "The devil has put the whole world on the watch against us. It
    is impossible for us to make the least move without exciting, if
    not all the world, at least a considerable portion of it. They are
    excited at what we do, and, strange to relate, they are no less
    excited at what we do not do!"

    --Brigham Young.

IS BAPTISM ESSENTIAL TO SALVATION?

This is a question of grave importance, because it involves me fate of every man and woman in the world. The minds of many have been troubled on this point, and none should rest satisfied until they have a perfect understanding in regard to it.

There is considerable discussion and diversity of opinions on this subject in the so-called Christian world; and it seems that all that has been said about it by uninspired men has only tended to bewilder the mind. But while they cling to their own opinions and wander from the truth, we much prefer believing the revealed word of God.

In Luke (vii. 29, 30) we read that John the Baptist, a servant of the Most High, taught baptism, and those who were baptized justified God, while some "rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him." No one will dare to say that men will be saved in rejecting the counsel of God against themselves. Then, as it is a counsel of God for men to be baptized, they cannot be saved without it; therefore, it is essential to salvation.

The Lord sent his angel to Cornelius, and told him to send for Peter, who would tell him words by which he and all his house should be saved (Acts x. 14). Cornelius did so, and when Peter came, "he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord" (Acts x. 48). If Cornelius had rejected baptism as non-essential, could he have been saved? No; for the angel told him that Peter would tell him how to be saved, and Peter "commanded them to be baptized." According to this, baptism must be essential to salvation.

Paul, speaking to the Galatians, says: "Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ" (Gal. iii. 26, 27). If it is essential to "put on Christ" to obtain salvation, then it is essential to be baptized, for we put on Christ by baptism.

Jesus, in giving the apostles their commission, said: "Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that  believeth not," (and consequently is not baptized) "shall be damned" (Mark xvi. 15, 16). Here the Savior positively declares that it is the baptized believer who shall be saved. Then, of course, baptism is essential to salvation, and who will dare to say it is not.

Jesus said to Nicodemus: "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water" (that is, baptized in water) "and of the spirit," (that is, baptized in the spirit) "he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John iii. 6). If entering the kingdom of God is essential to salvation, then being "born of water," or, in other words, being baptized, is essential also, for by one we enter the other.

The Apostle Peter, in the third chapter of his first epistle, says, that in the ark there were eight souls "saved by water, the like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us." According to this, he taught that baptism was essential to salvation.

On the day of Pentecost, many persons were convinced that Jesus was the Christ, which caused them to inquire of God's servants what they should do, to which Peter replied: "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins" (Acts ii. 38). If baptism was not essential to salvation, why did Peter command them to be baptized?

When John was in the wilderness he preached "baptism of repentance for the remission of sins" (Mark i. 4). He preached the same doctrine in all the country about Jordan (Luke iii. 3). Peter commanded the people to be baptized "for the remission of sins" (Acts ii. 38). Ananias said to Paul, "why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins" (Acts xxii. 16). From these quotations we learn that baptism is "for the remission of sins." Is the remission of sins essential to salvation? If so, baptism must be, for one is obtained through the other.

It is repeatedly stated in the scriptures that it is they who do the will of God that will enter the kingdom of heaven. That it is the will of God for people to be baptized, no reasonable person will deny. Then, they who say "Lord, Lord," and reject baptism, will surely receive that woeful doom, "depart ye cursed! I never knew you."

The apostles spoke by the authority that God had given them. What they told the people, while in the line of their duty was as binding on them as though the Lord had done it himself. Their words were the words of God. And when  they commanded the people to be baptized they must comply or lose salvation, for no one can be saved in disobeying God's commandments.

If baptism is not essential to salvation, why does the Lord require it? The fact that He requires it, is enough to prove that it is essential.

Some have supposed that the thief who was crucified beside the Savior went to heaven, and it is believed that he was not baptized; therefore, it is argued if one can be saved without baptism others can, and consequently it is not essential to salvation. But this supposition is not true, for Jesus said to the thief, "to-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise," and three days afterwards said to Mary, "touch me not for I have not yet ascended unto my Father." According to this, Paradise and Heaven are two distinct places, and as Jesus did not go to Heaven, neither did the thief; for they were both together in Paradise.

"If it is necessary for every one to be baptized," asks one, "what will become of the good people who have died without having that privilege?"

To this we may reply that the dead who died without hearing the gospel will have it preached to them as it was anciently, (I Peter iv. 5, 6). They who obey it will be saved but they who reject it will be condemned, as though they were in the flesh.

"But," says one, "a dead person, cannot be baptized." Very true; but God in His infinite wisdom provided a way in which the dead can be baptized for, by proxy, as shown by Paul in the questions (I Cor. xv. 29): "Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?"

Paul was not speaking about baptism for the dead, but the resurrection of the dead, and brings up baptism for the dead as a proof of the resurrection, by asking why they were "baptized for the dead if the dead rise not at all." But this plainly shows that "baptism for the dead" was both believed and practiced by the early Christians.

Enough has now been said to prove to any reasonable person that baptism is essential to salvation, and the arguments against such a doctrine have been sufficiently refuted. So, let all people prepare themselves and be baptized, under proper authority, for the remission of sins, that they may be saved in the kingdom of God; for what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul.

ALLEGED "OBJECTIONABLE FEATURES" IN THE RELIGION OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

BY ELDER CHARLES W. STAYNER.

THE BOOK OF MORMON. One of the reasons for non-belief presented by those who do not obey the Gospel revealed in our day, is that our religion has "objectionable features;" and some who have acquired information concerning the industrious and thrifty character of the Latter-day Saints, and their prosperous condition in Utah, carry the idea that were it not for its "objectionable features," "Mormonism," as it is called, might engage their attention, and that its claims would be more readily entertained by the intelligent classes. One of these "objectionable features" is, that we believe in and publish a record called the Book of Mormon, which has been falsely styled the "Mormon Bible," and through which the Saints have received from their enemies the name of "Mormons." This book, instead of being a substitute for the Scriptures, as is very incorrectly stated, is a record translated from ancient plates, found in the earth on the American Continent. The record gives most valuable information concerning the origin of the American Indians, a subject which has furnished a theme for much conjecture among the learned during the present century, and on which they are still endeavoring to discover sources of information.

Notwithstanding the desire to ascertain the very historical data which the work contains, the Book of Mormon has not received much of their attention; and this reticence is the more remarkable from the fact that scarcely a year passes without the publication of some newly-discovered evidence, testifying in a most telling manner to the truth of the account given in the record. Items of information are in quick succession being obtained and brought to their notice, which have been before  the world for about fifty years, in the record of which we are speaking.

The vast discoveries in Central America made by Messrs. Stephens and Catherwood, show conclusively the statements in the Book of Mormon to be correct; and these evidences are materially increased in various ways through the diligent researches of other discoverers, as shown in an article by Apostle Moses Thatcher, lately published in serial form in the Millennial Star. Speculations concerning the aborigines of that continent have furnished matter for volumes upon volumes, and the discovery of a skeleton or the finding of a stone has been dilated upon with zeal, and supplied conceded proof of a multiplicity of these theories and ideas, tending to show that the ancient inhabitants were a civilized race.

But here is a work translated from the actual record of those people, written by themselves when in their strength, and engraved on plates of curious and ancient workmanship, giving a lucid and narrative account of their settlement and social and religious progress, and hid away in the earth by the inspired historian for some fourteen centuries, and whose statements are sustained by undeniable proofs of a very striking character; and yet the work is comparatively ignored, and the facts therein given sought with avidity from other and less authoritative sources.

The reader would naturally inquire, what is the cause of this? Simply because the Book of Mormon has in their estimation an "objectionable feature." Its discovery was brought about by a revelation from Heaven. Mankind, and the learned in particular of our age, disdain any and everything that claims present revelation from God as its origin. If Joseph Smith had simply stated that he had found the plates in a mound, and had translated them by his own skill in language, it would have been regarded as a most interesting and valuable discovery, and the manuscript would have been purchased at a price, and doubtless found a place in the most prominent repository of curiosities. But the record being reserved to come forth as a means of salvation for the remnant (the American Indians and others of the seed of Israel), who should be scattered and down-trodden in the last days, it was to have a more dignified introduction to the notice of mankind, than a mere chance discovery would have afforded it. And all must concede that notwithstanding the distaste of the learned, and their prejudices concerning it, the Book of Mormon has been rendered much more generally known through the very means of its introduction,  than it could possibly have been if simply discovered in an ordinary way. In fact, it is to these "objectionable features" that the Latter-day Saints owe their extensive advertising, and are thus brought prominently before the public like the Saints of old.

The question naturally arises, why is it considered objectionable for a book to have an inspired origin? Why repudiate as false a valuable record of the people in America, because written and brought to light through revelation, while we accept the record of the people in Asia, called the Bible, which also claims to be the writings of inspired prophets and sacred historians, and to contain the word of God revealed from Heaven? Prophesied of in the Bible, the Book of Mormon stands side by side with the Asiatic Record, as its witness rather than its substitute; it endorses by fulfillment some of the grand predictions therein contained, and bears sacred testimony to the crucifixion, resurrection and ascension of Christ, and the introduction of the Gospel as given us by the Evangelists.

Such, then, is the Book which is regarded as an "objectionable feature" of the religion of the Latter-day Saints; and we claim that instead of being a "stumbling block," it should be regarded, sustained as it is by Scriptural history and scientific discovery, as one of the most convincing proofs of the truth of the Gospel revealed to its translator.

APOSTLES AND PROPHETS. Another "objectionable feature" with some is the organization of the Church with apostles and prophets. They cannot deny that the ancient Church was organized in this manner with an inspired priesthood and led by men "having authority," being commissioned of Jesus Christ to administer in the ordinances of the Gospel; and they cannot dispute that unless so authorized their acts were not recognized by the Lord, nor did they receive the seal of the spirit. In fact, the very foundation of the Church was this organization. Paul says, "it is built on apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief corner-stone." He even calls Christ an "apostle," and others call Him a "prophet," showing that He did not "take this honor unto Himself," but was "ordained of God" to officiate and acted by Heavenly authority in all His ministry. "As the Father hath sent me, even so now send I you."

Were it not for the "darkness" which was predicted should cover the minds of the people in the last days, we would be inclined  to marvel at the blindness of intelligent people to these things. That apostles and prophets should have been deemed requisite for the "work of the ministry" in the ancient Church, and yet be objects of Christian ridicule in the last days, is certainly very peculiar! As though worldly learning had by right taken the place of inspiration, and a college education legally assumed the throne of divine appointment. The nineteenth century is nothing if not inconsistent! And no age has been marked with more flagrant outrages upon common sense in religious theories and practice, than the one in which we criticise the Pharisaical Jews for rejecting the Savior, and the Catholics for assuming a power never delegated to them by the Ancient Church. For while these are denounced--the one for inconsistency and prejudice, the other for bigotry and usurpation, the modern "Pharisees"--professedly the followers of Christ, wag their heads at inspiration and apostleship, and "sit in high places" and occupy "the chief seats in the synagogues," assuming themselves to teach the people, without even presenting or possessing a semblance of authority for so doing. They scorn any descent of authority from the Romish priesthood as corrupt, hence lay no claim to a "chain of power" from the Ancient Church; and if they did, it would be a futile attempt, for the Romish Church, through which came even what semblance of authority they have, cut off long ago all her Protestant daughters from fellowship, and severed them from all rights and claims to the power she held.

Now, when the Latter-day Saints declare a new revelation of the apostleship, and the re-delegation to man of that sacred power of the Church, these "learned" gentlemen with collegiate prefixes and affixes, turn up their theological noses at the words "apostle" and "prophet," and deem the introduction of such inspired "non-essentials" as a sacrilegious innovation on the rights of the "modern school" of theology. Thus we find the world in the anomalous position of "Christians" fighting Christianity; professed believers of the Bible making war upon the Bible, religion, and in fact, on the Bible itself; believers in Christ discarding His doctrines, and parties placing their hope of salvation in an original form of faith, whose fundamental principles they ignore and despise! It is for the "faith once delivered to the Saints" we are called in question! And we may here say, because we believe in the correctness of the original organization of Christ's Church, that "investigation into our doctrines is impeded" (?). This is another of the "objectionable features," which keep, forsooth, the "intelligent"  classes from examining our claims to public attention, and is deemed a barrier to their embracing the Gospel!

SIGNS FOLLOWING THE BELIEVERS. Another feature of our religion, which is considered "objectionable" by the religious world, is, that we claim the necessity for and the existence of the spiritual gifts of the Gospel, the "signs" which Christ said were to "follow the believer." We read that after the Savior had risen from the dead, when He was about to ascend into Heaven from the Mount of Olives, He gave His apostles a certain commission, which we find recorded in the following language by St. Mark, in chap, xvi, 15-18: "And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." And lest any should raise objection to the standard translation of King James, which has been read in churches ever since the year 1611, we also give the same passage from the New Version, published last May, the chapter and verses being numbered alike: "And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to the whole creation. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that disbelieveth shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow them that believe: in my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."

The above promise evidently furnished us a distinctive mark which should characterize "them that believe" in Christ's Gospel. It admits of no other construction than that which is given by the plain language of the Scripture. But one class of people are promised the "gifts"--the "believers," but to them the promise is positive, emphatic and undeniable! It is possible to conceive that persons of sound moral principle might exercise sufficient faith through prayer to obtain certain manifestations of God's approval, and still might not be at the time actual members of the Church, but that the "true believers," who have become members of the Church of the  Savior, should be destitute of these gifts is not only an improbability, but from the words of the Scripture a positive impossibility!

We are led by the Savior's saying directly to the following conclusions: that the disciples were to preach the Gospel as it had been taught them by its Author; that some would believe its doctrines and be baptized, and that those who did so believe would receive the evidences of spiritual gifts which Christ foretold and described. There can be no misconstruction of this Scripture, without sacrificing consistency and stultifying the Divine word. But in order that we may be still further assured concerning the literal meaning of the Savior's promise, let us consider whether such manifestations did actually follow their administrations among the people. For direct record proof of this we have but to read the two following verses, which close the above-named chapter: "So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen."

But we also find these gifts mentioned in the course of their ministry, and not merely referred to in a general way, but the special gifts particularized which were imparted by Divine favor on certain occasions named. For instances of this kind read the Acts of the Apostles. In the second chapter it is recorded that they (the Saints) were all with one accord in one place, "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak in other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance." And we find that the gifts were so marked and prominent in their effects on this occasion, that Peter had to give an explanation to the multitude who came together, showing that they were the blessings of the Holy Spirit, as foretold should belong to the Christian Church. Then again in the third chapter, we are informed that as Peter and John went into the Temple, "a certain man lame from his mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the Temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the Temple; who seeing Peter and John about to go into the Temple, asked an alms. And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said, Look on us. And he gave heed unto them, expecting to  receive something of them. Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk. And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up; and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength. And he leaping up stood, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God. And all the people saw him walking and praising God: And they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple: and they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him." And in explanation of this manifestation Peter said, "And his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know; yea, the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all." Showing plainly that it was by the use of the name of Jesus, through the "gift of healing," that this blessing was conferred.

Read the smiting of Ananias and Sapphira at the word of St. Peter, when they withheld part of the purchase-money at the time of the consecration of their substance; also the healing power manifested through the shadow of the apostle (Acts v). Now read in Acts viii, the miracles performed by Philip, one of the lesser priests sent to baptize the people of Samaria, verses 6 and 7: "And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed." Also read verses from 13 to 17 inclusive: "Then Simon believed also: and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done. Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: (for as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus). Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost." Some may raise an objection here, and say that although the Holy Ghost was said to be given, in this instance no gifts are specially mentioned. But on reading the following verses we find that "When Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands,  he may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity." This plainly shows that the outpouring of the Spirit produced some evidences of such a remarkable character as to attract the attention of Simon, or he would not have been tempted to "offer money" to the disciples for the power to confer such gifts.

Then read in Acts ix, the case of Saul being healed of his blindness, under the hands of a certain disciple named Ananias, (this is not the same who was smitten at Peter's word): "And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto thee in the way as thou earnest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized." Also the raising of Tabitha from the dead by St. Peter, recorded in same chapter.

These were literal fulfillments of the words of Jesus, spoken on the Mount of Olives. No construction of Scripture can give them any other than a literal meaning. These works were in reality performed by and for those who believed. Paul had once been a disbeliever, but now a "believer," he rejoices in the gifts and shows forth the power of God in the name of Jesus. And we find that these gifts were not confined to the Apostles, but that they existed also among the other Saints. In chapter xiii, 1-3, of the Acts, we are told, "Now there were in the church that was at Antioch, certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away." Now, these men were not apostles who prophesied, though perhaps prominent in the Church, but possessing the "gifts," the Spirit spoke through them, and the Church was edified and blessed. Hence none can consistently say that the "gifts" and "signs" were limited to the apostleship,  and thus argue the sudden cessation of them with the death of the apostles, or that they were not to be universally enjoyed by all believers. Besides, the multitudes who, we are told in various parts of the record, "spoke in tongues and prophesied" when confirmed, fully show that the gifts were general in their character, and not bestowed exclusively on a special few of those who believed, or that any class of "believers" was debarred from enjoying them; but that it was a foregone conclusion with the Church that these evidences should follow, and that it was a fact in their history that they did follow belief and obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Instances might be multiplied to prove the existence of the gifts among the Saints, such for instance as the case of a certain man named Agabus, who had the gift of prophecy, of whom we read in the Acts of the Apostles, chapter xxi, 11-13. We also read in Acts xxi, 8, 9, that Philip the evangelist had four daughters, virgins, who possessed the gift of prophecy: "And the next day we that were of Paul's company departed: and came unto Csesarea: and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him. And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy." Stephen also who, like Philip, was one of the lesser priests, and not an apostle, saw at the time of his martyrdom "the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God."

These and many other incidents plainly show that visions, prophesyings, tongues, healing and the general "gifts of the Gospel" were disseminated among the Saints, both male and female, "severally as willed by the Spirit." Paul says (1 Cor. xiv, 26, 27), "How is it then, brethren? when ye come together every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying. If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course; and let one interpret," showing that these gifts were universal among the Saints, or "believers," and that the possessors had to be at times checked and instructed in their use.

Added to those cases recorded in the Scriptures, the blessings enjoyed by the Saints as the "signs following the believer," are mentioned in a general way by historians. In the second century, St. Iraenaeus testifies that "the Christians, by the gift of God, cast out devils, healed the sick, raised the dead, and performed miraculous works in the name of Christ, in all parts of the world." (See Gahan's Church History, page 76.)  But we find that in the third century, the government and organization of the Church began to change from the primitive form established by Christ. At least in detail, if not in a general way, some of the ordinances were even at an earlier date, materially changed and modified. Even in the second century, we find the historian Gahan refers to a change in the ordinance of baptism in the following pointed language. Speaking of Novation, who was ill, "he was baptized in bed, not by immersion, which was then the usual method, but by infusion or pouring of water. On recovering he received not the seal of the Lord * * says St. Pacian, that is to say, the sacrament of confirmation."--(See Gahan and Mosheim.)

There can be no doubt that this "changing of the ordinances" which had been established by Christ, as the means of obtaining salvation with its kindred blessings, gradually produced the cessation of the gifts among them, that to this, and also the withdrawal of the authority to confer the Holy Ghost, through the martyrdom of those holding the right to officiate, must be imputed their absence in succeeding centuries, until at the present day these evidences of the true Gospel are even discountenanced by parties claiming to be followers of Christ, and the Latter-day Saints condemned as presumptuous and wicked for seeking to possess them, and testifying of their existence in the Church. And it is lamentable to know that it is considered an "objectionable feature" of the religion we profess to enjoy these blessed tokens of God's approval which edified, strengthened and comforted the ancient Saints, and which Christ declared should "follow them that believe."

Reader, is it not strange that professing Christians should not only themselves fail to obtain the gifts which are an inseparable evidence of the Christian religion, but that they should take up arms with the enemies of Christ in denouncing those who possess them,--considering the existence of the gifts a bar to accepting the truth, and a stumbling block in the pathway of obedience? What they despise and denounce, however, we, the Latter-day Saints, hold as a substantial evidence of the truth of the Gospel revealed to Joseph Smith, and a standing testimony against those who "have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof." And we reiterate the apostle's advice when speaking of this class, "from such turn away!" And the writer of this article desires to add his testimony to the many which have been recorded in the Church established in our day, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that the gifts of the Gospel promised to the believers are with the Latter-day  Saints! That he has seen, witnessed and experienced them in his own person! That he has himself been healed under the administration of the Elders, according to the words of James, recorded in chap. v. 14, 15: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him." That others have been healed under his hands instantaneously by the power of God! That some of his immediate friends and acquaintances have the gift of tongues, others prophesy, others see visions, and all who are faithful possess the Holy Spirit, which testifies that these things are verily true,--that this is the veritable work of God set up for the preparation of a people to meet the Lord when He comes in power! And he bears this testimony in all sincerity, knowing that by our words shall we be justified or condemned, and that both writer and reader will have to meet them at the last day!

Liverpool, England.

    "Posterity will yet do us the justice, when our persecutors are
    equally low in the dust with ourselves, to hand down to succeeding
    generations, the virtuous acts and forbearance of a people who
    sacrificed their reputation for their religion, and their earthly
    fortunes and happiness to preserve peace."

    --Joseph Smith, July 25, 1836.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS FOLLOW TEACHINGS OF THE SAVIOR.

ADDRESS DELIVERED AT THE SALT LAKE TABERNACLE, SUNDAY, DECEMBER 25,
1910, BY PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH.

(REPORTED BY F. W. OTTERSTROM.)

It is with a feeling of great dependence upon the Giver of all Good that I arise before you, this afternoon, in the hope of saying something by the help of the Spirit of the Lord, that will be encouraging to the Latter-day Saints and also a comfort to them with reference to some of those glorious principles which we have espoused and which, nevertheless, are very much misunderstood and misrepresented by our enemies.

We do not fully realize, it seems to me, the simplicity and naturalness of those great doctrines that are involved in the probation of man, in his mortal state. Many have sought for the origin of man in his development from the lower animals or creatures, and it is very difficult, indeed, to persuade men who are supposed to be scientific, to believe that the works of God are one eternal round, and that man is nothing more and cannot be anything less, we believe, than the offspring of God. No man, however scientific, however learned, however deeply he may search into the secrets of nature, can ever find out more than is revealed already, in the Scriptures of divine truth, with reference to man's origin. Men may speculate, and guess, and suppose many things, and can argue themselves into queer notions and beliefs with reference to man's origin, but after all it will only be their beliefs, or their imaginations or conclusions from human reasoning. It would be superfluous, no doubt, for me to cite my hearers to the Genesis in the Bible, where an account is given of man being placed upon the earth, formed in the image and likeness of God, being made in His likeness not only male but also female, for the Bible plainly implies that in order that man should become like unto God, or be created in His image and likeness, he should be a dual being, that is, he should be not only man but that his complement or other self should be woman, thus he was formed  in the likeness of God. Man was placed in the garden that was prepared for him. He was given the liberty to enjoy and partake of all the fruits of the garden except the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and he was told that when he should partake of that fruit, or if he should, then he should surely die.

Yet, it was foreordained, and the first man was predestined to partake of that fruit in order that the greater and real purpose of God might be fulfilled, for if Adam had kept the law of heaven, by refusing or refraining from partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, he would have remained forever in his innocence, without power of increase. Therefore, the object and purpose of God would fail in his being, for the great commandment that was given to him was that he should multiply and replenish the earth, and have dominion over it and over all living creatures upon the earth, for he was made lord of all and above all things that were created of God, or were placed here on the earth. Man was placed here to be the lord and master of all of them. Why? Because he was God's child; because he was made or formed and created in the image and likeness of his Father and, shall I add here, in the image and likeness of his Mother? If I should say such a thing it would shock the Christian world, and they would ridicule the thought or the idea that the original man had anything but a father, and owed nothing but to his father, for his existence. In the revelations that have come to us through Joseph, the prophet, and also those that are contained within the lids of the Bible, we are told that all things were created spiritually before they were temporally; in other words, they were created in the other world before they were placed here--not only man, the child of God, but all the animals that were placed upon the earth, and the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the air. All things were formed and had their existence spiritually before they were formed temporally on the earth, Even the seeds and herbs of the field had their existence in their spiritual state before they were planted in the earth.

But when man transgressed that heavenly law, which forbade that he should partake of the elements of this earth, whereby he should become of the earth, earthy, then he brought upon himself temporal death, just as God declared he would do, if he should partake of the "forbidden fruit." Not only did he bring upon himself the temporal death, that is, the death of the body, but he also placed himself in subjection to spiritual death, which death is banishment from the presence  of God into outer darkness where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Through this condition, brought upon our first parents necessarily--necessarily because it had to be, in order to carry out the great purpose of God to people the earth--man placed himself in the most helpless condition, powerless to relieve himself from the temporal death which he had brought upon himself, and powerless in and of himself, and through his own wisdom, to escape even the consequences of spiritual death--absolutely helpless. But we read, in the new revelation that has come through Joseph, the prophet, in these latest days, that the gospel which was afterwards, in the meridian of time, preached by the Son of God, was also preached unto Adam and to his children in the early stage of man's existence in the earth. The same gospel of faith in God and in a Savior of the world and in remission of sin by repentance, and the gift of the Spirit of God to lighten man in the world, in the path that should lead him back into the presence of God from whence he had fallen; all this was taught to Adam by the angels of God who were sent to minister to him and to reveal to him the plan of life and of redemption. Among other things, there was established, in the days of Adam, to be continued by his posterity, the law of sacrifice. They were required to offer the sacrifice of oxen, and of sheep, and of doves, and of various animals; and in these sacrifices, which were given to them with commandment to follow and to observe, the principle was taught them that in the meridian of time one should be sent, mighty and strong, with power to redeem and save, who should make the great sacrifice for all mankind. He would relieve the children of Adam, and all the human family, from the beginning down to the time of this great Savior, and thenceforth through all generations of time, until the winding up scene, or until every son and daughter of Adam should have the privilege of being redeemed from the fallen and helpless condition into which they had been placed because of the fall of the first parents.

So, from the time of Adam until the Son of God, whose supposed natal day we are here, perhaps most of us, for the purpose of celebrating and of reflecting upon, these sacrifices were offered in anticipation of His coming, in anticipation of the great sacrifice that He was to offer, once for all, thus doing away with the shedding of the blood of animals, of beasts, and of birds, whereby man could be kept in memory of this great principle of sacrifice which was instituted, from before the foundation of the world, for the redemption of man from temporal and also from spiritual death; first, from the  temporal death without any responsibility on his part, or act of his own, without any required virtue, honor, or worthiness upon his own part. Inasmuch as death has come upon me--temporal death--not by any act of mine, and I am not in any way responsible for that condition in which I find myself; inasmuch as you and I had no hand, in the beginning, in bringing about the conditions that now exist, we, by the will of God, and by the power of life and of salvation in the Son of God, shall be redeemed, every one, from the temporal death, no matter what we are or who we are. It matters not whether we are learned or illiterate, bond or free, white or black, old or young, ignorant or intelligent, we shall all come forth out of the condition that has come upon us temporally, and we shall have to stand before the bar of the great Judge, at last, to give an account of our deeds done in the flesh. Next to this redemption from the temporal death comes our redemption from the power of the second death, but this redemption will not be brought to pass in our behalf independently of ourselves. We are responsible for our own sins and will be held responsible for our deliverance from them, for they lead to the second death.

I will again tell you what the Scriptures tell us is the second death: It is being cut off from God; the blessing and privilege of His presence; it is indeed banishment from God and from His Kingdom, and from the glory and exaltation, the joy and happiness of eternal life. That is the second death, and that is what will come upon all men who reject the redemption that has been wrought for them in the atonement of the Son of God, whom we call Jesus of Nazareth, the Christ. And who was Jesus, the Christ? He was both God and man. Can we accept it? Can we comprehend it? It is very simple to those who will permit themselves to comprehend it. It is very plain if men will comprehend, firstly, the fact, that God is the Father of man, spiritually, and that God is the Father of Jesus Christ, both temporally and spiritually, and that Jesus Christ is nothing more nor less than the Son of God, begotten of His Father, as absolutely, and as truly as any child was begotten of his earthly father. You don't need to mince the matter. How could we be like God if we were not begotten in His image and in His likeness? Then this holy man, Jesus Christ, had God for His Father, and He had for His mother the virgin, Mary, who never knew mortal man until after the time that Christ was born. He had this human mother for His mother, and thus were joined together in Him, forever, God and man, and thus is explained to the human family the connection existing between God and man, his children, his offspring  in the earth. Not only is God our Father, but Jesus Christ is our brother; and in the spirit He is the elder brother of the human race, whereas in the flesh Adam was before Him. Many other prophets, men and inspired persons were before Christ in the flesh, and yet He was the first born of God in the flesh; he was God's "only begotten Son" in the flesh. He came into the world in this way, clothed with double power--power to die, which He derived from His mother; and power to resist death, if He had so willed it, which He had inherited from His Father. Thus He had power both to live forever and also power to pass through the ordeal of death, that He might suffer it for all men, and come forth out of the grave to a newness of life--a resurrected being, to be clothed with immortality and eternal life, that all men might come forth out of the grave unto life eternal, if they will obey Him. They will come forth anyhow, either as vessels of honor or as vessels of dishonor. They will come forth from the grave whether they will or not. They can't help themselves. We could not help the curse of mortal death coming upon us, neither shall we be able to avoid or to prevent the resurrection of this body from that grave; for as God raised from the dead, so will all mankind.

Then the Latter-day Saints worship God, the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and we are instructed, and we do follow that instruction, to worship God, the Father, and to call upon His name for the blessings that we need, in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ. I do not suppose that there is a Latter-day Saint anywhere who does not believe, who has not absolutely accepted in his soul the literal and absolute resurrection of the Lord, Jesus Christ, from the dead. We accept that; it is a part of our doctrine; it is a fundamental principle of our religion. On that truth depends our hope of everlasting life, and, therefore, we have cast our lot into the plan of life and of redemption and of salvation inaugurated by the Son of God while He was in the flesh. We depend upon it for our exaltation; upon it rests our hope of happiness and the privilege of entering again into the presence of our Father, the Father of our spirits, and enjoying eternities with Him. Our hope is founded on the great truth that Jesus rose from the dead and conquered death. Now, a great many people will argue that this is, in some degree, only mythical, that it cannot be real or tangible. I shall take the liberty, if you will permit, to look at the Scripture for a moment with reference to this matter. After the resurrection of Christ, abundant evidence was given His disciples and Saints to establish  the reality of His resurrection from the dead. Of course, we have the testimony of the ancient disciples of Christ with reference to this matter, but that is not all. We read here the testimony given concerning the resurrection of the Savior, by Luke, one of the disciples of Christ, who wrote a brief history of His doings and life. We read here of two of the disciples who went to Emmaus with the Savior after His resurrection, and knew Him not until they got there, and He broke bread, then they discovered that they had been walking and talking with the Lord:

"And they said one to another, Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?

"And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them,

"Saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.

"And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of bread.

"And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.

"But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit,"--just as a great many professed teachers of religion, today, claim that He was but a spirit, only a spirit, and that the body itself does not rise, but that the resurrection from death to life is the departure of the spirit from the body, the body to return to dust; and the spirit to return to God, redeemed and resurrected from death unto life eternal. This is the doctrine of some teachers of religion, for I have heard them teach and preach it. We believe that the gospel of Jesus Christ and that the life and mission and works of the Son of God are far more real and far more tangible than this. So the disciples of Jesus, when He appeared unto them, were terrified and affrighted, supposing that they had seen a spirit.

"And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?

"Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself; handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

"And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet.

"And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat?

"And they gave him a piece of broiled fish, and of an honeycomb.

"And he took it, and did eat before them.

"And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me.

"Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures.

"And said unto them, Thus is it written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day:

"And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

"And ye are witnesses of these things,

"And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endowed with power from on high.

"And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.

"And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven.

"And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy:

"And were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God."

We might refer you to many other passages here. We take this Scripture as it reads. We testify to the world that the disciple of Christ, the apostle of the Lord Jesus, the scribe, the writer of this testimony, was inspired of God to write the truth, and that he did write the truth and nothing but the truth. Jesus was no spirit risen out of the body, for the spirit had already departed from the body and returned to it, and taken it up again. While the body lay in the tomb, according to divine truth revealed in the word of God here, he was quickened by the spirit and went and preached to the spirits that were in prison (1 Peter 3: 18-22), thus fulfilling also the prediction of the prophets concerning Him, that He was anointed to proclaim liberty to the captives and to open the prison doors to them that were bound. So, Christ went to the spirit world where darkness reigned, where the spirits of men were shut out from the presence of God, where they could only be ministered to by messengers sent from the Lord, who possessed a higher and a far more exceeding weight of glory. There He went, and with Him went the  two malefactors who were crucified with Him, for He said to them that day they should be with Him in "paradise;" and they were there: not in God's glorious Kingdom, but in the spirit world, where Christ went. He had this great mission to perform, of preaching His gospel to the spirits in prison, the same gospel that is preached to the living, for there is but one plan of life, one gospel, one faith, one Lord, one baptism, one Holy Spirit, that cometh from God and that bringeth light and intelligence unto the children of men. There is only one way; it is the straight and narrow path that leads back into the presence of God. That is the way that Christ trod; that is the way that He marked out for His disciples to tread in; and that is the way that you and I must go in order to obtain the reward that has been promised to the faithful. But, says one, what a narrow idea this is. How incompetent is such a plan as this, to reach the millions and millions of the human family who have, necessarily, died without knowing the gospel of Christ, without having heard even the name of Jesus Christ.

How narrow, then, to say that no man can enter into the Kingdom of God but by the door and through the means that Jesus Christ has offered to the children of men. But, no, it is not a narrow view; it is the broadest possible view to take of this matter. Why, how can you, then, meet the necessities of the children of men, all the myriads of spirits that have passed away from this mortal stage without the knowledge of this gospel, without the knowledge of Jesus Christ, without the benefits of the ordinances of the house of God? We will tell you, for it has been revealed in its fullness in this dispensation. As Christ went to preach to the spirits in prison, that were disobedient when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was preparing, in which a few, that is, eight souls were saved by water, the like figure whereunto baptism doth now save us, so this same plan prevails today, and the same principle. The great mission inaugurated by the Son of God is now being prosecuted by ten thousand thousands of those who have held the Melchisedek priesthood which is after the order of the Son of God, men who have been endowed with power from on high to preach the gospel to the spirits in prison. Not a soul that has ever lived and died from off the face of this earth shall escape a chance to hear the gospel of Jesus Christ. If they receive it and obey it, the ordinances of the gospel will be performed for and in their behalf, by their kindred, or their posterity in some generation of time after them, so  that every law and every requirement of the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be carried out, and the promises and requirements fulfilled for the salvation of the living and also for the salvation of the dead. Mormonism, as it is called, the gospel of Jesus Christ, as devised by the Son of God, provides that every son and every daughter of God, every child of the Father, every soul that has descended from Adam shall have the privilege of hearing this holy gospel of Christ and shall come to know the truth, that His name, the name of Christ--Jesus of Nazareth, is the only name under heaven by which man can be saved, exalted and restored again to the presence and glory of God the Father.

Through Him, as I have said already, all men that have died shall be raised again from the dead--every one--and not only shall they be raised from the dead, but they shall be restored to their perfect frame. We will go, now, to the doctrines that we have received in the Book of Mormon and in the Doctrine and Covenants, the revelations that have come to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and we will find that every soul shall not only be raised from the dead, but shall be restored to their perfect frame. There will be no hunchbacks in heaven; no one-legged or one-armed men there, nor cripples, nor any deformed sons and daughters of the Father in the celestial glory, for they will be restored by the power of God and by the principle of life contained in the gospel of the Son of God. They will all be restored to their "proper frame" and "perfect form" mark you, "both limb and joint." We read that, here in this good book, the Book of Mormon (Alma 11: 43-45). I intended, when I got up, to read you some of the doctrines of Jesus Christ, contained in this book, but let me say, the people of the world generally, seem to want to find out some different way from that which the Lord has designated, in order that they might be saved. Some men want to be saved without any righteousness on their own part, without any forgiveness of sin, without any repentance, without humility of acknowledgment that they are unworthy, except through a remission of their sins, to enjoy the blessings and inherit the glory of the Kingdom of God. They even hold out the idea, the erroneous, wicked, pernicious thought or idea, that the murderer on the scaffold can be ushered into the presence of God and to the highest glory if he will only say, on the scaffold, before the drop is cut, that he "believes in the Lord Jesus Christ." Why, it is infamy; it is abomination; it is the essence of injustice and unrighteousness.

No man can be ushered into the presence of God in his sins, and no man can receive a remission of his sins except he repent and burial with Christ. For God has made us free agents, to choose good or evil, to walk in the light or in the darkness, as we choose, and he has ordained it thus that we might become like Him, that if we prove ourselves worthy of everlasting life and glory in His presence, it will be because we have repented of our sins and have obeyed and kept His commandments. And, if we are doomed, or cursed, or cast out into the second death, into darkness, where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched, it will be because we have not obeyed the will of God, nor walked in the light, because we have chosen darkness rather than the light, and our thoughts were evil and we did not repent, therefore, we received no forgiveness or remission of our sins. The judgment of God will be just, and His rewards will be just, for He will reward men for their merits, and punish them for their wickedness. That is justice and righteousness; anything short of that, anything more or less than that would come of evil and would brand the Father of all, the God of heaven and earth, the just Judge, as unworthy of such titles and of such glory and greatness and impartiality; for it would not be possible for a just God to reward men for something that they were not worthy of, nor to condemn men for what they had not deserved.

Then, again, Jesus told the people at Jerusalem, His disciples and those who followed Him, that He had other sheep that were not of that fold, and He must go to them, and they must hear His voice. They must be taught His gospel, that there might be one shepherd and one fold. We read His words in this glorious and good book which I hold in my hand, which was given by inspiration from the Lord. The Book of Mormon tells us how the Savior of men, after He had ascended into heaven from among the Jews, descended upon this continent, among the inhabitants that dwelt here, who had been prepared beforehand by prophets and by inspired men who had taught them the gospel as they understood it, and who had foretold them the coming of the Son of man to the earth. He visited them, and He organized His Church here, as He organized it over there. He appointed twelve disciples here to preach the gospel and to lead in matters pertaining to the cause of the Kingdom that was established upon this continent; and He taught them the same doctrines--only they are preserved and revealed in somewhat greater plainness to us--that He taught the disciples and the  people among the Jews. I am going to read you some of the things that the Lord taught the disciples and the people that were prepared to receive Him, upon this continent, after His ascension into heaven. Mark you, when He came to the people here He came as the Son of God, risen from the dead. He showed to these people also the evidences of His crucifixion. They had heard of it by the revelations of God; they knew that He had been crucified, that He had risen from the dead, and that He had established His gospel and His Church there. They were expecting Him here because the Lord had promised them that He would come; and He stood upon the earth, in the midst of them, and taught them His gospel; He ordained them to His priesthood, conferring upon them His power and authority to administer for the salvation of the children of men. He sent out those whom He chose to be His mouthpieces and representatives, among all the people of this land, to preach this gospel that Jesus had preached to the Jews and had now preached to the inhabitants of this continent. He came here as Jesus Christ, resurrected from the dead, clothed with flesh and bones as tangible as man's, capable of eating the broiled fish and the honeycomb--which no spirit could partake of, for a spirit would not do that.

It would not be consistent with the law that governs them for a spirit to attempt to partake of the gross elements of this earth; but Jesus could and did do it, for he was both Lord and Christ; both man and God; possessing the power both of God and of man; and in and through Him God and man are linked together as one family in the forms that they always existed, just as they exist now, except at times possessing greater intelligence than at other times--sometimes barbarians, and ignorant, or enlightened and taught by prophets and inspired men that were raised up among them. In this way has God taught the Chinese, the Japanese, and other peoples of the world in their times and seasons, the wisdom possessed by men who have been raised up by the Lord and inspired to instruct the people among whom they dwelt, for their enlightenment and to the leading of them into moral and righteous paths--not always conferring the priesthood upon them, but giving them intelligence. The Lord did not have to confer the priesthood upon Columbus, when He moved upon him to discover this country, but He called him for that purpose and moved upon him to accomplish that work, and the man thus inspired for that work could not help but do it. He could not forsake the mission that was given him; neither could he cease until he had accomplished the work. We read  that here in this book. We are told that Columbus was inspired to do the 'work that he did; and so have many men, in many ages of the world, been inspired of God to do certain things and teach certain precepts akin to the gospel of Jesus Christ in order that the people might be brought nearer to the Lord and that they might not be left to become wholly heathenish and wholly ignorant, benighted and barbarous.

Now, I hope you will pardon me for detaining you; but I have chosen a few words that I want to read you, from the Book of Mormon, that were translated by the gift and power of God, through Joseph Smith the prophet. You will find a very great resemblance between some of the words I shall read in this book and those contained in the New Testament of the Bible. The recorder of the circumstance and the utterances here referred to wrote:

"And it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words unto Nephi, and to those who had been called (now the number of them who had been called and received power and authority to baptize, were twelve), and behold he stretched forth his hand unto the multitude, and cried unto them saying, Blessed are ye if ye shall give heed unto the words of these twelve whom I have chosen from among you to minister unto you, and to be your servants; and unto them I have given power, that they may baptize you with water; and after that ye are baptized with water, behold I will baptize you with fire and with the Holy Ghost; therefore blessed are ye if ye shall believe in me, and be baptized, after that ye have seen me and know that I am.

"And again, more blessed are they who shall believe in your words because that ye shall testify that ye have seen me, and that ye know that I am. Yea, blessed are they who shall believe in your words, and come down into the depths of humility and be baptized, for they shall be visited with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and shall receive a remission of their sins." Then he continues:

"Yea, blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."

Let me pause just a moment here. Blessed are the poor in spirit--who do what? Are they blessed simply because they are poor in spirit? No; don't forget that. Let this rest upon your minds. "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me." There is the substance of it. There is the truth: "Blessed are the poor in spirit who come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." And thus it is made a little plainer here than you will find it in the New Testament.

"And again, blessed are all they that mourn, for they shall be comforted;

"And blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

"And blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled"--what with? The Lord tells us here, "Blessed are all they who do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost.

"And blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy."

Of all people under the heavens, the Latter-day Saints should be the most merciful people, the most forgiving, the most charitable, for no man can more easily forgive and show mercy to his fellow creatures than he who has received mercy and forgiveness from God.

"And blessed are all the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

"And blessed are all the peace-makers, for they shall be called the children of God.

"And blessed are all they who are persecuted for my name's sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

"And blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake,

"For ye shall have great joy and be exceeding glad, for great shall be your reward in heaven; for so persecuted they the prophets who were before you."

Now, I cannot pursue this subject longer. I will say this, that these are the doctrines of Jesus Christ. These are some of the words that He uttered to the people upon this continent, and these are the words that He uttered to the people upon the old continent, or over there in Jerusalem. Other words He uttered which we will not have time to refer to; but He taught as never man taught, and the doctrines that He taught are yet--almost at least--as high above the conceptions of mankind and their ability to carry them out, as the heavens are above the earth. Yet, His doctrine is true; His precepts are righteous; His gospel is the power of God unto salvation; and in proportion as man rises to a conception, and an acceptance of and obedience to the principles taught by the Son of God, the nearer he becomes like Him and like the Father of our spirits and the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He was God in the flesh; He was Emmanuel or "God with us," the Savior of the world. The Latter-day Saints believe in Him not only because of the testimonies borne  of Him in the Bible--in the four gospels and the Epistles of the New Testament, and the predictions of the prophets in the Old Testament of the Bible, concerning His coining and mission; not only because of the evidences we have here in the Book of Mormon, where it is still more plainly given than it is in the Bible, nor because we also have further and stronger evidences of the divinity of His mission in the revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but also because we have the testimony of witnesses of these divine things and, especially, of the divine mission of Jesus Christ, by and from men whom we have seen in the flesh, with whom we have conversed, with whom we have associated and whom we know to have been, in their lives, pure, upright, honest and faithful servants of the living God. Beside all this we know the truth by the witness of the spirit to ourselves. Now, may the Lord bless you.

Of course, we understand that this is not, indeed, the natal day of the Savior. He was not born on the 25th day of December; but this is the day that has been accepted by the world, at least by the so-called Christian world, as His natal day, and we have accepted it with them. It would be difficult, indeed, to break away from it and celebrate the anniversary of the birth of the Lord on the day that He was really born. So we meet, today, to celebrate that important event and to praise His name. I thank my Father in heaven for the faith He has given me in the divinity of the mission of Jesus Christ. I thank Him for the blessings of the holy priesthood that He has restored to the world in this dispensation. I thank Him for the organization of His Church. I thank Him for the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus, from baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, all along to the endowment and sealing and higher ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which were designed to prepare men, by ordination, appointment and faithfulness, to dwell with God in the eternal world. May the Lord bless us and help us to be faithful always, to the end, is my prayer, in the name of Jesus. Amen.
