Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Introduction

Two things I am very anxious all my sons should be: faithful servants of our Heavenly Father, and useful members in his Kingdom. Integrity to the truth and ability to do good are qualities which I hope will characterize you all.

—BRIGHAM YOUNG, 25 JULY 1871

Amongst the pleasures of my life, at the present time, is the thought that so many of my sons are acquiring experimental and practical knowledge that will fit them for lives of great usefulness, and with this thought, I associate the hope, that by God's mercy, that knowledge will be applied in striving to save the souls of men, and building up the Kingdom of Heaven on the earth.

—BRIGHAM YOUNG, 11 NOVEMBER 1875

Much has been written about Brigham Young. And yet few men have been less understood by their contemporaries than he was. Separated from his countrymen by strange beliefs and a vast distance, he was a subject of intense ridicule and slander during his lifetime. Confident that time would eventually assign him his rightful place in history, Brigham Young studiously ignored the malicious stories that were circulated about him. "I am often made aware," he once wrote Jefferson Davis, "of the utter uselessness, and folly of seeking to vindicate my character from such foul aspersions as are occasionally raised against me; from the simple fact, that . . . when the vile slander is fairly refuted, and truth appears in the most incontestable manner, it is permitted to lie quietly upon the shelf to slumber the sleep of death." [^1]

The mountain of false reports made against Brigham Young has been tenaciously quarried and in many cases has served as the main source of information for the biographer. Consequently, the truth about Brigham Young is still largely "upon the shelf," so to speak, because biographers have not sought an understanding of him in the right places.

"The letters of a person, especially of one whose business has been chiefly transacted by letters, form the only full and genuine journal of his life," said Thomas Jefferson. Such is the case with Brigham Young. The voluminous correspondence that comprises a weighty part of the Brigham Young papers in the archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints presents a view unsurpassed in its detail of his life. These letters vividly illuminate the character of the man whom Samuel Eliot Morison has described as "among the most successful commonwealth builders of the English-speaking world." A select group of the letters, chosen from among the countless papers of state and ecclesiastical importance, are those he wrote to members of his family. These reveal a dimension of his life that has largely remained hidden from view in the popular studies of him: his role as husband and father. If among Brigham Young's pleasures in the waning years of his life was, as he said, the thought of his children's honorable achievements, then the groundwork for his joy had been laid years before at his own fireside. Few men have ignited the spark of human worth and dignity in their children as effectively as did Brigham Young. Through the numerous letters he wrote to his children, we can see something of the relationships he established with them and get some insight into his family life. And into Brigham Young himself, since personality and character are nowhere better revealed than in the intimate environment of one's family circle.

Brigham Young's family provided much of his happiness in life. "I due think the Lord has blest me with one of the best famelyes that eney man ever had on the earth," he wrote in his own hand, with his own characteristic spelling, on one occasion; and, after returning from missionary service for the Church in England, he noted that his joy was complete when he was able to spend, for the first time in years, an evening by his fireside with his family: "We injoi it and feele to prase the Lord," he wrote in his diary. While traveling back to Winter Quarters from Salt Lake Valley in the fall of 1847, he lamented, "O that I had my famely here." So important was his family to him that regardless of his success and accomplishments in life, Brigham felt that were he to fail in his duty as husband and father, he would "[wake] up in the morning of the First Resurrection to find that he had failed in everything."

Brigham Young's was one of the prominent families of Mormondom—not only because of its size, or because of his position as president of the Church and as governor of Utah Territory, but also because it stood as an example of those principles of industry and service that had long been preached as ideals of Latter-day Saint family life.

Because of numerous burdensome responsibilities of public office, Brigham's personal contact with his family was necessarily limited. After frequent absence from home during the first decade of his Church membership, he was told in a revelation, "it is no more required . . . to leave your family as in times past, for your offering is acceptable to me. . . . I therefore command you to . . . take special care of your family from this time, henceforth." While this statement did not eliminate future absences from his family, it no doubt affected the quality of his association with them, limited though it still must be.

Brigham Young's family was one of the largest in the Church. [^2] Sixteen of his wives bore him fifty-seven children, eleven of whom died in infancy or early childhood. Of the forty-six children who grew to maturity, seventeen were sons and twenty-nine daughters. Aside from the awesome responsibilities attendant upon presiding over the Church at a time when detail was not consistently channeled to subordinates and so demanded his attention, Brigham was confronted with the daily care of a household that at its height numbered more than seventy individuals. The logistical problem alone, of feeding and clothing such a number, staggers the imagination, not to speak of providing the education and training that must precede responsible behavior if children are to perpetuate traits of nobility and integrity.

Confronted with chiding and ridicule from friends and enemies alike, who doubted Brigham's ability to even know all of his children, let alone properly care for and instruct them, [^3] President Young nevertheless succeeded in providing for their physical, emotional, and spiritual needs in a manner that is both exemplary and profound. He brought a degree of wisdom and understanding to the task of family management that contributed to a positive relationship with his children and remarkably influenced their attitudes and accomplishments in life. Several factors contributed to this, not the least of which was a paternal love and kindness, balanced with firmness and justice. One of Brigham Young's daughters recalled that "home was as beautiful to me as love and happiness could make it." To his children, no other fact of their father's life was so plain a proof of his greatness as "his life at home and the influence which he radiated there." His daughter Clarissa Young Spencer, who fondly remembered her childhood as "one long round of happiness," wrote that her father "had the tenderness of a woman for his family and friends." Susa Young Gates related that although there were the usual squabbles among the children, "we were not a contentious family." Nor did the size of the family preclude a spirit of companionship and esteem between its individual members. Susa concluded that hers "was an ideal father, kind to a fault, tender, thoughtful, just and firm. . . . None of us feared him."

The kindness that characterized Brigham's relationship with his children included a firmness "that neither humiliated the child nor lowered his own self-respect." Discipline was mainly an educational process of example and precept: "It is not by the whip or the rod that we can make obedient children," he stated, "but it is by faith and by prayer, and by setting a good example before them." [^4] The few instances of Brigham Young applying the "rod" to his children must be regarded within this framework. If children knew the feelings of their parents when they did good or evil, "it would have a salutary influence upon their lives; but no child can possibly know this, until it becomes a parent. I am compassionate therefore towards children." Governing a home by violence and dictatorship was contrary to Brigham Young's convictions:

I do not believe in making my authority as a husband or a father known by brute force; but by a superior intelligence—by showing them that I am capable of teaching them. . . . If the Lord has placed me to be head of a family, let me be so in all humility and patience, not as a tyrannical ruler, but as a faithful companion, an indulgent and affectionate father, a thoughtful and unassuming superior; let me be honoured in my station through faithful diligence, and be fully capable, by the aid of God's Spirit, of filling my office in a way to effect the salvation of all who are committed to my charge.

Brigham Young taught that when children are bound to the moral law, "until duty becomes loathsome to them; when they are freed by age from the rigorous training of their parents, they are more fit for companions to devils, than to be the children of such religious parents."

This "indulgent" and "affectionate" father did not lack firmness, however. During the family devotion one evening a noisy young girl "was running about and squealing with laughter." Brigham stopped his prayer, caught the child, spanked her, and laid her sobbing in her mother's waiting arms. He then returned to his chair, where he again knelt and quietly concluded the family prayer.

Brigham Young's adeptness as a child psychologist was demonstrated on one occasion when one of his wives confronted him with a small son who, as soon as he was fed his bread and milk each day, was in the habit of knocking the dish and spoon to the floor. "The next time he knocks the dish from your hand," Brigham counseled, "lean him against the chair, do not say one word to him, [and] go to your work." The mother did so, and the child stood by the chair for a while looking first at his mother and then at the objects on the floor. Presently he got down and crawled to the spoon and dish and placed them upon the table. "He never tried to knock that dish out of he hand again," concluded Brigham. "She might have whipped him and injured him, as a great many others would have done; but if they know what to do, they can correct the child without violence."

Brigham Young's confidence in having taught his sons a correct principle was manifest in an address in 1872 discussing the carelessness of children who not only played in the streets, but even taunted teamsters to run over them. "And sometimes people have to stop their carriages to save the lives of children," Brigham noted, adding, "if one of my boys attempts to obstruct the highway, take your whip and give him a good sound horse-whipping." But, he concluded, "I think of a truth, that a boy of mine never did this, never."

An important institution in the Young household was the evening devotional. "There might be wars and rumors of wars, councils and and balls, meetings and dinner-parties," but no matter how busy they were, all family members were expected to be in attendance at home. After prayer, the family would hold council to formulate policy, plan recreational activities, or solve juvenile problems that may have arisen in the family. At these devotionals Brigham Young would often take the opportunity to counsel and instruct his wives and older children. A note dictated by him to his family on April 2, 1866, suggests that schooling them to meet regularly for their daily devotion was not accomplished without repetition:

I have felt moved upon to write the following, for the perusal of my family, and to which I call their serious attention.

There is no doubt but that my family, one and all, will acknowledge that my time is as precious to me as theirs is to them. When the time appointed for our family devotion and prayer comes, I am expected to be there; and no public business, no matter how important has been able to influence me to forego the fulfilment of this sacred duty which I owe to you, to myself and to God.

I do not wish to complain of you without a cause; but I have noticed at prayer time that only a portion of my family has been present; some of my wives are absent visiting a sister, a neighbor, a mother or a relative; my children are scattered all over town, attending to this or that; and if at home, one is changing her dress, another her shoes, another getting ready to go to the theater; another has gone to see Mary, and another to see Emily, and I may add, etc., etc., etc.

Now, I have a few words of counsel for my family, which I shall expect them to receive kindly, and obey: namely, when prayer time comes, that they all be at home. If any of them are visiting, that they be at home at half past six o'clock in the evening. I wish my wives and children to be at home at that time in the evening, to be ready to bow before the Lord to make their acknowledgements to Him for His kindness and mercy and long-suffering towards us.

Your strict attendance to my wishes in this respect will give joy to the heart of your Husband and Father.

Church Historian George A. Smith was in Brigham Young's home at prayer time on one occasion. After noting that quite a large number of the President's family were there, he recalled that after a "very fervent prayer," Brigham addressed his family on the subject of his and their positions in the Church. The President told his family that the eyes of the world were upon them and also the eyes of the Saints and that the influence of his teachings was affected by the example of his family.

He said it was necessary for him to observe the word of wisdom, not only for his own sake, but his family should set examples. He wished his wives and daughters always to adopt their own fashions and to set an example and as far as possible to manufacture what they wore. He spoke on the absolute necessity of the saints ceasing to follow the fashions of the world. His first wife, Mary Ann Angell, followed in an interesting address. . . .

Brigham Young's exemplary life of personal integrity was a dominant influence for good in the lives of his children. He was convinced of the necessity of setting "an example before our children that is worthy of their imitation and highest admiration. If we do this, we shall have occasion to rejoice and be exceeding glad, for we shall have influence over them and they will not forsake us." Although the public press painted anything but a virtuous picture of Brigham Young, his family knew the falsity of this image. In setting himself as a reference point to designate the path of virtue and happines, this trumpet gave no uncertain sound. Writing his first letter to his oldest son, Joseph, on the occasion of the boy's entrance into missionary service, Brigham said:

As you have grown to years of understanding you have had continually the instructions of one who has been appointed to stand at the head of God's kingdom on the earth, the front of the battle; you have seen his energy, observed his deportment both private and public—should not you therefore eventually prove yourself a skillful general?

Another time he advised Joseph to "keep yourself pure before the Lord—your father before you has done it and my constant prayer is that you may. With all my heart I believe you will."

In his association with his family, Brigham was not given to hypocrisy. When he urged his children to be honest, they saw an honest man. For example, while living in Auburn, New York, about 1826, he had contracted a three dollar debt from a local druggist, who, when approached with payment, could not find the note and refused to accept the money, stating that Brigham must have been mistaken about it. Some forty years later and two thousand miles removed from the scene of the incident, having heard somehow that the note had been found, Brigham dispatched his son John W. to Auburn with the charge: "I wish it settled. He [the druggist] may be dead; but his heir or heirs may be living." [^5]

Brigham counseled his children that daily toil, however humble it be, "is our daily duty, and by doing it well we make it a part of our daily worship." His children, once again, did not have to look beyond their father for an example. A little over a year before his death Brigham received a letter from an old friend, George Hickox, whom he had known forty-six years earlier in Mendon, New York. After reporting the death of mutual acquaintances, and recalling how kindly Brigham had been on an occasion when the writer had suffered from "fever and ague," Mr. Hickox reported that a chair built by the Mormon leader in Mendon a half century earlier was being displayed in a forthcoming grand centennial supper in the local Congregational church. "We would be very happy to have you come and occupy it," the writer concluded. President Young replied, expressing his interest in the celebration and amusement at the place his chair would occupy. He continued:

I have no doubt that many other pieces of furniture and other specimens of my handiwork can be found scattered about your section of the country, for I have believed all my life that, that which was worth doing was worth doing well, and have considered it as much a part of my religion to do honest, reliable work, such as would endure, for those who employed me, as to attend to the services of God's worship on the Sabbath.

A practical philosophy of life lay at the center of Brigham Young's efforts to educate his children. He taught that service to the Lord is more than praying and attending meeting: "We can also serve him in a life of usefulness, honesty and sobriety, remembering that it should be the object of our existence here that when we leave the world it will be a little better for our presence and labors." He further taught that preparation for the "life of usefulness" requires diligence and effort and that "our constant desire, should be to know how to build up the kingdom of God, and of necessity this work calls forth an almost endless variety of talent, skill and labor." He stressed that we cannot excuse ourselves from our duty of building up the kingdom of God, "for all of our time, all of our ability and all of our means belong to Him. It is not the privilege of any person to spend his time in a way that does no good to himself nor to his neighbours." Of the time allotted to man on the earth, Brigham Young was convinced that there was none to waste. "After suitable rest and relaxation there is not a day, hour or minute that we should spend in idleness, but every minute of every day of our lives we should strive to improve our minds and to increase in the faith of the holy Gospel, in charity, patience, and good works, that we may grow in the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus Christ." The more the Latter-day Saint is blessed with knowledge and talent, he believed, the more he is responsible to use his ability for "the spread of righteousness, the subjugation of sin and misery, and the amelioration of the condition of mankind."

Brigham Young taught that a prerequisite for useful service in the kingdom is a sound, practical education. Children should be so taught

that when our sons are sent into the world as ministers of salvation and as representatives of the kingdom of God in the mountains, they can mingle with the best society and intelligibly and sensibly present the principles of truth to mankind, for all truth is the offspring of heaven and is incorporated in the religion which we have embraced. . . .

We are the guardians of our children; their training and education are committed to our care, and if we do not ourselves pursue a course which will save them from the influence of evil, when we are weighed in the balance we shall be found wanting.

In an age when the father was frequently away from home visiting the Saints, directing the building of settlements, or helping to gather the poor, much of the responsibility for teaching the children in their early years devolved upon their mothers. The formal education of Brigham Young's children began in a small room in the Lion House and later continued at the white schoolhouse built especially for that purpose across the street to the east. Beside the basics of reading and writing, the children were taught "strict probity of conduct."

Brigham Young spared no effort to provide opportunities for the personal development of his children. After elementary education in the local schools, they were given opportunity for further learning and experience in the field of their choice. Having been taught that building the kingdom requires an "endless variety of talent, skill and labor," they were early engaged in a wide range of studies and activities by way of preparation. Collectively, their lives show excellence in many fields of endeavor, including architecture, engineering, railroad construction, art, music, drama, educational administration, teaching, banking, farming, politics, lumber manufacture, law, and literature. They also served in numerous administrative assignments in various organizations of the Church.

Several of Brigham Young's children made important contributions to the Latter-day Saint community and to the nation. His oldest son, Joseph, served many years in the Utah Territorial Legislature; Brigham Jr. was a mission president, a member of the Council of the Twelve, and a counselor in the Church's First Presidency; John was widely known in railroad construction and financial circles and was a counselor to his father in the First Presidency; Willard had a remarkable military career, as an engineer he supervised important river and harbor improvements along the Missouri and Mississippi rivers and in the Northwest, he presided over two colleges, and he was superintendent of Church building; Don Carlos was Church architect for many years and a member of the Utah Legislature; Susa Young Gates, a noted author and editor, played a leading role in state and national women's organizations in addition to raising a large family. While not a complete listing, these examples are indicative of the determination and drive that was characteristic of many of Brigham Young's children. Their accomplishments serve as a monument to a dedicated home life.

Brigham Young's desire for his children was that "they not only walk in the footsteps of their father, but take a course to enjoy life, health, and vigor while they live, and the spirit of intelligence from God, that they may far outstrip their father in long life, and in the good they will perform in their day." And more specifically, "I wish my sons to far exceed me in goodness and virtue." Whatever Brigham's influence may have been upon the lives of his children in their early years, his efforts to direct them continued even after they left home to begin their preparations in life. The letters they received from their father were an important source of direction for them. Many of these letters are a reflection of his belief that Solomon's saying, to spare the rod and spoil the child, ought to be altered to read, "Spare the rod and give good counsel to children and thus draw them to you." Letters written by Brigham to thirteen of his sons as they embarked upon various assignments away from home reveal a unique ability to discern the needs of his children and counsel them in the problems they faced in the different conditions under which they labored.

Eleven of Brigham Young's boys filled missions for the Church. Joseph, Brigham Jr., Oscar, Ernest, Arta De Christa, Lorenzo, and John W. completed proselyting assignments in England; Morris labored in Hawaii and the Eastern States; Heber in England and Switzerland; Don Carlos in the Southern States; and Feramorz in Mexico. In the letters he wrote to them, their father gave them counsel that is pertinent far beyond its original intent.

"While you are on your present mission," Brigham wrote his son Oscar, "you will lay a foundation for future usefulness in the Kingdom of God."

If there be any difference in missions probably the first mission that a man takes has more influence on his future than any that he may take in after life. On his first mission he lays the foundation and adopts the principles which are to guide him through his future career, and it has seldom been the case that a young man who has been dilatory and careless while upon his first mission has ever recovered the ground he then lost.

Brigham Young noted that much that is truly valuable in life can be gained in discharging one's calling as a missionary in the Church of Jesus Christ. "There is no position a young man can be placed in that is better adapted to give him a knowledge of God and of His holy spirit than to be sent on a mission." He reminded Joseph A. that education was not all confined to schools, and that while engaged in his proselyting he should

lose no opportunity of making yourself familiar with all that is useful and likely to benefit you, for to be able to combat with the world we must make ourselves acquainted with the ways of the world. This can only be done by keeping your mind constantly on the alert and when in society never allow anything to escape your notice, listen attentively; and observe minutely the manners, customs, and remarks of all, for, from the most humble of our fellow creatures an observing man can learn something that will be useful to him in after life.

A mission provides an opportunity to obtain knowledge and experience that no book can teach. "Stores of information surround you," Brigham wrote two of his sons in England, "you are in the midst of the world's activities, the discoveries of science and the masterpieces of inventive genius are within your reach and you have many bright opportunities of increasing your range of knowledge and widening your views of man and nature."

After reminding one son that the missionary is called to mingle in society a great deal, Brigham urged him to cultivate his speech and social graces and use every effort to improve his address. "Always exert yourself to be agreeable, and no matter whether poor or rich, treat them with equal courtesy, do not be pompous to the needy, nor condescending to the wealthy." By this, he assured him, "you will gain the love and admiration of those worthy of your esteem, and at comparatively little expense."

Arriving in the large cities of Christendom in their youth—many of them away from home for the first time—Brigham's sons were cautioned to avoid the wickedness of the world with its many allurements.

Many a young man has fall[en] from a virtuous life through a desire to simply see and become acquainted with the sins of the world. But having once become familiar with the ways of the sinner it has too often proved that the meshes of sin were too strong to allow of its victims escape. Do not on any pretense or excuse allow yourself to be persuaded to visit the dens of iniquity . . . and other traps for the unwary.

To his son Heber, Brigham wrote that a missionary's success depends on his ability to subjugate his passions, appetites, and feelings to the mind and will of God, through self-mastery and determination. "The man who suffers his passions to lead him becomes a slave to them, and such a man will find the work of emancipation an exceedingly difficult one." The father urged his son to "make the doing of God's will and the keeping of His commandments a constant habit with you and it will become perfectly natural and easy for you to walk uprightly before Him." He concluded, "The time of youth and early manhood is the proper time in which to form such habits."

To the young missionary confronted with the added problem of learning a difficult foreign language, Brigham advised diligence, study, courage, and perseverance:

Never allow your courage to fail you; man's greatest works have been done by men of patience, perseverance and a determined will which would acknowledge no defeat, rather than by those gifted with a natural ability which made success easy but who lacked the tenaciousness of purpose. Then my boy never say fail but work on in the way you have started and your reward is certain.

Since the main responsibility of the missionary is to take the message of salvation to mankind, he must never neglect an opportunity to enlighten the ignorant, or strengthen the weak. "Raise your voice wherever possible in defence of the truth," Brigham wrote; but, if "when declaring the truth, you are attacked by the wicked, do not condescend to argue with them, much less retaliate." He continued:

Recrimination proves no truth; it enlightens no man's mind, but it is one of the weapons used by the adversary to produce hatred and malice in the hearts of mankind, and should never be indulged in by a Latter-day Saint. When you may be assailed, heed it not, bear your testimony to the great work the Lord is doing on the earth, proclaim the Truth in meekness, and if they will not listen, leave them to their own folly. We are not called to cavil with the world.

Brigham Young summarized the mission experience by noting, "it is the noblest, happiest life that a man can lead, to be a minister of salvation to the people of the nations."

Two of President Young's sons were appointed to the United States military academies at West Point and Annapolis. Willard Young entered West Point in 1871 when he was nineteen, and Feramorz commenced his training at the Naval Academy in 1874 at age fifteen. While the problems confronted in the military were different from those in the mission field, Brigham's boys in the service also received pertinent and forceful counsel from their father adapted to their needs and circumstances.

Being Mormons and sons of Brigham Young demanded an austerity that was not common in a military environment. "By exhibiting your character and the principles you profess in your daily walk and conversation, and by refraining from every appearance of evil you will not only be admired by the good and the upright, but you will command that respect that even the most unvirtuous are willing to accord to those who truly deserve it." And to the soldier who may have been inclined to slip into anonymity so far as his religion was concerned, Brigham wrote that it was the duty of "every Latter-day Saint, young or old, to serve the Lord. None of us are excused from this duty, as, also, none of us are shut out from the attainment of the blessings of eternal life. Never in all your associations forget that you are a Latter-day Saint."

As Willard launched into rigorous training and study at West Point, he was directed "to treasure up the instruction so abundantly provided there, that in after years you may be prepared to take a place even in the foremost ranks of the great men of the nation." And lest he become over-studious, he was urged to pursue a course of moderation: "A proper regard must be had to physical as well as intellectual exercise, else the intellectual powers become impaired, and therefore, bodily recreation and rest are as necessary as they are beneficial to mental study."

No course of action was urged by Brigham Young upon his sons with more force than that directed to Willard almost immediately after his arrival at the Military Academy. "I understand you cadets are exceedingly popular with the fair sex, and some of them are very, very dangerous when so disposed, just for the sake of having a laugh at their victims; shun such as you would the very gates of hell! They are the enemy's strongest tools, and should be resisted as strongly. Beware of them!"

Another vice confronting the servicemen was idleness. Convinced that happiness consists in having something worthwhile to do and in doing it well, Brigham warned that "whoever wastes his life in idleness, either because he need not work in order to live, or because he will not live to work, will be a wretched creature, and at the close of a listless existence, will regret the loss of precious gifts and the neglect of great opportunities."

An "unmitigated evil" to young men in military service, which Brigham Young felt would impair their mental powers and make them unfit for their daily duties and studies, was the use of tobacco and profane language. "Some young men seem to entertain the idea that to smoke, to chew or to use profane language makes them appear more manly. Never was [there] a greater fallacy." Real manhood, he advised, consists in serving God and keeping his commandments. "The highest type of mankind is shown in such worthies as Enoch, Abraham, Joseph, Nephi, Alma, Joseph Smith, and others. If boys wish to be thought manly let them copy the best men and their virtues, not inferior and vicious men and their follies and vices."

Although several of his children attended the local University of Deseret, three of Brigham Young's sons studied at institutions of higher learning in the East. Don Carlos and Feramorz (after his release from the Naval Academy) studied engineering at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute at Troy, New York, and Alfales received a law degree from Michigan University at Ann Arbor. Like his sons in the military service and in the mission field, these students also received their portion from their father's steadying pen.

As he arrived in the little New York university community of Troy to study engineering and architecture, Don Carlos was cautioned that some of his new surroundings would tend to strengthen his faith while others would seek to draw him away.

As you advance in life you will find every position and occupation surrounded by its peculiar temptations, the great strength and bulwark against all of which is prayer to our Heavenly Father. Cultivate this spirit and you will find that it shall be a wall of fire around you, and your glory in the midst of you. In its practice you will find a safeguard against the wiles of the adversary, and every good resolution will be fortified by it, and every seductive influence will lose its power to annoy you.

Focusing upon the moral lapses that often mar the character of the student away from home, Brigham urged his sons never to abuse the confidence that others had placed in them, "or by folly or criminality break down the character we have built up by a life of industry and honesty. Our character is not entirely our individual property. It belongs partly to our neighbors and we have no right to shake their confidence in us and in mankind generally by acts inconsistent with the good name we have established."

Brigham Young recognized that a contributing element to happiness consisted in the wise selection of associates and friends. He counseled his boys to select companionship among those whose characters were established upon a foundation of truth and honor, whose pursuits were honorable, whose expenses were moderate, and whose lives were temperate.

Studiously avoid all those whose lives are tinctured with looseness, prodigality, and even among the very best of your associates be sure and only imitate their virtues. Remember that however bright any character may be, however much he may shine mentally or intellectually, that if he has vices they are blemishes and should not be copied. It would be as foolish, yes more so, to copy a man's moral blemishes because he has the reputation of being a gentleman, a student or a good fellow, as it would be to make an artificial wart upon one's face because some very handsome man had the misfortune to have a natural one on his. We all of us are subject to the influence of others, especially of those for whom we have regard; and from our companions both our character and disposition we'll receive a tincture, as water passing through minerals partakes of their taste and efficacy. How careful then ought we to be to associate only with the upright, the good and the pure.

Finally, to the young student who might be tempted to set his religion aside while obtaining a degree, Brigham wrote:

The adversary has no craftier snare for the feet of the young of God's people than to persuade them they can be Latter-day Saints and bury the principles of their religion so deep out of sight that when wanted they never can find them. Whilst away from home I hope you will continue your present practice of associating as much as practicable with the Elders and members of the Church.

While the letters of Brigham Young to his sons reveal a deep personal affection for his children, the answers he received from them reveal that they returned the feeling. The numerous letters written by his sons are lavish in sentiments of respect and honor for their father and eagerness to do his bidding. As they began their various assignments away from home, Brigham's sons well knew the size of the shoes they were being asked to fill. They undertook the challenge in the same spirit in which they were sent. After beginning his missionary work in England, Brigham Jr. wrote his father: "I have been afraid that more is expected of me than I can do. They consider the idea that such a father had ought to have a smart son. I can't help it if they are disappointed in their expectations but I will do my best to answer the prayers of my friends." Another time, after being introduced to New York merchants during a trip east, he informed his father, "They take off their hats and make very polite bows [and remark] 'happy to meet you Mr. Young,'" but, acknowledged the younger Brigham, "it is simply the result of your labors, Father, and I give you the credit next to God. I know that you have done the work, and I am reaping the benefit, and I feel that the only way I can repay you is by living as becomes a saint which may God help me to do." Another son, John W., explained his reason for rooming in one of St. Louis's finest hotels when he stopped there in company with other businessmen in 1866: "Personally I feel no desire to make a show, but when the eyes of many are directed towards me and it is said, 'there is a son of Brigham Young,' I feel that to look and act respectably is my duty."

The letters of Brigham's sons leave no doubt that their father's influence upon their lives was lasting and profound. As a missionary in England in 1866, John W. penned these lines: "I seat myself to write to you and it is with great pleasure that I do so because I not only love you as a Father, but respect and honor you as a Prophet of God." Writing from West Point, Willard reflected upon his home life and the guidance of his father as a preparation for his opportunities at the Military Academy.

I ever feel grateful towards you, my dear father, for the many great kindnesses and benefits you have heaped upon me, and upon all the children, though it is perhaps impossible for me to appreciate their full worth. How thankful we all ought to be (I really think I am) that we have such a loving and indulgent parent, such a wise instructor, and so worthy an example as you.

In 1876, after receiving counsel from Brigham that helped him resolve the question of continuing his miitary career, Willard responded:

I must say thanks a thousand thanks for your excellent letter. As is always the case it proved interesting beyond comparison. I always have such a 'good' feeling (I cannot better describe it) when I read your words. They seem to do me good every way, physically, mentally, and morally. The effect of the perusal of this last letter was to make me involuntarily exclaim: Thank God for such a father.

You have satisfied me every way. I shall enjoy myself a great deal better now, I feel sure, for in trying to carry out your advice in the several directions pointed out, I shall be doing just what I need to better satisfy my own sense of duty. I shall serve out the remainder of my time now with a good heart, since I know it to be your wish.

And from England Lorenzo wrote to his father: "Your letters are always repeatedly read, for in them I find spiritual strength, encouraging words, and parental love, which spurs me on to more diligence in executing my duties."

If the congenial image of Brigham Young seen in the pages of his letters to his sons appears to contradict the austere picture that is generally seen of him, it is largely due to two factors:

First was the preponderance of unreliable source material pertaining to Brigham Young. So unfavorable was the popular reaction to Mormonism and its leaders in the nineteenth century that the stream of historical sources dealing with the Latter-day Saints received a taint from which it has never been adequately purified. In 1882, Phil Robinson, a correspondent for the New York World, noted that, with the exception of Burton's City of the Saints, he was not acquainted with a single gentile work about the Mormons that was not utterly unreliable from its distortion of facts. Yet it is from these works "that the American public has acquired nearly all its ideas about the people of Utah." Since most students of Brigham Young have seen him mainly through the jaundiced eye of a hostile nineteenth century press, their understanding of him has been highly contradictory at best.

A second factor that has obscured the view of Brigham Young has been the difficulty of seeing him from the perspective of his domestic environment. The public view was less obscure; in an effort to correct faulty opinion about his people and himself, Brigham spent much of his time giving interviews. Even as his health failed him in the closing months of his life, he refused to relieve the burden on his time and strength caused by the constant stream of visitors to his office, "all of whom have to be chatted with more or less." He reasoned:

I am satisfied that such visits are, as a rule, productive of good results. Many a one who comes to Utah filled with all kinds of outrageous ideas with regard to the Mormons in general and Brigham Young in particular, after having visited our City, seen its objects of interest and called at the office, go away with feelings greatly modified, and often afterwards have a kind word for the people of Utah when they hear them assailed, and occasionally will smooth the way of any of our missionaries whom they may chance to meet. This interviewing, then, though sometimes disagreeable is too valuable a means of correcting false ideas, and removing prejudice to be discontinued whilst by the blessing of the Lord I am able to meet those who call upon me and extend to them courtesies to which, in some cases, they are probably entirely unworthy.

But the attempt was not wholly successful. In the first place, the interviews were too brief to permit more than a fleeting glimpse of the President. Second, many of the visitors who came to his office were looking for other, more intimate things. Their very interest in Brigham Young's family deprived them of a view of it. He noted that almost everyone that came to see him was motivated by an inordinate obsession or depraved curiosity to know how many wives he had. Even some of the Saints were inquisitive on this point. "A great many men and women have an irrepressible curiosity to know how many wives Brigham Young has," he noted in the Tabernacle in 1870. On this occasion he did not disappoint them:

I am now going to gratify that curiosity by saying, ladies and gentlemen, I have sixteen wives. If I have any more hereafter it will be my good luck and the blessing of God. "How many children have you, President Young?" I have forty-nine living children, and I hope to have a great many more. Now put that down. I impart this information to gratify the curiosity of the curious.

If one senses a note of sarcasm here, it is because many such inquiries about Brigham's domestic life had served only to fuel the engines of ridicule and slander against himself and his family. Consequently, in his contacts with the public one perceives a studied reticence to expose his family to further debasement and contempt. Although willing to extend courtesies, even to the unworthy, in an effort to correct public opinion, Brigham Young hesitated to submit his family to the gaze of the unscrupulous. The volumes that record his meetings with visitors and report his public discourses seldom mention his family. In 1857, as work began on his history, he notified the Church Historian that "he did not wish but little history of his family given." Only by a study of his private writings and correspondence with his family can the researcher adequately discover the sensitive, affectionate nature of Brigham Young that has almost completely escaped biographers. [^6]

Every father who reads the letters of Brigham Young to his sons may vicariously experience the satisfaction that he felt in seeing his children grow to maturity and develop themselves as useful citizens and participants in building the kingdom of God. He will note, however, that Brigham's satisfaction was not unearned. Among the paternal influences that had the greatest impact upon the lives of his children were the religious and secular education that he provided for them, the environment of love and understanding in which they were raised, and, above all, the example of his own life.

And every son who reads the letters of Brigham Young will learn that happiness in life rests upon a foundation of responsible behavior and useful service, and that the quality of one's happiness is proportionate to his diligence and preparation. Indeed,

Our daily toil, however humble it may be, is our daily duty, and by doing it well we make it a part of our daily worship. But whatever be our labor, calling or profession we should hold our skill, knowledge and talents therein, subservient to the accomplishment of the purposes of Jehovah, that our entire lives, day by day, may be made to praise Him, and our individual happiness secured by the consciousness that we are fulfilling the purpose and design of our presence here on the earth.

—DCJ

Footnotes

"In some families the children are afraid to see father—they will run and hide as from a tyrant. My children are not afraid of my footfall; except in the case of their having done something wrong they are not afraid to approach me. I could break the wills of my-little children, and whip them to this, that, and the other, but this I do not do. Let the child have a mild training until it has judgment and sense to guide it. I differ with Solomon's recorded saying as to spoiling the child by sparing the rod. True, it is written in the New Testament that 'whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth.' It is necessary to try the faith of children as well as of grown people, but there are ways of doing so besides taking a club and knocking them down with it." Journal of Discourses, IX (February 9, 1862): 195-96.

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Information about Brigham Young and his family is largely derived from the Brigham Young papers in the Church Archives, which contains numerous letters written to and from members of his family. The following published works are also helpful: Susa Young Gates, The Life Story of Brigham Young (New York, 1930) and Brigham Young, Patriot, Pioneer, Prophet (Salt Lake City, 1929); Clarissa Young Spencer, One Who Was Valiant (Caldwell, Idaho, 1940). Brigham Young's sermons are published in Journal of Discourses (26 vols., Liverpool, 1854-86).
[^2] 2. Heber C. Kimball and Christopher Layton had sixty-five children each; John W. Hess, sixty-three; John D. Lee, sixty; and Brigham Young, fifty-seven.
[^3] 3. Non-Mormons in the nineteenth century created the fiction that Brigham Young did not know all his wives and children. See, for example, Albert Richardson, Beyond the Mississippi (New York, 1867), p. 355; and Mark Twain, Roughing It (New York, 1899), pp. 124-25.
[^4] 4. Brigham Young also taught, "Kindness, love and affection are the best rod to use upon the refractory. Solomon is said to have . . . recommended another kind of rod. I have tried both kinds on children. I can pick out scores of men in this congregation who have driven their children from them by using the wooden rod. Where there is severity there is no affection or filial feeling in the hearts of either party; the children would rather be away from father than be with him.
[^5] 5. The arrival of John W. Young in the small New York town did not go unnoticed in the local newspaper: "A son of Brigham Young, (we didn't learn his number,) was in town this morning, and called at a business house in Genessee St. to settle an account by his numerous progenitor some thirty years ago. Brigham is honest in some things, but rather slow. The debt discharged by him was, we understand, for borrowed money." Unidentified newsclipping accompanying letter of John W. Young to Brigham Young, May 9, 1866.
[^6] 6. See also Dean Jessee, "The Writings of Brigham Young," The Western Historical Quarterly 4 (July 1973): 273-94.
