Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Editorial Procedure and Acknowledgments

An important part of the Brigham Young papers filed in the archives of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City is the books containing the voluminous retained copies of letters he sent during the years of his public administration. Copied by pressing moistened sheets of thin, transparent paper against the face of the original before it was sent—to obtain an offset duplication for filing—these letters, written on a wide variety of subjects and sent to a multitude of individuals, are among the best sources for understanding the life of Brigham Young. Among these writings are the ninety-five letters written by Brigham Young to his sons published in this volume. Although these are not a complete collection of all that President Young wrote to his sons, they are perhaps the best reflection of his domestic relationship with his children. Other letters to his sons dealing exclusively with business matters or detailing local events have not been included here. The letters printed here may all be found in chronological order in those letter books and so need no further documentation.

The letters written to each son, commencing with the oldest and proceeding to the youngest, have been grouped together and arranged chronologically. Circumstances of age, health, and other factors explain the absence of letters to four sons. However, a brief biographical statement on these four sons has been included so that the listing of the seventeen sons who grew to maturity may be complete.

Since Brigham Young relied almost entirely upon secretaries to write for him, (he once stated he had only eleven days of formal schooling), few of his letters written between 1847 and 1877 are in his own hand. It has therefore not seemed necessary to retain punctuation and spelling peculiarities. The four exceptions in this volume where Brigham Young actually wrote a few lines or a postscript with his own hand, as well as quotations from writings of his sons, are published as written, except for minimal punctuation that has been supplied for easier reading.

Preceding the letters written by Brigham Young to each of his sons is a short biographical summary of the boy's life. This is followed by a historical introduction to each letter or series of letters. Blanks, omissions, or illegible words have been noted with an explanation in brackets—[illegible], [torn page], etc. Missing letters or words in an obvious context have been silently supplied. Conjectural alternatives for missing words are given in brackets. Obvious slips of the pen or strike-throughs have not been retained.

Explanatory notes under the heading of each son are located in a special section at the back of the book. Also, to avoid repetition and to lessen the bulk of notes and cross references, a biographical appendix, identifying persons named in the letters, has been included.

Although diligent effort has been made to collect documents and biographical data pertaining to Brigham Young and his sons, a work of this nature will probably never be complete. Additional information or source material that would have a bearing upon the subject at hand would, therefore, be gratefully received.

Many persons have contributed significantly to the content, accuracy, and readability of this volume. I am especially indebted to the Church Historian, Leonard J. Arrington, and assistant historians Davis Bitton and James B. Allen for their insightful suggestions and direction. I appreciate the painstaking efforts of Maureen Ursenbach and Jill Mulvay, editors in the Church Historical Department. The Church Archivist, Earl Olson; librarian, Don Schmidt; and the staffs of the archives and library have provided important service. Jeff Johnson, manuscript curator, particularly has brought to notice important source materials and information pertaining to Brigham Young's family. Noel Barton of the Genealogical Society has given valuable assistance in genealogical sources. This mention of professional assistance in no way includes blame for any failings that may appear in this volume. Responsibility for any errors in fact or judgment is my own.

Several descendants of Brigham Young have provided information and source material pertaining to Brigham Young's sons: Richard W. Burton, Mrs. Bruce Jenkins, Mrs. Emily Young Knepp, Mrs. Adele McCaman, Mrs. Mary Adele Monson, Mrs. Phillis B. Phillips, Mrs. Naomi Schettler, Dr. Clark Young, Gaylen Snow Young, George Cannon Young, President S. Dilworth Young, and Whitney Young.

The following depositories and institutions have provided additional information and source material: Brigham Young University Library, Provo, Utah; University of Utah Library and Utah State Historical Society, Salt Lake City; Utah State University Library, Logan, Utah; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Archives, Troy, New York; and U.S. Naval Academy Archives, Annapolis, Maryland.

The pleasing format and presentation of these letters are the scrupulous work of Keith Montague and the Deseret Book Company.
