Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Joseph Angell Young

1834-1875

Joseph Angell Young, the oldest son of President Brigham Young, was among the Mormon missionaries who arrived in Utah from England on October 4, 1856, bringing news of the precarious condition of handcart immigrants on the plains that year. Relief efforts were immediately organized and within hours Joseph A. and twenty-seven other young men, under the leadership of George D. Grant, had started back into the mountains with sixteen wagonloads of food and clothing. Failing to meet the immigrants at Fort Bridger, Joseph and three others were sent ahead with the message that assistance was on the way. When they found the immigrants, the toll of death had already begun to mount. Of the six hundred Saints camped at Red Buttes alone, comprising Martin's handcart company and Hodgett's wagon train, fifty-six had died of exposure and hunger. As the relief effort proceeded, Joseph A. was sent back to the Salt Lake Valley to report progress and the condition of the immigrants. He arrived in Salt Lake City at 4:00 A.M. on November 13 to tell of the tragedy which, but for the effort of the returning European missionaries, would have been even more devastating than it was.

The first son of Brigham Young and Mary Ann Angell, Joseph A. was born on October 14, 1834, in Kirtland, Ohio. At the age of twelve he accompanied his parents to Winter Quarters during the Mormon exodus of 1846. He remained at Winter Quarters with his mother during the winter of 1847-48 and accompanied the family (his father having returned to Winter Quarters in the fall of 1847) to the Salt Lake Valley the next year. During the years 1854-56 Joseph labored as a missionary in England, where he presided over the Bradfordshire Conference. It was while he was returning from this mission in 1856 that he participated in the rescue operation described above. Although deprived of education early in his life due to the persecution and frequent moves of the Saints, Joseph studied hard in England and familiarized himself with the writings of Bacon, Blackstone, Locke, and Mill. An avid reader, he collected one of the finest private libraries in Utah.

In 1864 Joseph A. was called on a special mission to New York to transact Church business and to take charge of the Church emigration that year. On February 19, prior to his departure, he received a special blessing under the hands of his father and other members of the First Presidency. "We bless you at this time, and set you apart for a mission to the East, to go to the City of New York, or to any other place where it shall be necessary for you to go to attend to business connected with the gathering of the saints. . . We bless you with that wisdom, knowledge, and understanding and power with God, power with the angels, power with men upon the earth, and power over the elements, and over spiritual agencies, so that you shall accomplish your mission, and the labor you are sent to do. . . . We now say unto you that you shall go in peace, and return in safety with your brethren who are going with you and no power shall have power over you but the power of God and the holy angels who administer to the children of men who are heirs of salvation. You shall travel in peace and in safety whether in wagons, stage coaches, railway cars or in any other kind of conveyance, that traverses the land, the great lakes, or the mighty seas, wherever you are called to go you shall go in safety and shall have power over every evil power that would seek to destroy you, and after you have accomplished a good work you shall return in safety to your family and friends. . . ." [^1]

Joseph's mission took him to St. Louis, Chicago, New York City, and across the Atlantic to England. His travel to and from the mission field was not without incident. Five days after leaving Salt Lake City, while crossing Black's Fork of the Green River, the stagecoach in which he was riding broke through the ice in six feet of water, causing a three-hour delay. While returning home later that year he was involved in a severe train wreck four miles east of Syracuse, New York. "The whole train was smashed including the car I was in to within one seat of where I sat, [but] I escaped without a scratch," he reported. [^2]

Joseph A. operated a lumber business and was engaged in significant building projects in the Salt Lake Valley. He superintended the building of the Salt Lake Theatre and provided lumber for railroad construction. In 1868, when Brigham Young contracted Mormon labor to build the transcontinental railroad through Utah Territory, Joseph joined with Bishop John Sharp for a grading and tunneling contract through Weber Canyon. In 1869-70 he supervised the construction of the Utah Central Railroad from Ogden to Salt Lake City and was the first superintendent of that road. He was among those sent to Boston to negotiate the settlement of the railroad contract with Union Pacific Railroad officials after that company failed to meet its contract obligations to Mormon builders.

Joseph A. traveled extensively with his father and other Church leaders throughout Utah settlements, regulating Church affairs and visiting the Saints. In April 1872 he was called to preside over the Church in Utah's Sevier district, which covered the area from Gunnison to Panguitch; and he was named president of the first stake organized in Sevier County in 1874. An important accomplishment under his leadership was the opening of a road through Clear Creek Canyon, linking Sevier Valley to the settlements of Millard County and grain markets in southern Utah and southeastern Nevada, an enterprise completed without territorial subsidy. He also organized the United Order in Sevier County, which he described as "one of the best mutual benefit associations in existence." [^3] During his lifetime he served the people of five Utah counties—Salt Lake, Tooele, Summit, Sanpete, and Sevier—in nine sessions of the territorial legislature.

Living in the era of plural marriage, Joseph's family consisted of three wives, Mary Ann Ayers, Margaret Whitehead, and Clara Stenhouse, to whom were born nineteen children. One of his sons was a West Point graduate who became Utah's first general, Richard W. Young.

During Brigham Young's later years Joseph assisted in the President's office with his father's correspondence and business affairs. At the time of his sudden death on August 5, 1875, at the age of forty-one, Joseph A. Young was in Manti, Utah, where he had been sent to supervise the construction of the Manti Temple.

Upon hearing of his brother's death, Brigham Young, Jr., wrote in his diary, "Oh, my brother, my brother. In many things he was superior to any man I ever saw. The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away. . . . He was a great man tho' possesing many weaknesses, but he was humble and full of faith. It seemes like one half of me had been torn away and I deprived of a mighty counsellor. . . . All the people mourned his loss, and I felt to say in the language of David, 'know ye not that a prince has fallen this day in Israel?'" [^4]

Letters dated August 31 and September 30, 1854

When the recently released European Mission president, Samuel W. Richards, arrived in Salt Lake City on August 26, 1854, he carried a letter from his successor, Franklin D. Richards, for Brigham Young containing anxiously awaited news about close relatives of the First Presidency laboring as missionaries in England. In June Franklin D. had attended a special Church conference in London, where he had seen George D. Grant, the forty-two-year-old brother of Jedediah M. Grant, twenty-eight-year-old William H. Kimball, son of Heber C. Kimball, and Joseph A. Young, twenty, the oldest son of President Brigham Young. "It would have done yours, Bro. Heber's and Bro. Jedediah's souls good to have heard Joseph, William and George address their brethren in the ministry, on that occasion," reported the mission president. "They spoke gloriously and seemed to stir up the spirits of the brethren from their foundation with life and energy. . . . I feel first rate about them all and I believe you will have occasion to rejoice greatly in their noble careers." With specific reference to Brigham Young's son, Franklin Richards added, "Joseph tells me he is taking particular delight in studying the works of the Church and familiarizing himself with the first principles of the Gospel and feels happy in his field of labour; he left off his tobacco of his own accord while coming through the states." [^5]

Joseph A. Young had arrived in England on June 4, 1854, in company with the new mission president, Franklin D. Richards, and five other missionaries, including the kin of his father's two counselors. Called upon to address the Liverpool Saints that first evening in England, Joseph gave his maiden speech, which "extended over a period of ninety consecutive seconds." [^6] He spent his first three weeks in Liverpool, after which he was assigned to work in Manchester, where he spent the next five months walking in the streets, preaching in the halls, and observing the scenes his father had witnessed some fifteen years earlier. While in Manchester Joseph received his first letters from his father dated August 31 and September 30, 1854.

Salt Lake City, August 31, 1854

Joseph A. Young

Manchester, England

My dear Son Joseph,

With no little pleasure I take this opportunity of writing to you before the departure of tomorrow's mail. On the 26th inst. Bro. Sam[ue]l W. Richards arrived in this city in company with Thos. S. Williams bringing a letter from Bro. Franklin [Richards] of 7th July, from which I am happy to learn of your commencement to testify of that work in the midst of which you have been raised, even the kingdom of our God upon the earth, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom and whom all dominions shall serve and obey, and which is destined to increase as it has heretofore increased in glory and power henceforth and forever. Joseph, this has been your privilege, to grow as the Church has grown; when it was in its infancy you were dandled on the knees of a tender mother and received the caresses of an affectionate father, and as you have grown to years of understanding you have had continually the instructions of one who has been appointed to stand at the head of God's kingdom on the earth, the front of the battle; you have seen his energy, observed his deportment both private and public. Should not you therefore eventually prove yourself a skillful general, and even now able to wage war successfully with the powers of darkness, superstition, priestcraft, and ignorance, to overcome evil however it may present itself and preserve yourself a pure and holy tabernacle for the residence of the Holy Ghost. And by so doing you will never be led astray. The enemy will never overcome you, but you will be watchful, temperate in all things, and at all times ready to bestow the blessings of the gospel to the children of men. You are away from me now, and among a people who will look more or less to you for counsel and advice, to whom your words will be as a sweet morsel, as leading on in the path of salvation and to be retained while memory lasts. You then need so to live as ever to hear the soft unerring voice of the Spirit of the Lord [which] will be in you as a well of water springing up to everlasting life, and which is a never-failing fountain of intelligence and wisdom.

We also received from Bro. Samuel the first news in regard to the state of our immigration this season, who are much in need of assistance as the church train had lost 120 head of cattle [^7] and most of the trains lacking provisions. A large number of teams will start in a few days with many tons of flour to go to the hindmost company some 300 miles out and return leaving none behind.

The weather is fine, and considerably cooler than in the former part of the month, and showers have fallen quite frequently; about 2 AM of the 30th quite heavy thunder with rain. The health of the valleys is generally good. Our Indian relations, although peace has existed through the summer, are at present slightly precarious [^8] but our crops being mostly secured, we apprehend no serious difficulty. With the alphabet [^9] or characters in which this (annexed) is written, although not perfect, we intend to go ahead and if necessary amend until the system of orthography and writing is revolutionized for the use of our children in Zion.

Sept. 1. The mail arrived last evening; a letter from you was received by myself, one by Mary [Ann Ayers Young], and one by Brigham [Jr.], all very satisfactory. I now wish to say to you, proceed with your studies, and apply your heart diligently to the study of the gospel wherein is true wisdom, so will the Lord bless you continually and you will be enabled to rejoice before Him with exceeding joy and gratitude. Be assured you are always remembered in our aspirations to our Heavenly Father day by day. I now close praying that His choicest blessings may be yours and subscribing myself as ever,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young.

Salt Lake City, September 30, 1854

Joseph A. Young

Manchester, England My dear Joseph,

On the 28th we received a letter from you which gratifies me much to learn of your diligence in traveling from place to place and proclaiming the words of life to men. Assuredly industry is one characteristic of the Saints of God on the earth. Whilst the elders are industriously employed in foreign countries promulgating the news of the re-establishment of the kingdom of God on the earth, we are here also busily engaged in building up that kingdom from year to year—indeed it is our study and prayer every day and every night to do faithfully the work required of us and in which we so much rejoice to be engaged. Our youths feel this influence. As they approach to years of understanding the boys are not to be seen loafing about the streets for they hail the opportunity to render themselves available for the general interest of Zion in which, you remember, the Lord has said "an idler shall have no place except he repent."

Your brother Brigham is actively engaged on the island [^10] with the cattle, and is well and doing first rate.

We are here in the enjoyment of good weather and that glorious atmosphere that prevails in this high region of country and full of health and spirit with the horn of plenty well filled but not overflowing to the extent to make the bounties of earth, save in good estimation. Wheat is bringing from J. M. Horner & Co. Deseret Store $2 in goods while sugar is selling generally 3 lbs. to the dollar and most other articles have been similarly reduced in price.

Our immigration are arriving [illegible]. A company from Texas [arrived] first with Capt. Jolly. Job Smith and Co. [illegible] and Capt. J[ames] Brown and company arrived this [mornin]g. The train with goods for public improvements, called the church train, will arrive next week.

Business is pressing and time scarce today, and I must close praying God Almighty to bless you continually and sustain you day by day with his Spirit in the work in which you are so profitably engaged.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated December 1, 1854

Joseph A. Young responded to his father's letter of September 30 with gratitude for the expression of approval of his missionary labors in England, and reported that he would shortly be leaving Manchester to begin a new assignment as president of the Bradford Conference. In reflecting upon his first five months of missionary work, Joseph wrote: "When I first came to England, I thought I could have taken charge of the British mission with the greatest ease. I have now, however, not quite such an exalted opinion of myself, for castles in the air will not stand the cold and chilling influences of the sneers of the world; and in fact, the more I learn the less I know." His father's influence in his life was a prominent theme of the letter. "I can now in some degree realize the benefit to be derived from those counsels and teaching you bestowed so liberally upon me, both in private and in public. When I left home I was an ignorant unthinking boy, but I shall try to return a man of God, one whom he will delight to own and bless. I was glad for the line from mother, and will endeavor to follow her advice." [^11]

At the request of Brigham Young, Thomas W. Ellerbeck, one of the President's chief clerks, wrote to Joseph A. Young on December 1, 1854, to inform him of current news in Utah. As Brigham Young reviewed the letter late that night, he added a few lines of postscript with his own pen. In this letter the methodical style of the learned scribe stands in sharp contrast to the warm counsel of the affectionate father. This postscript offers one of the rare glimpses of Brigham Young through the intimacy of his own handwriting.

Salt Lake City, December 1, 1854

Joseph A. Young

Manchester, England

Dear brother Joseph,

With much pleasure at the request of your honored father, I embrace a few moments to give you the current items of news of this part of our mountain land. Well your father has sent to St. Louis for a 10 horsepower steam engine for the Timely Gull, a boat for the lake, of the building of which you have been informed. This is to be brought out next season. Another item of news is the completion of the walls of an Endowment House erected on the N.W. corner of the Temple Block which will be finished as we have ability to go ahead, for it is much wanted. It is about the size of the Council House, which is now nearly prepared for the assembling of the legislature, who you will remember meet on the second Monday of this month.

Col. [Edward J.] Steptoe and his men, some 200, you know are wintering in the city. He is quite gentlemanly in his deportment, and anxious that his men should conduct themselves with propriety, not making themselves an annoyance to the good citizens of Salt Lake. He wished the mayor, in consequence of their appearing drunk so much in the streets, to assist him in his endeavors to debar them from liquor. Beer drinking and whiskey drinking also having become so frequent and so much more extensive by some of those who would be good brethren, than should exist in our lovely city, the city council repealed every license to sell. And before this it was announced from the stand by Elder [Heber C.] Kimball that all members of the Church who did not return their licenses for making the article during the following week should be cut off. All but one promptly replied with their licenses returned. So we shall have a quieter time with the soldiery than they would love had their palates been consulted.

The mail arrived this evening; we have word that the last mail from here was destroyed by the Indians near Laramie and the carriers killed. [^12] Charley Kinkead, along, was left for dead, but was subsequently picked up by some party from the fort, has recovered pretty much.

By a letter from A. S. Siler on Oct 3/54, he requests to be kindly remembered to you; he was then at St. Louis having returned from Georgia.

Bro. [Albert] Carrington is now reading your letter of [blank] to Mary [Ann Ayers Young] here in the office to President, Squire [Daniel H.] Wells, G[eorge] A. Smith, and others in the office. We are all amused and gratified at your description of the difference twixt the Mr. and the Elder Jos. Young.

Promising to endeavor to keep you informed of such items of interest as would be interesting to you from time to time, as I may be directed,

I have the pleasure to subscribe myself,

truly your brother in the covenant,

T. W. Ellerbeck

My Dear Son Joseph

It is now late at nigh. The male has arived this evening and I have heard your letter red, and it rejoice my hart to here sush good knews frm you. May the Lord Bles you for ever and ever, is my Prayr for you. We are jest movin in to our new house. [^13] I suepose Mary and the Chldren will give all the famely knews. You can hardly emagen the joy it gives me to here such good knew from you. My sole leaps for joye. Be faithful my son and the Lord will Bles you and I Bles you. Remember you are my oldest son, the arc of the famely. I want you to be faithful that you may [be] worthe of your stashon in my Kingdom. Give my love to all the Brethern. God Bles you.

Brigham Young

Letter dated February 3, 1855

The appointment of Joseph A. Young to preside over the Bradfordshire Conference of the British Mission on December 1, 1854, placed the welfare of 875 Church members under the care of this twenty-year-old missionary. "They are as affectionate a body of saints as ever lived," Joseph wrote his wife Mary. "Sometimes, after I have preached, I have to shake hands with two or three hundred, and it occasionally makes my arm so lame the next morning that I cannot write." Confronting Church members in England were social conditions that bred extreme poverty. "I see strong, able-bodied men working for ten shillings ($2.42) a week, and they have large families to support out of that; and in addition, it takes some money to support the work. Thus the saints have about as much as they can do; and if they stop a little, the load becomes so heavy that they cannot carry it." [^14] "Some of them have not had a full meal at a time for two months; they have just enough to keep them nearly starving to death all the time." [^15] Joseph reported that the work of God appeared to be moving ahead quite rapidly in England, but admitted that there were not so many being baptized as in previous years. He attributed this to a change in proselyting method in which the full price of accepting the gospel was explained to new prospects. "Before I baptize anyone, I inquire if they are willing to lay everything upon the altar. The consequence is, that those baptized now are a great deal better, taken enmasse, than has heretofore been the case." [^16]

Joseph A. presided in Bradfordshire during the remainder of his mission, which terminated in July 1856. Under his direction 214 persons were added to the fold, of whom 110 emigrated to Zion. Such was the esteem held for Joseph A. Young by the Bradfordshire Saints that they presented him with a silver goblet upon his departure.

The following letter to Joseph is Brigham Young's initial response to his son's appointment at Bradford.

Salt Lake City, February 3, 1855

Joseph A. Young

Manchester, England

Dear Son,

Morning and evening do I call upon the Lord to bless you in your labors. Your course I watch with the eye of an affectionate and loving parent, whose anxiety for your welfare, I hope you will repay with a faithful and energetic performance of the duties assigned to you in the ministry.

Up to this date the most flattering accounts have reached me in regard to your daily walk and the rapidity with which you acquire knowledge. These reports are from those in whom I place the greatest confidence; hence I do not doubt their correctness. I well know that the Lord has given you talents of no ordinary cast and all that it requires is a fixedness of purpose, a reliance in the Most High, together with prayer and humility, to ensure my fondest expectations in regard to you.

I look upon this mission as a sort of probation—a kind of middle period between boyhood and manhood—a time which as you improve or neglect, will make or mar your future career.

Therefore, my son, give heed to the instructions of those who are placed over you to counsel and direct you in the thorny and dangerous paths you now tread, and in no instance let me hear of your having neglected or disobeyed their injunctions.

While you are absent from the Valley, I wish you to lose no opportunity of making yourself familiar with all that is useful and likely to benefit you, for to be able to combat with the world we must make ourselves acquainted with the ways of the world. This can only be done by keeping your mind constantly on the alert and when in society never allow anything to escape your notice. Listen attentively, and observe minutely the manners, customs, and remarks of all, for from the most humble of our fellow creatures an observing man can learn something that will be useful to him in after life. Such has been my course and, from daily and hourly experience of its benefits, I recommend you to pursue the same.

There are many things you can inform your mind upon, the laws of England, her form of government; lose no opportunity in your travels of visiting her manufacturies, her works of art, her grand and spacious buildings, and all that is worthy of note, not from a mere idle curiosity but to store your mind with that which will benefit yourself and your brethren in after years.

When in society (for you will be called to mingle in it a great deal) use every endeavor to improve your address, and always exert yourself to be agreeable, and no matter whether poor or rich, treat them with equal courtesy. Do not be pompous to the needy, nor condescending to the wealthy, but show by your manner that you do not respect a man because of his money. By this you will gain the love and admiration of those worthy of your esteem, and at comparatively little expense, for it costs but little labor and attention to be polite and civil to those around you.

I have taken this opportunity to advise and counsel you, as I learn from your letters that you are anxious to improve, therefore I felt that a little well-timed advice would not be thrown away, but would aid and assist you in your endeavors to acquire that knowledge which through the persecutions of the Saints you had not the priviledge of obtaining in your early years.

As you progress in doing good, [and] your desire to make yourself thoroughly acquainted with the principles of our holy religion and all other useful knowledge increases, so will my love and affection increase for you.

The family are all well. Your mother is about the same as when you left. Mary [Ann Ayers Young] and the baby are both doing well, but the more minute particulars Mary and Alice [Young] will write to you about.

The legislature closed their session a short time since and adjourned to meet at Fillmore the next term.

The sugar works are in operation, [^17] the building and machinery being complete. Your Uncle Truman [O. Angell] has bestowed a great deal of mental labor on that job and deserves great commendation for the indefatigable perseverance with which he has pursued and searched out the intricacies of the machinery.

An express came from Fillmore reporting that Indian, Walker, is dead. His disease I have not learned.

The difficulty between the Sioux Indians and the troops at Fort Laramie last summer bids fair to stop communication between the valley and the states. For the present our last mail is reported to have been waylaid near Independence Rock and the carriers with one exception killed; therefore it will be best for you to direct your letters by way of California and send a duplicate copy by the regular route across the plains. Let us hear from you often.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated February 7, 1855

On February 7, 1855, Heber C. Kimball, first counselor to Brigham Young in the First Presidency of the Church, dictated a letter to one of the scribes in the President's office for his son William, who had accompanied Joseph A. Young to England as a missionary in 1854. To this letter Brigham Young appended the following single page, written in his own hand to his son Joseph. The document is another one of the few examples of Brigham Young's own handwriting during the years of his presidency.

Salt Lake City, February 7, 1855

Joseph A. Young

Bradford, England

We ware very happy to receive your letter but was sorey to here that you had to goe without drawers and wescoats [waistcoat]. If the people due not [help] you so that you can be comfortble you are at liberty to ask Br Franklin [Richards] for a little money to by those nessaries for your comfort. I wish you to be very prudent and lern the worth of money. You are now in a situation to lern poverty and welth. Improve your self so that you will be prepard for more important stations in life. All the gold in Caleforna could not by my good feelings to you and thankfulness to the Lord. You letter gave grate joy and Br Franklin [writes] in high terms of you. I wish you to the Brethern [to] say G. D. G. [George D. Grant], Wm Y[oung], Wm H [Kimball], James F[erguson], James Little and finely all of them, I remember them all in my prayers daly and in our prayer cirkel every Sabath in the afternoon. Your mother wishes me to wright a fue words for hir. Hir helth is about as usual not very well but so she works all day and then till midnight frequently. We feele proud before the Lord when we think what you are duing in the grate cause and Kingdom of our God. Be faithful my son. You went out as a child. We trust you will return a flaming Elder of salvation. Keep your self pure befor the Lord. Your Father before you has don it, and my constant prayer is that you may. With all my hart I beleve you will. May God Bles you forever and ever.

O how glad we will be to see you.

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 25-26 August 1877.
[^2] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 2 October 1887.
[^3] Brigham Young to William H. Hooper, 30 May 1862.
[^4] Attacks upon mail stations and travelers crossing the plains—especially in the area between Forts Bridger and Laramie in 1861-62—dictated the need for protection of travelers in that area. Consequently, when Hooper and West started for Washington, D.C., in April 1862, they were escorted by twenty mounted men under the command of Colonel Robert T. Burton of the Nauvoo Legion. Burton and his men returned to Salt Lake City on May 31.
[^5] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 24 June 1862.
[^6] Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 24 June 1862.
[^7] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 6 July 1862.
[^8] Ibid., 4 July 1862.
[^9] Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 11 July 1862.
[^10] Strained relations between England and America developed in 1862 in the wake of a series of Confederate victories in Virginia and talk that England might recognize the Confederacy and interfere in its behalf in the Civil War.
[^11] In 1860 a change was made in the method of Church immigration. Prior to that time money had been sent east each year to purchase wagons and teams, which immigrants then drove to Salt Lake Valley. However, beginning in 1860 the Saints in Utah, being rich in cattle but poor in money, outfitted teams that were sent east loaded with merchandise that was sold in the eastern market and returned with the Church immigration. These "church trains" saved the Latter-day Saints from ten to thirty thousand dollars cash each year. See Leonard Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1958), pp. 205-211; also Brigham H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church (Salt Lake City, 1930), 5:106-111.
[^12] Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 4 September 1862.
[^13] Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 13 October 1862.
[^14] Ibid.
[^15] Ibid.
[^16] An effort by Brigham Jr. to avoid burdening the poor is suggested in his diary entry of September 9, 1862: "Sister Dawson brot up some dinner for T. O. King and me, I refused to eat, but she looked so pained that I did eat for I was hungry and I bless her for the food. It is not always that we get dinner, but when we do it tastes good. God bless the people; they are as kind to me as tho' I were their own relation, and nothing is too good for me, that their scanty means can get, so they think."
[^17] Brigham Jr. did overcome the habit. It should be noted that interpretations and attitudes toward the Word of Wisdom have changed over the years. Brigham Young, for example, stressed the importance of adherence to the principle, both from an economic and spiritual standpoint, but did not make adherence a test of fellowship. Treatment of the subject may be found in Leonard J. Arrington, "An Economic Interpretation of the Word of Wisdom," Brigham Young University Studies 1 (Winter 1959): 37-49; and Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom" (Master's Thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972).
