Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Brigham Young, Jr.

1836-1903

Brigham Young, Jr., was one of twins born to Mary Ann Angell and Brigham Young in Kirtland, Ohio, on December 18, 1836. His twin sister, Mary Ann, died in Nauvoo, Illinois, at the age of seven. As a child Brigham Jr. experienced the trying times of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, and accompanied his parents to Winter Quarters during the Mormon exodus from Illinois in 1846. A year later, at the age of twelve, he drove an ox team across the mountains to the Salt Lake Valley. During his early years in Utah he worked on the Salt Lake Temple and supervised work on the transcontinental railroad. An excellent horseman, he assisted in the rescue of snow-bound immigrants on the overland trail east of Utah and led a detachment of troops in the Utah War. He later became a director of the Utah Central and Utah Northern railroads, was business manager of the Deseret News, a member of the Utah Legislature, president of the East Canyon Coal Company, and a member of the board of directors of Brigham Young Academy. In his life, he was labor boss, business manager, legislator, and diplomat.

Brigham's ascendance to positions of leadership did not come easy. Having been deprived of education and social contact in his early years, he stepped forth reluctantly when leadership responsibilities were first offered him. Especially lacking in the oratorical skills and social graces he felt were expected of a son of the Church president, Brigham Jr. often lamented his lack of ability, and in his early adult years he shied away from public assignments. On one occasion, having been invited to the stand at a meeting in Farmington, Utah, he arose and ran out of the door. The opportunity that finally prepared him to overcome his social shyness came during his first mission to England in 1862-63. Less than a year after his return, he was called to England again to assist the veteran Daniel H. Wells in the presidency of the European Mission, and in 1865 he succeeded Wells as president of that mission. Most of his subsequent life was devoted to church service.

On February 4, 1864, Brigham Jr. was ordained an apostle and assistant counselor to his father in the Church presidency. Four years later he was appointed to the Quorum of Twelve. A decision in 1900 that seniority in the Quorum of Twelve would be reckoned from the date of appointment to that quorum, and not ordination to the apostleship, ultimately proved to be the factor that kept him from becoming president of the Church.

After returning from Europe in 1867, Brigham assisted his father with Church business in the President's office and frequently traveled with him visiting the settlements of the Saints. After the death of Ezra T. Benson in 1869, he was called to preside over the Mormon settlements in Cache Valley and southern Idaho. While there he was a member of the Logan, Utah, city council, president of the Cache Valley United Order and of the Logan Board of Trade, and commanding officer of the Cache Valley Nauvoo Legion. In 1873 he was named one of seven counselors called by his father to assist in the responsibilities of the First Presidency.

Brigham Jr. was with his father during the President's last illness in August 1877—those days of "extreme anxiety" that preceded his death. "I cannot write of the sufferings of a dear parent, and what language can describe the feelings of my heart? . . . How can we endure this terrible event which seems to be approaching too surely despite the pleadings and tears of a great people?" he wrote. [^1] After the death of his father, Brigham Jr. was named one of the administrators of the estate, an assignment that caused him much sorrow when members of his family brought litigation against the Church in a public spectacle before the final settlement.

In 1884 Brigham Jr. traveled into Mexico on a missionary assignment to introduce the Book of Mormon among the remote Yaqui Indians. While there he contracted yellow fever and nearly lost his life.

Having married plurally, Brigham Jr. supported a family of six wives and thirty-one children. As the "polygamy question" received increased attention from the nation's law makers in the 1880s, forcing most of the church leaders out of public life, Brigham Jr. spent much of his time on the "underground," away from his family and friends. During this time he traveled extensively among the Latter-day Saints in outlying settlements and fulfilled a variety of far-reaching church assignments. After the enactment of the Edmunds antipolygamy bill by Congress in 1882, he was called with Charles W. Penrose to Washington, D.C., to assist in the effort to rescind the oppressive legislation against the Latter-day Saints by soliciting support for the admission of Utah to the Union. Among government officials contacted were leading members of Congress and the President of the United States. In 1885 Brigham went to Mexico City where he met President Diaz, and he later visited the governors of seven Mexican states in an effort to obtain permission for Mormons to settle in Mexico. Subsequently, he was instrumental in the purchase of land in northern Mexico that became the gathering place of Mormon colonists. In 1889, with Arizona Church leader Jesse N. Smith, he traveled to New York City, where he assisted in negotiations with the Aztec Cattle Company to secure Mormon land claims in Arizona and New Mexico. When not traveling, Brigham Jr. was "hiding out" in his own home or that of friends as he sought to avoid polygamist-hunting deputies—an exercise he described as the "usual routine of reading and waiting for the Lord." As months of hiding grew into years, depriving Brigham of the society of his family for long periods of time, with telling effect upon his health and his domestic tranquillity, he felt pressure mounting to give himself up. "I have reason to believe," he wrote in his diary at a particularly trying time, "that my worst enemies are one or two of my own family." [^2]

One of three members of the Council of Twelve who were still in exile in 1890, Brigham Jr. was called a second time to preside over the European Mission. He remained in Europe until 1893, when he was informed that all indictments against him had been dismissed and that he was free to return home. He arrived in time for the Salt Lake Temple dedication in April.

During the remaining decade of his life Brigham Young, Jr., traveled among the stakes of the Church in his responsibilities as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. He died in Salt Lake City on April 11, 1903, after several months of illness.

Letter dated June 5, 1862

In the midst of efforts to obtain statehood for Utah in the spring of 1862, senators-elect William H. Hooper and George Q. Cannon were sent to Washington, D.C., to petition the Congress of the United States on that subject. Since Cannon was in England directing the Church's European Mission at the time the assignment was made, Chauncey West, the presiding bishop of Weber County, Utah, was sent to temporarily replace him. When West and Hooper left Salt Lake City for Washington on April 26, 1862, Brigham Young, Jr., then twenty-five years old, went with them to witness the petitioning process and observe conditions in the East, leaving his wives Jane and Catherine in Salt Lake City.

On May 30 President Brigham Young addressed a letter to William Hooper in Washington that contained some advice for his son Brigham: "I want him to be very particular in keeping a minute and correct daily journal of whatever he may see, hear, or do that is of any particular moment; and in case he should forget, I shall be obliged if you occasionally remind him, for I am desirous that he derives all possible benefit from his trip and your oversight and counsels." [^3]

Brigham Jr. had arrived in the nation's capital on June 6 after stopping a few days in New York City. Three weeks later he received his first letter from his father.

Salt Lake City, June 5, 1862

Brigham Young, Jr.

Washington City, D.C.

My dear Son,

I was much gratified to learn of your safe arrival in Atchison, [Kansas,] and trust that you also arrived safely in Washington.

Col. R[obert] T. Burton and company returned on the 31st ult., [^4] all well, and having met with neither accidents nor Indians, except a small band of the Denver tribe on their way to Salmon River, that you met on your way down.

At last advices high water at Ham's Fork was detaining the forward companies of the ox train, but grass is now good, and when they cross that stream they will be in condition to make good time, and will probably not be a month later than last year, if so much as that.

City Creek has considerably damaged North Temple Street and the road in the canyon, but the water is now abating a little.

In my letter to Br. [William H.] Hooper, May 30, I requested him to ask you to keep a minute and correct journal of all you might see or hear of interest. I wish you to carefully and regularly attend to this request, for in so doing you will reap many advantages as well as much gratification, and it will be more of a pleasant than irksome duty, if daily attended to.

How would you like to have me forward you an elder's certificate, and take a mission to England, after you have finished your visit to Washington? Please inform me the first time you write.

Should you decline going abroad previous to coming home, I should be pleased to have you, in returning, come by way of Auburn and visit Mr. Worden who lives in Throopsville, three miles north of Auburn, Cayuga County, State of New York. Mr. Worden married James Works' youngest sister, who was also the youngest sister of your sister Elizabeth [Y. Ellsworth]'s mother. His daughter Angeline is living in Auburn and has written me two letters. I wish you to see her, and if she would like to come with you to pay us a visit and return at her pleasure, I would be much pleased to have her do so. If she has not means for so doing, bear her expenses. If you have time to spend a few days in Auburn, Port Byron, and that region, it may be of interest to remind you that I began my mechanical career in Auburn, and helped build the first little market house in that place, when the site of the state's prison was a swamp filled with hemlock and other trees, many of them from three to four feet through, and some of them five and others seven feet through.

Katy [Catherine Spencer Young], Jane [Carrington Young], your children, and all of us are enjoying good health.

We pray for your welfare, and that your trip may prove a benefit and blessing to you.

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated August 6, 1862

President Brigham Young's letter of June 5 proposing a mission to England had a profound effect upon his son, who may not have regarded himself as missionary material. "I cannot describe the feelings of my heart at the sight of that letter, and how it affected me when I came to read it," [^5] Brigham Jr. wrote in his diary. In his letter of acceptance, he said: "You ask me how I would like a elders certificate and go to England on a mission. I shall leave that question with you. If you wish me to go, send the certificate, and I will, God being my helper, accept and fill the mission to the best of my ability. My own feeling on the subject is repugnant to asking to go, but if you send me, I go willingly. I know that it would make a man of me. But here is the point; this is what I should want to say on my return: 'Father you sent me on a mission to England. I have lived humble and pray[er]fully and filled that mission to the best of my knowledge and ability.' Then I'll feel I am a man, but never till that day arrives, can I feel worthy to bear rule in the smallest degree in the Kingdom of God or worthy of being called my Father's son. When I think of the labor you have performed on this earth, in building up the Kingdom of our Lord, and the experience you have had upon missions, I have longed for the time to come when I could realize and understand your feelings, which I shall never be able to do until I've experienced the visisitudes of a traviling elder. . . . P.S. I will endeavour to keep my journal in order." [^6]

Planning to accompany George Q. Cannon on his return to England after the adjournment of Congress, Brigham Jr. had leisure time to travel and observe conditions in the East in the midst of the Civil War. After wandering through the streets of Washington, D.C., in weather that was "extremely hot and oppressive" and observing social conditions there, he wrote, "I wish I was a thousand miles from here, or in my mountain home." [^7] Adding to his distaste was the grim evidence of the war then raging between the North and South. "Some hundreds of wounded have arrived here to day, from before Richmond minus arms, legs, heads tied up, blood dripping from the hind end of the waggons, as they went through the streets—others shot through the body and puking blood at every step. . . . I would rather be in Utah than anywhere else in the world." [^8]

On July 6, 1862, Brigham Jr. visited the long-time friend of the Mormon people, Colonel Thomas L. Kane, at his Philadelphia home, where the Colonel was recovering from a recently inflicted Civil War wound. During the visit, Kane, who was anticipating a momentary advancement to the rank of brigadier general, requested young Brigham to join his staff as aide-de-camp. On July 11 Brigham wrote to his father for counsel. "I do wish that you could say one word of advice to me on that point. I have asked my Father in heaven, and left it with him. If circumstances favor my going to England, right, if with the Col., do, [ditto] . . . but I care nothing about that, unless it will assist me in the building up of the Kingdom of God, which is the desire of my heart no matter how far I may vary from the line." [^9]

Hearing nothing further from Colonel Kane or from his father, Brigham Jr. departed for England on July 16, 1862, aboard the steamship Scotia in company with George Q. Cannon. They arrived in Liverpool ten days later. The following letter of August 6, 1862, is the initial response of President Young to his son's acceptance of a missionary call.

Salt Lake City, August 6, 1862

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

My dear son Brigham,

Supposing, but not knowing, that you have gone to England with Br. George Q. Cannon, I write you a few lines at a venture, knowing that if you are there you will be glad to receive them, and if you are not, there will be no harm done. If you accompanied Br. George Q. to Liverpool, I am glad of it. And now if I can learn that you are doing good in the vineyard, I shall feel very well satisfied, but spending time and means without any particular benefit to one's self or others, causes me regret.

If you are in England I trust that you will faithfully, humbly, and prayerfully do all the good you can. I wish you to live and fare as the poor elders do. Grub your way along as they do, and thoroughly learn how poor folks live, for you are young and hearty and can endure it, and it will prove of great future benefit to you, and while doing this you have the advantage of having your family all comfortably situated and provided for, relieving you from anxiety on their account.

Make up your mind to stay contentedly for a reasonable length of time, or until you receive advice from me to return home. And while doing all the good you can, strive also to learn and improve yourself all you can at every opportunity and through every laudable available channel, shunning not only evil but every appearance of evil. Upon all these points Br. George Q. will cheerfully give you the aid of his cool judgment and experience, as I have requested him in a letter sent by the same mail which takes this, and which aid I have no doubt you will cheerfully accept and profit by. Your name and personal acquaintance in England will answer in lieu of an elder's certificate, though should you wish it, or any other papers, Br. George Q, has authority to furnish you.

Should there be any interruption between England and America, [^10] you and the elders from here had probably better make your way home.

In going to England you have not had to deprive your children as I did you and Joseph and your sisters when I went, for I had to take a part of their scanty bedding and also leave them barefoot and poorly provided for. Catherine [Spencer Young], Jane [Carrington Young], and your children will all be well provided for, so that your mind may be free from anxiety on their account. I see nothing to hinder your going ahead in doing all the good you can, which I hope and really believe you will not fail to do, and I glory in your grit. I do not mention my going to England in the way I had to, with any design to in the least disturb your feelings, but because I cannot help contrasting the way in which I went with the way in which the elders have gone since that date.

Since writing the foregoing your cousin Joseph W. [Young] has telegraphed me that you have gone to England, with which, as before stated, I am well pleased.

The Church trains [^11] are all on their way home, and the last train expects to leave Florence [Nebraska] in a day or two, which closes our this year's operations in Florence in time for all to arrive here in good season.

We are all well, and home affairs are in a flourishing condition.

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated August 30, 1862

Arriving in Liverpool, England, on July 26, 1862, Brigham Young, Jr., was assigned to labor under William C. Staines in the London Conference. Shortly after arriving there he received his father's letter of August 6. He replied that receipt of the letter had given him new life, and he went on to express his feelings about his new assignment. "I am fairly engaged in working out my Salvation, and I thank God from the bottom of my heart that I have enlisted in this great work. . . . I have been appointed to labor here in this Great Metropolis. My district is Whitechaple, Poplar Barking, [and] Goswell Road. . . . It is pretty hard for me to preach, but I am in a place that I have got it to do and I seek unto the God of Israel for strength, and he has never failed to answer the prayers of his Saints. My mind is made up to stay here until I am sent home. . . . When I landed in Liverpool I staid in that City about a week, and then I started for my field of labor, and I am taking it afoot with the rest of the traveling Elders, and I am able to do it with the help of my Father in Heaven. . . . Be kind enough to excuse all mistakes as I have just come in and have been walking some few miles, (which thank God I am able to do) and the joy your letter gave me has made my eyes a little moist, so please forgive me all blunders. Bro. Geo. Q. [Cannon] has furnished me with an Elder's certificate and I feel to bless God day and night for the privilege of earning my Salvation, and of warning others of the evils that are coming upon the earth. Father, I can in part realise what a time you had when you first came to this country. My mission will be a perfect pleasure trip compared with yours, and it is you and others that have brot this about, and you are now (when no longer able to go abroad into the world yourselves) providing for my family and hundreds of others of Elders that are now preaching the principles of the Gospel in every part of the known world. . . . God bless Israel is my prayer day and night. You wish me to do all the good I can, and believe that I will. You are wright. I shall make it my business, and if seeking the Lord all the day long will give me the grit you speak of, then I am striving for it." [^12]

Salt Lake City, August 30, 1862

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England My dear son Brigham,

Since my last to you, Aug. 6, yours of July 11th and 18th have come to hand, and I was much gratified in their perusal. I am pleased with your writing, "my whole heart is engaged in building up the Kingdom of God on the earth," and that you so promptly went into the field of labor assigned you instead of tarrying in the Liverpool Office, for that course will prove much the most useful to yourself and all with whom you may come in contact.

So far as you may have opportunity I wish you to improve yourself to the utmost in studying good books and in associating with, and listening to, and profiting by, the conversation and experience of good persons, that when you speak to the people, they may be persuaded that they are not only listening to one having authority, but also to one appreciating and preaching the good, sound, saving doctrines and precepts he teaches. Cease not to lift up your voice in all faithfulness, teaching the people the way of life and salvation, which you know.

As I advised you on the 6th inst., I wish you to carefully observe how poor folks get along, which you will have excellent opportunities for doing, and to be prudent and economical in all your expenditures as much so as consistent and reasonable with your calling and duties, realizing that means unwisely or luxuriously expended had far better be husbanded for gathering the poor. Whenever necessity and your judgment dictate, you are at liberty to apply to Br. George Q. Cannon for such funds or other assistance as you may need, who is authorized to supply your prudent wants.

Ever strive to be humble, faithful and obedient, calling upon the Lord in faith and sincerity, and he will fill you with wisdom and understanding, give you power to influence the honest in heart, guide, bless and protect you, and crown your faithful labors with a success that it has not entered into your heart to conceive possible in your youth and inexperience. Though going forth at an early age to proclaim salvation to mankind, yet you start under many very favorable circumstances, and I doubt not you will seek to and rely upon our God, striving with your might to aid in building up his kingdom and strengthening the same upon the earth, with an eye single to His glory, that he will enable you to overcome, and win many souls to His cause.

Having faithfully labored in the vineyard until about the last of May next, you are at liberty to, and I would be pleased to have you visit the brethren upon the continent and such places of interest that you may wish, in company with some suitable person Br. George Q. may select, of which I have advised him. From about the last of May you can so arrange your visit to the brethren upon the continent as to be back to Liverpool on or before about the first of August, in readiness then to start for home, where you can arrive in about 25 days from the time of starting. This arrangement is of course based upon uninterrupted peaceful relations between England and America. Should troubles or a strong probability thereof arise, they may vary the aforesaid plan of a trip to the continent, and Bro. George Q. is already advised to be ever watchful and ready for a brewing storm, in time for the elders from here, and as many more as come, to make their way safely to these shores.

Day after tomorrow, Sept. 1st, I purpose starting with a small company on a visit to our most southern settlements, expecting to be gone about a month.

Bro. Lewis Bronson arrived on the 29th inst. with a company of some 212 persons, mostly from the states, 74 days from Florence. We expect all the freight and persons of our this year's immigrating operations to be here by and before the 25th of October.

I was pleased to learn from Bro. George Q. that he had placed you at the start to labor with so good and suitable a person as is Bro. W[illiam] C. Staines. Please give him my kind regards, and tell him he is ever remembered in my prayers in behalf of the Israel of our God.

Work on the temple is making good progress, general good health is enjoyed, the people are peaceful and industrious, and our harvests good.

Myself, your mother, your brothers and sisters, Catherine [Spencer Young] and Jane [Carrington Young] and their children, and so on and so forth, are well.

Bro. Heber C. Kimball sends you his best respects, and says, "God bless Brigham Young, Jr.," to which I add the blessings and prayers in your behalf of your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated October 11, 1862

When first asked to accept a mission call, Brigham Young, Jr., was not informed of the intended duration of his service. The letter from his father of August 30 not only contained that detail, but surprisingly gave the son the opportunity to visit the continent of Europe before his return. Writing to his father in reply, young Brigham said, "I had made up my mind to stay here until you sent for me, be the time short or long, and to do my utmost for the good of the Kingdom, and if I can't preach much I will try and set a good example, and I think that is half the battle. You have given me permission to visit the continent. I thank you from my heart, and will try and improve the opportunity to learn all I can." [^13]

In an effort to better acquaint himself with the English culture, Brigham Jr. had visited the London exposition and other sights, collecting numerous books and pamphlets descriptive of the places he visited and the people he met. In comparing the English people with his own countrymen, he wrote that he was happily mistaken in his conception of those among whom he labored: "They are far superior to what I believed them previous to my coming here, just as good men as I wish to meet, and I am ashamed of the feelings I once had with regard to them. I really think that I have brot myself to that point that I do not care what countrymen I meet with, if they are only good Latter-day Saints, I feel like a brother to them and desire to do them good. I can now see the difference between America and England. I have heard more swearing in one day in that land of freedom, than I have since I've been in England. This I suppose is one of the causes that England has been prospered, but they are fast approaching the American system." [^14]

Having been advised by his father to "thoroughly learn how poor folks live," Brigham Jr. reported that opportunities for such education were abundant in London, and he described his own daily fare: "In the morning, I have for my breakfast some thin slices of bread and scrape and a glass of warm water with a little chalkey milk and sugar in it. Understand me, I don't mean to complain, but merely telling you the facts in the case. Then for dinner, sometimes I don't have any, but make up for that by walking three or four miles. My supper is pretty much the same as my breakfast. Sometimes a little better, but I don't feel to complain at all for I have all that I want, and I would live this way for months, to save money to send the Saints to the Valley. I shall be as economical as possible and endeavour to be saving. I feel very different from what I used to a few months ago, for I have known what it is to be hungry, and without money, but I never felt better in my life. Thank the Lord." [^15]

Salt Lake City, October 11, 1862

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

My dear son Brigham,

You can scarcely realize the gratification I derived from the perusal of your very welcome and excellent letter of August 7th. I was much pleased that you so manfully entered upon the field of active public duties so soon after your arrival in Liverpool, and that you have so strong a desire and determination to walk humbly and prayerfully and do all the good our God may bless you in being instrumental in accomplishing. I am also pleased that you have been privileged to visit the Exhibition and other instructive places you mention, and approve of your plan of buying books descriptive of the noted places you visit, so far as they are to be had, that you may not only learn all you can at the time, but also have the means of refreshing your memory and learning still more when leisure moments permit after your return home.

I fully approbate your course in continuing on to England, being fully satisfied that it will result in far more good to yourself and others than would in your direct return from Washington.

Without doubt there are many poor Saints in that district and in all the manufacturing districts of England, some very destitute, and that you may not be burdensome to anyone who is struggling in poverty [^16] I have instructed Bro. George Q. Cannon to furnish you from time to time such funds as your reasonable and economical wants may require. This will relieve your mind of all care on the score of means suitable to your calling, position, and circumstances, and will enable you to give to, rather than receive from, the very poor. Notwithstanding this, it may at times be best, both for yourself and them, for you to accept an invitation from the poor to partake with them their scanty fare. Under this arrangement I presume that you will, as already advised, be prudent in the use of money, realizing that only money answers for immigrating the poor to Florence, and that gathering the poor directly follows their obedience to the gospel, and is obligatory upon us to the extent of our ability in that channel. In this advice about prudence and economy, I do not by any means wish you to heedlessly deprive yourself of the necessaries and comforts of life suitable to the requirements of your position and calling, but to keep a wise watchcare over your expenditures.

On the 1st inst. I started with a few brethren on a tour through the southern settlements and returned on the 25th. In that short time we traveled some 800 miles, visited nearly all the settlements, and held thirty public meetings, in twenty-four of which, I addressed the congregations. The settlers in our Dixie have been very energetic in making improvements, and in raising cotton, &c. Both ourselves and the brethren we saw enjoyed our visit and I trust that it was mutually beneficial.

On the 17th inst. I purpose starting, with a few brethren, on a visit to Cache Valley and the intermediate settlements, and to hold a two days meeting in Ogden City and Logan, and a meeting in North Ogden, Willow Creek, and Brigham City.

As I wrote in my last letter to you, I wish you to make a visit to the continent next season, starting in time to complete your visit and return to Liverpool by about the 1st of August in readiness to start for home. When you make the aforenamed visit I wish Bro. George Q. Cannon to accompany you, if consistent with his other duties at the time; if not, I wish Bro. C[hauncey] W. West to go with you.

Catherine [Spencer Young] and her children are still living where they were when you left, and are all well. Jane [C. Young] and her children remain at the mill where George W. Thatcher and Luna [Y. Thatcher] are living, and are also all well. Catherine and Jane both write to you tolerably often, and I presume give you the family news. Day before yesterday they got two ambrotypes of Brigham [S. Young] and Albert [C. Young] taken together, one for each of them, and the little fellows make a very pretty picture.

In all probability you will be able to entirely omit the use of tobacco while on your mission, if you have not already done so. In such case I trust you will be wise enough to not resume its use on your return, either while crossing the ocean, passing through the states, nor upon the plains, but permit us to welcome you home with your mouth and breath free from the use and smell of tobacco. It is now going on two years and a half since I have used a particle of tobacco, and I guess a little resolution and faith on your part will also enable you to dispense with its use, in doing which you will ever feel strengthened, prospered, and blest. [^17]

If there should be no outbreak between England and the United States, you are at liberty to return at the time before mentioned, or to tarry longer and return with Bro. West, just as you and the brethren may feel and decide at the time, unless I in the intermediate time see it for the best to advise you otherwise.

I am, as already stated, much pleased with your labors thus far and with the spirit of your letters, and feel assured that if you will continue as you have begun, your course and conduct will prove a credit to yourself and your father's house, in honor to your God, and salvation to yourself and others.

The immigrating companies have all arrived in good condition and spirits except three, and the freight train, which are also all coming along in good time. Of the two Church passenger trains still on the road, one camped on the Muddy on the 9th inst., and the other passed this forenoon. The [train] which is in the rear and has over two hundred passengers, camped at Pacific Springs last night, all well, and will probably arrive in a little over two weeks. We have been signally blest in our this season's immigrating operations, having brought in good time and condition all the freight and passengers that were at Florence.

Your mother is enjoying pretty good health, and my health and that of the family is very good.

The weather continues very pleasant, and our crops are abundant.

Please remember me kindly to Bro. [William C.] Staines and give him my good wishes and blessings for his welfare and success in working righteousness. His family are well.

That yourself, Bro. Staines, Bro. Cannon, and all who love and live the truth may be abundantly blest and prospered in doing the will of our God, is ever the prayer of your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated January 3, 1863

As the news spread that a son of Brigham Young was laboring as a missionary in England, the Saints were eager to see and hear him; consequently, he was assigned to travel throughout the mission and speak. By January 1863 Brigham Jr. had spoken at conferences in Bedford, Leeds, Carlisle, and London. He had also traveled to Wales and Ireland. But he saw his role as a son of Brigham Young as demanding social graces beyond his ability to meet. "I have been a fraid that more is expected of me than I can do. They consider that such a father had ought to have a smart son. I can't help it if they are disapointed in their expectations but I will do my best to answer the prayers of my friends. But I can do nothing without the help of God." Reflecting further upon his seeming ineffectiveness, Brigham said, "I have thought and said many times since I've been here, 'I can't see that I'me doing any particular good here; I don't convert anybody.' But some of the brethren tell me I am doing a good work, but if I don't convert one soul it will make no difference to me; I will do my duty and work just as hard as though I was baptiseing my hundreds." [^18]

Probably due to his extensive travels, it was not until February 4, 1863, that Brigham Jr. answered his father's letter of October 11. In this he reflected upon his first half year in England: "I never enjoyed myself better than I have here in England preaching the Gospel of Jesus to the best of my ability. . . . I manage to make some blunders but my intention is good. . . . I am unable to convey to you on paper the thankful feelings that is in my heart for such a father, and for the care that you have shown for me heretofore when I had forsaken the pathe marked out to me by example and would do wickedly, but my repentance with the help of God shall be lasting and with the aid of his spirit will I serve him the remainder of my days. I don't suppose this looks very well on paper. It would be better to talk of something else. I thank you sincerely for the aproval of my plan of buying books connected with the many places I may visit of historical notiriety. And I also thank you for the good advice you give me, and that you are satisfied that my mission will result in more good to me and others than my return from Washington. I have made my home among the saints whenever I could, without distressing them. You know they go to more trouble for me to oblige you than they do for some of the elders, therefore I know if I go to some places they will distress themselves for me, so I make them a visit between meals but I have plenty to eat, to wear, sleep and the Lord blesses me with his spirit, and that is all I can ask. Your journey north I have seen in the D. News. How did you manage without me? I don't doubt but that you got along and hardly missed me, yet it is impossible for me to get along without you." [^19]

Salt Lake City, January 3, 1863

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

My dear son Brigham,

Your very welcome, interesting and satisfactory letters of Oct. 13 and Nov. 12 came safely to hand and their perusal afforded all of us much gratification. It is a source of great joy to me, and to all your relatives and friends, that you are so faithful, diligent, humble and prayerful in the duties of your calling and field of labor. And whether you personally baptize many or few matters not, as you have justly remarked, for the results of your ministry are under the control of our God, it only devolving upon you that your labors be in all faithfulness to the best of your judgment, ability and opportunities. Besides your diligence in preaching, I am much pleased that you so correctly bear in mind and practice the setting a goodly example in your daily conduct and conversation, for it is a saying as true as it is trite that "example goes further than precept."

I wrote you on the 11th of Oct. that I proposed visiting Cache Valley and the intermediate settlements; I accordingly did so, starting on the 7th and returning on the 25th of Oct. We held two days meetings in Ogden City and Logan, and meetings in Kaysville, North Ogden, North Willow Creek, and Brigham City. In every place the brethren were much pleased at greeting and meeting with us, and we doubt not our visit was mutually beneficial. While I was absent north, Col. [Patrick E.] Connor, commanding the Cal[ifornia] Volunteers, who were ordered to protect the overland mail and telegraph lines in Utah, with 4 or 500 troops, leaving only one or two companies on the line at Ruby, formed a camp on the bench land east of this city and just north of Red Butte Creek. Why they are so safely ensconced where their services are of no benefit is probably a question the colonel and his command cannot answer so correctly as can some of us. But, as heretofore, the plans of those who ordered them where they are will be frustrated, and they also as heretofore, will be filled with wrath and wonder that their efforts against the truth so signally fail. Up to the present Col. Connor and his command have conducted themselves with commendable propriety so far as their intercourse with the citizens is concerned. On Christmas eve the theatre was filled with guests invited to participate in appropriate ceremonies, preparatory to commencing theatrical performances for the season. The proceedings of the evening were instructive and interesting, as you will learn, from the notice thereof in this week's News. On the 25th, 27th, and 31st ult. the building was opened to the public, and well-filled houses each night evidence the gratification of the people at so excellent an opportunity for relaxation, improvement and enjoyment. For the present there will be two performances each week, on Wednesday and Saturday nights. Since about the middle of Dec. we have had an occasional snow squall, some cool nights, quite a sprinkling of parties, and some sleigh riding, with about four inches of snow now on the ground, and the clouds promising more. On New Years Day myself and Presidents [Heber C.] Kimball and [Daniel H.] Wells enjoyed a very pleasant family party in the Social Hall and an excellent supper furnished by Bishop [Edward] Hunter and his counselors.

Should you again meet Mr. [Jules] Remy, [^20] please give him my thanks for a copy of his Journey to Great Salt Lake City, which he was so courteous as to send me, and which came safely to hand. Since its reception, business and a multiplicity of duties have so occupied my time as to preclude my examining it, though I have heard some of the brethren remark that in the main it is quite fair and candid, and calculated to do much good. As to the drill-sergeant you wrote about, Br. [William] Pinnock, if I read the name correctly, I will instruct Br. Cannon to assist him and his family to emigrate next season, having them help themselves all they can.

Secretary [Frank] Fuller informs me that he expects to receive, in the course of a few weeks, the funds to pay off Br. [Robert] Burton's command. For this reason I enclose authority to receive and receipt for your pay, [^21] which I wish you to sign and return with your reply to this. I entirely coincide with the idea entertained by Br. Cannon and others of the brethren, that your traveling among the branches and conferences will be a mutual benefit and gratification and production of good, and therefore wish you to do so to the extent Br. George Q. may deem best, until it is time for you to start on your visit to the continent previous to your returning home as already advised. I am so well pleased with your letter that I hope you will write as often as convenient, and by so doing you will at the same time gratify me and benefit yourself. On the 19th ult. Gov. [Stephen S.] Harding read to the Legislative Assembly his message, which they deemed so inappropriate, meddlesome, and abusive that they declined ordering printed the copy he handed to the Secretary of the Council. [^22]

My health is very good, as is also the health of the family, your brother Joseph's, and his family, your family, John W.'s, and that of your other relations and the people generally, with the exception of some cases of whooping cough among the children. That you may have a happy new year and as many happy new years as will enable you to complete your probationary labors to the acceptance of Israel's God, is the wish and prayer of,

Your father,

Brigham Young

P.S.

Lest it has not reached you [^23] I will make an extract from my letter to you, Oct. 11: "As I wrote in my last letter to you, I wish you to make a visit to the continent next season" (now this season), "starting in time to complete your visit and return to Liverpool by about the first of August in readiness to start for home. When you make the aforenamed visit I wish Br. George Q. Cannon to accompany you, if consistent with his other duties at the time; if not, I wish Br. C[hauncey] W. West to go with you." I will now add to the foregoing extract, that I wish Br. West to accompany you from Liverpool home, if Bro. George Q. thinks at the time that he can consistently permit him to do so. When you leave Liverpool for home I wish you to travel by the speediest modes of conveyance, and when you arrive in New York get Mr. Ben Holladay to telegraph to St. Joseph, to have seats in the stage ready for you on the day you expect to reach there.

Letter dated March 26, 1863

Upon receiving his father's letter of January 3, Brigham Young, Jr., wrote in his diary, "I thank my God for such a father and pray him in the name of Jesus Christ that I may never more be guilty of doing anything that would grieve him in the least, or cause anything but joy in having me for his son." [^24] Within hours he penned a reply. "Honored Father. . . . I really feel the want of language to express the satisfaction and the joy I feel in perusing your letter to find that you are satisfied with the course I have taken in this country, and that my letters breath forth a spirit that is acceptable, and that causes you to rejoice makes me feel like a little child, and can't help singing the praises of our lord for all his goodness to me and my brethren. I have not baptized anyone yet, but I have preached as hard as I can those principles pertaining to our religion that I understand." [^25]

On March 25, 1863, Brigham Jr. received a telegram containing the brief message that his father had been arrested. [^26] After waiting nearly a month for further word, he expressed his concern in a letter to his father. "I must tell you how I felt some three weeks ago, when I got the news of your arrest. The spirit of the Lord assured me that all was right, but with this assurance in my heart, it was all I could do to keep from asking Bro. Cannon to start me for home. . . . I do not feel easy. We can hear of the doings of Gov. H[arding] and Judges, and I can hardly contain myself. If it was not for deserting my post I would start home tomorrow, but I do not wish to come home until the right time for me. If I did I could not look you in the face. I do not wish to do anything rashly but take things calmly, and consider all points. You can understand how I feel better than I can tell you perhaps, but nevertheless it does me good to tell you that I am alive in Christ and with you to the end." Expecting news from home with each mail delivery, Brigham Jr. waited three days to complete his letter, but after repeated disappointment he concluded his epistle on the 25th with a resolution to abandon his forthcoming trip to the continent and be ready to leave England at a moment's notice. "There is one thing certain. I will not leave Liverpool except it be for [the] U.S. until I hear that things are in a little less critical condition with you there in the valley." He reasoned, "supposing anything should be the matter, that my poor services would be needed by you, and I not where I could get word. . . . I never could forgive myself for leaving when such an event is the least probable." [^27]

The long-awaited letter of his father, dated March 26, explained the arrest in sufficient detail as to set his mind at ease, although the son did not receive it for a month after the telegram.

Salt Lake City, March 26, 1863

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

My dear son Brigham,

Your very welcome letters of Feb. 4 and 6 came safely to hand, and, as heretofore, we were all much gratified with their tenor and spirit, and feel assured that you are laboring diligently and with your might in behalf of the great cause in which you are engaged. I cordially approve of your trip to Ireland and visit to different branches in Wales and elsewhere, for, with the spirit you are blest with such visits will prove mutually beneficial.

As probably already advised through Br. [George Q.] Cannon, I wish you to omit purchasing any bolting cloths, for I have made other arrangements.

Gov. [Stephen S.] Harding and Judges [Charles B.] Waite and [Thomas J.] Drake had, by their efforts to stir up strife between Utah and the general government, become so obnoxious to the people that a large and enthusiastic mass meeting convened in the tabernacle early this month, and unanimously adopted resolutions condemnatory of the course of said officers, and a petition to President Lincoln to forthwith remove them and appoint good men in their places. The petition was, in a few hours, signed by some 2500 persons in the city alone, and was handed to Br. H[orace] S. Eldredge to deliver to Br. [John M.] Bernhisel for him to present to the President. Said officials, more or less countenanced and aided [faded] Col. [Patrick E.] Connor, continuing their meddlesome and mischievous [faded] Judge [John F.] Kinney, upon complaint, issued a writ citing me to appear before him and answer to a charge of bigamy. The writ was served by U.S. Marshal [Isaac L.] Gibbs, to which I promptly responded, and after examination was bound over to appear for trial at the March term in 1864. Since then the hue and cry about testing the operation of the anti-polygamy bill passed by Congress last summer has considerably abated, and Harding, Connor and Co. are at present quite crestfallen and apparently at a loss what to try next. It is probable that their efforts to create trouble will prove futile, and that they and their like will disappear as the grass grows.

Brs. H. S. Eldredge, Feramorz Little, your brother John W. Young and Lewis Hills started for the States in the stage on the 11th inst.

Br. Eldredge goes to New York to transact business and superintend the affairs of our this year's immigration, and your brother John will go with him; Feramorz will stop at Florence and operate there and in the regions round about, assisted by Br. Hills.

We are not yet advised of the probable number of our this year's immigration from abroad, and of course do not know the number that will need assistance across the plains, but presuming it to be unusually large, the brethren are preparing to send 500 four-yoke ox teams to Florence, [^28] to leave here about the 25th of April, and to arrive on the frontier about the middle of July. This number we presume will answer the contemplated purposes, as did the numbers sent the two last seasons.

Cotton being high priced in the States, and our facilities for manufacturing it not quite in readiness, arrangements are being made to send by the ox trains a quantity of cotton to the States for sale. This may appear some like "taking coals to Newcastle," but under present circumstances it is thought that it will pay, and at the same time have a beneficial effect in increasing the production to meet home demand as soon as we can get the requisite machinery in operation.

On the 14th inst. in company with Brs. [Heber C.] Kimball and [Daniel H.] Wells, some of the Twelve and a few others, I went to Bountiful to dedicate their recently finished meetinghouse. We held interesting meetings there on the 14th and 15th, and returned home p.m. of the 15th.

As I have already advised Br. Cannon, so I also wish you, as far as you may have opportunity, to counsel the Saints about to emigrate this season, especially those who expect assistance across the plains, to dispense at the start with all useless baggage, for they had better give it away at home than to pay expenses on it to Florence, and then have to leave it through lack of transportation, also to use sacking so far as possible instead of chests, trunks and boxes, in packing such articles as they bring. Also inform them that very many, if not the great majority, of those furnishing teams for their assistance do not use tobacco, tea, nor coffee—all high priced and cash articles—and that cash is very scarce with us, for which reasons it will be a good time while crossing the plains to begin to learn to dispense with the use of said articles, as we do not expect to be able to furnish them only for cases of sickness, or as medicinal stores.

James Cobb and his sister Charlotte started for Boston in the stage on Monday last, 23d inst., and will write to you soon after their arrival in that City.

Lest my Nov. 13 letter to George Q. [Cannon] may not have come to hand, I will here make an extract from it. "In my next letter to Brigham I shall inform him that I wish him to purchase and bring with him one dozen of the best and largest sized opera glasses he can find. I do not care so much about the style and finish of their mounting, so it be plain and substantial, as I do about the size and quality of the glasses. I also wish him to have each one furnished with a good well-made leather cover and strap suitable for carrying it when traveling. I also wish him to purchase another dozen in New York City, on his way home, to be, as the dozen first named, of the largest size, best quality, and leather covered and strapped. I would like to have the object glasses of the opera glasses capped, as spy glasses are, if he can get it done."

Katy [Catherine Spencer Young] and Jane [Young] and your children are all well, and the children are growing finely.

My health, your mother's, your brother Joseph's and family, my family's and that of your friends and the people in general is good.

The month thus far has been very pleasant.

Home affairs are peaceful, and bid fair to continue so.

That you may be continually guided, blest, and prospered in all your desires and labors in behalf of the truth, and return to your home in health and safety, as previously advised, is the prayer of,

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated June 3, 1863

Upon receiving his father's letter of March 26, Brigham Young, Jr., replied that had he not been restrained by the Spirit of the Lord, "I would have been with you ere this; but I was assured by that never failing moniter of the servants of the Lord that all would be well." [^29] So confident was he that when the President's letter of June 3 arrived at Liverpool containing added assurance to dispel any uneasiness about affairs at home, Brigham Jr. had already departed on his tour of the continent.

Salt Lake City, June 3, 1863

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

My dear son Brigham,

Your very welcome letter of April 22 came to hand on the 25th ult., and you may rest assured that we were all much gratified in again hearing from you, and interested in perusing your account of travels, doings, spirit, and feelings up to that date.

I last wrote to you on the 18th of April, which letter I trust you received about the time yours of the 22nd reached here, and in that letter I informed you that I purposed soon starting on a visit to our southern settlements; accordingly on the 20th of April, in company with Pres. [Heber C.] Kimball, several of the Twelve and others, I started on my visit and returned on the 19th of May, having been absent 29 nights and 30 days. During that time we traveled nearly 850 miles, and held 39 meetings, at which I addressed the congregations 37 times. The brethren in all the settlements we visited greeted us with much gratification and paid strict attention to our counsels and instructions, and in nearly all places there was visible a commendable increase of energy and taste in improvement in buildings, fields, orchards, vineyards, spirits, feelings, &c.

On the 11th ult. I received a right good letter from your brother John W., written in New York City, April 21. He was well, and enjoying himself much amid new sights and scenes, and from all sources I learn that his conduct is very commendable, and that his trip will doubtless be very beneficial, at least to himself. He mentions that he wrote to you, as I had requested him, on his arrival in New York City, and that he expected to soon start for New Hampshire and Boston in company with Br. Horace S. Eldredge.

Gov. [Stephen S.] Harding has been removed, and his clique and plans have all fizzled out. He said the other day, I am told, that he expected to leave Utah in two or three weeks. His departure will probably be soon followed by that of two or more of his more immediate official aiders and abettors, but whether or not, it is certain that the backbone of opposition and strife-stirring slander at home is broken, and there is no apparent prospect of their being able to create any disturbance here at an earlier date than next year at the soonest, so that I think you need have no uneasiness about trouble or affairs at home while on your continental tour, nor within the time previously mentioned for your return home. They are too busy with their own affairs to molest us at present though their feelings are doubtless bitterer and bitterer.

Br. George Q. Cannon's letter containing particulars of W[illiam] G. Mills' trial has not yet come to hand, but the result of that trial caused me no surprise.

The spring just past and thus much of June have been unusually dry and warm, but gardens and fields are luxuriant and promise abundant harvests, strawberries being already plentiful in market, and green peas appearing on many tables. In the meanwhile all the varied in and out-door avocations are being vigorously prosecuted, huge granite blocks being hauled for the temple and cut and laid, and the work on our new tabernacle being vigorously prosecuted.

The trains for Florence are making excellent progress, with prospects that our immigration will not have so long to wait on the Missouri as they did last year, but rather that some of the trains may have to wait a little for arrivals.

Your course, conduct, travels, spirit, feelings, and views, so far as communicated, are highly satisfactory to me, and I have great confidence that you will perform all duties and so shun or overcome all evil and allurements thereto as to perform a mission beneficial to yourself and others, and return to your home with greatly increased faith, profitable experience gained, and none but good works accomplished.

Since writing the foregoing I have received another letter from John W., dated May 17, N.Y. City. He had been to Boston, had visited James and Charlotte [Cobb], and viewed the notable buildings and places of that city. He was in excellent health and spirits, and expected to soon visit Washington in company with Br. T[homas] B. H. Stenhouse.

On your return I would be much pleased to have you visit Col. [Thomas L.] Kane, if reasonably convenient. At any rate you may have opportunity to make a call upon some portion of his family, which, if you can do, will be very agreeable to them, to the Colonel, and to me.

All is well and prosperous at home, with good prospects for abundant harvests.

My health, your mother's, that of my family in general, and of your wives and children, is good.

That all needed blessings may ever attend you upon your continental tour, upon your return home, on or about the time you are already advised of, and thereafter through your probation and to an abundant admission to the celestial kingdom of our God is the prayer of,

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated December 8, 1864

The first mission of Brigham Young, Jr., to England ended with his travels on the continent of Europe in June and July 1863. In summarizing his missionary experience he wrote to his father: "I have enjoyed myself well while on this mission and altho' it has been short I think it will make me look into my own heart, and in a small measure realize the blessings with which I am surrounded. Altho' I do try to do my duty and live as I know you would have me, in placing my whole mind upon the work in which I am engaged, yet I will occasionally wander away to the valley, and I can see you in my minds eye, and I can't help but exclaim in the depths of my heart, that the day I see you again and grasp your hand and those of the brethren will be the happiest of my life, and I look forward to it as the day of the beginning of my existince. I never could apreciate those blessings before and I am afraid I do not sufficiently at the present time, but I know I thank God from my very soul that he has given me such a father and altho' I may err in many things, yet my desire will ever be that I may be a source of rejoicing to you and never for a moment give you pain or grieve the spirit of God within me. I know I have your prayers for my welfare with the rest of my brethren who are in missions, and I feel to thank you for the good advice and very kind letters you send me, for those few words from you do me a world of good, and as I have stated before in my letters that as often as you write me (as you have plenty of clerks that could give me the news &c) so often will you confer a blessing upon me, that I am hardly worthy to receive. If I gave the Lord sufficient thanks for all his blessings poured out upon me through you, it would take an eternity and as little as I feel like I could do will be to spend the life he has given me in his praise and to gloryfy his name upon the earth." [^30]

Brigham's missionary experience had come at a critical point in his life. "I feel very like I had been in a deep sleep all my life," he wrote in his diary, "and had just waken up. If I live a thousand years, I will never have anything happen to me so opportunely as this mission has." [^31] Only after the insight that followed the trial of his faith in England was he able to realize the importance of his religion and the object of his creation. The change in his life caused serious reflection as he looked back at the "horrible gulf" that he had just missed falling into. "I long for the time to come," he wrote his father, "when I can prove to you and mother how much I value your kindness and long suffering towards me. I realize to some extent how wild I've been—and perhaps wicked in many instances—and how patiently ye both have waited for me to change. My constant prayer is that I may never cause you another pang of sorrow, or that you may ever have cause to blush through any act of mine hereafter." [^32]

On August 1, 1863, Brigham Young, Jr., left England for America. He arrived in Salt Lake City twenty-six days later. As the stage-coach rolled to a stop in front of the family residence on South Temple Street, his father with all his family was at the gate to meet him. When Brigham Jr. stepped from the coach he was immediately swallowed up in the affectionate greetings of his family. The "gentile" passengers, he recorded, "looked on with surprise no doubt thinking I had many friends." The day of his homecoming ended with this note: "I . . . thank God that I can look my Father and all the Saints in the face and not feel to blush for any action committed on my mission." [^33]

Less than a year after Brigham Young, Jr., arrived in Salt Lake City, he was called to return to England with Daniel H. Wells to preside over the European Mission of the Church. The two men, with their wives (Brigham took Catherine), left Salt Lake City on April 30, 1864. After spending some time in the East, they sailed from New York on July 11 and set foot in England on the twenty-fifth.

At the beginning of his first mission, as Brigham Jr. obtained his first real glimpse of the world during his travels in the eastern United States, he was appalled at the moral conditions that existed beyond the cloistered environment in which he had been raised. After several weeks in Washington, D.C., in 1862, he concluded, "the city seems to be one big whore house. I wish I was a thousand miles from here." [^34] Later that year, upon observing conditions in England, he noted, "I never had the least conception of the real character of men until within the last three or four months, and I must say that I am completely dumfoundered." [^35]

The difference between his own people and those of the world staggered his mind. In London he saw men and women "wallowing in their filth so drunk they could not lay still, cursing and swearing, and poluting themselves by every species of crime that is known. How different from the mountain home that I have so firmly fixed in my minds eye, where, instead of seeing crime, you behold all that makes the Lord delight in the workmanship of his hands. I never could have reallized the gulf that seperates us from the world—not until I had looked down both sides of this mighty chasm, could I thank God truly for the blessings which he has given unto his people." [^36] Such were the degraded social conditions that temptation seemed to present itself at every turn. He wrote his father, "Oh, the devil is working hard to destroy the servants of God here and it takes all the faith and prayers that I can muster to keep my thoughts pure before my God. No matter how poor an out I make of it, I am trying to serve God to the best of my ability—and yet I occasionally catch myself wandering from that straight and narrow path. I can feel your prayers for me; they influence my actions. You understand what temptations there are in the world, and how . . . easy it is to fall off and before we know it be sunk in the depths of misery and vice." [^37]

While traveling on the continent in 1863, just prior to his return home, Brigham Jr. again wrote of widespread human degradation. "I have thought many times, that if the soldiers, whores, and beggars were taken out of Italy, it would be without inhabitants except those who, like ourselves are merely transient residents." [^38] After arriving in Bologna one evening he noted, "I did not like this place at all. They show their vices a little to plain. As soon as we had arr[ived] and fairly got the dust of from us, several ladies dressed in white presented themselves for us to pick from. They waited long and patiently but were disapointed at last. Such things as these make me disgusted with society as it exists at the present time, and long more earnestly for the society of virtuous men and women, which are only to be found as a community in my own loved home." [^39]

Brigham Jr. had not been in Milan long—the first city in Italy that really suited him—before he noticed the same corruption that he had seen elsewhere. "I have come to the conclusion," he wrote his father, "that the whole world is turned into one Grand Manufactury of illigitemate children." [^40] Now, two years later and traveling to England on his second mission, Brigham noticed that the same pall of corruption hung over New York: "This city is one of the most wicked places I was ever in, and wickedness is on the increase. Nothing but the utter destruction of this people will ever purify the land." [^41]

As he donned the cloak of administration over the European Mission with Daniel H. Wells, Brigham faced the problem of human depravity from still another perspective—that of coping with the degraded social environment in which he must direct missionaries of Zion. In an era when moral prerequisites for missionary service were not as tightly drawn as they later became, it was not uncommon for some of the elders to succumb to the temptations around them. A somber theme of Brigham's letters to his father during the years of his mission presidency was the plight of missionaries who had transgressed. Within one year he reported nine cases of serious deviation. In relating a particularly grievous case in which one elder had been guilty of drunkenness, immorality, and assault and battery, which resulted in a two-month prison sentence, Brigham wrote to his father, "I find that the greatest trial the brethren have to meet is to keep their skirts clear of women—that class of people being very plenty, and from the customs of the country they have come to think every man they meet wants to ride them, and about two thirds of the females keep an open shop day and night. If I ever felt sick and tired of the filth and corruption, it is now, and my desire increases daily to gather out the honest, that the Lord may burn up the rotten masses." [^42]

The following letter of Brigham Young to Brigham Jr. and Daniel H. Wells was written on December 8, 1864, some three months after they had taken the reigns of the European Mission.

Salt Lake City, December 8, 1864

President Daniel H. Wells and

Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Brethren,

Your welcome favors (Bro. Daniel's [H. Wells] of Oct. 22nd and Brigham Jr's. of Oct. 27th) have been received and perused with much interest, and the business items have been duly noted. Your communications manifest a spirit of improvement which I am pleased to witness, and I hope that you will continue to cultivate this spirit in all your writings and teachings and in the management of your business.

Your continued visits to the conferences, and meeting with the elders and Saints at their various fields and places of residence is time well spent. By such visits the mission will be more likely to be kept in a healthy condition, and the details of affairs throughout the conferences to be more thoroughly known by you. I have been very sorry to hear what you have written to me respecting David Gibson and his operations. Whenever his mysterious disappearance shall be accounted for I am of the opinion you will find that he has been prompted to take such a course by the loss of the Spirit and the shame arising from transgression. It is to be regretted that at this late day, after the Latter-day Saints have had so much instruction upon the plan of salvation, men should fail to perceive that there is nothing that the adversary can offer as a temptation to seduce them from the path of righteousness and truth which they cannot obtain by treading in that path undeviatingly. There is no good thing which is not comprehended in the gospel of Jesus. Every gift and blessing that can enhance the happiness of man, or add in the least to his enjoyment and to the development of his God-like nature, is promised unto man through his obedience to the truth, and he can receive all these things as fast as he prepares himself for them. Strange to say, however, not only are the people in the world blind to this great fact, but men and women, who call themselves Latter-day Saints, and who have been taught the principles of salvation, fail to recognize it, and desert the substantial pleasures which they would enjoy eternally, and go in pursuit of their shadows.

We have had a steady rain, mingled with some snow, now for two days. It is still raining. There is no frost in the ground, and as the rain falls gently, it is [line blurred]. Everything is moving on peaceably in the city and territory. The holding of the convention for the regulation of the price of grain has been attended with excellent effects. Flour and grain have sold at remunerative prices, and the farmers have been able, by the sale of their produce, to furnish their families with many comforts which would have been beyond their reach had there not been a united effort to keep up the prices. This has not been the only advantage. Speculators and others in the adjacent territories have exerted themselves to obtain flour and grain from other quarters, instead of depending wholly upon us, which they would have done had they thought that they could have obtained provisions at the old prices.

The Volunteers on the bench are becoming more insignificant every day. They are becoming tired of their publishing business, and are anxious to sell out the Vedette Office. [^43] They do not attract the least notice from the citizens, and we all go about our business as though the redoubtable general and his command were not in existence.

A specimen of the silver ore which [Patrick E.] Connor has been digging in the west mountains, [^44] and about which there has been so much noise made, was lately showed me. It is nothing but lead, and rather poor quality at that; it contains a much smaller percentage of silver than our Las Vegas lead did.

The line of the proposed canal between Big Canyon Creek [^45] and the city is now being surveyed by Bro. Jesse W. Fox. By leveling from the point selected as the most suitable for the canal to cross that creek, we find that the water can be brought to a point in the city nearly as high as the top of Eagle Gate near my Beehive house, which will be sufficiently elevated to answer every desired purpose in navigation or irrigation. The digging will soon be commenced, and it is the intention to push the work through as fast as practicable this winter.

The hard times which the working classes in Lancashire, Warwickshire and other places are suffering, may cause some of the more honest and reflecting portion of the people who have heard the testimony of the servants of the Lord to pay some attention to the truth and to bow in submission to its requirements. We can tell the nations of Babylon that they have only begun to experience, in a small degree, the calamities and judgments which will most assuredly come upon them unless they repent of their sins and turn unto the Lord.

If there are any of the Saints who have means sufficient to carry them across [illegible] this side [illegible] are desirous to come, the better [illegible] to take passage to New York and then take rail from there to Buffalo and cross from there to such points in Canada as will be most feasible and present the best facilities for obtaining employment. If such persons could obtain suitable employment not far from Detroit, on the Canada side, it would be convenient for them to come from there west when they wish to emigrate, but in seeking a place to stop, they will have to be governed by circumstances. I mention New York as the port to which they should ship, because passages can be obtained more readily, and as a general thing at more reasonable rates, than to Canadian ports. If any should choose to come on west into the neighborhood of Wyoming, and seek for employment, there would be no objections. By the time they obtain their outfit, opportunities will very likely offer for them to come on here. But in all this you must be governed by the situation of the country and by circumstances. I indulge in the hope, however, that, before long, the way will be open for our emigration to come by the Colorado River, and that steamship owners will be willing to charter their vessels to carry our people to Aspinwall on the Atlantic side and from Panama on the Pacific side up the coast to the point that will suit us best. The best months for the Saints to cross into Canada will be June, July, and August; they then will have time to prepare for winter.

Ransohoff's store was robbed one night last week of a quantity of clothing. The police have been very diligent in their search after the thieves, and have finally been successful in arresting them, and in finding the greater portion of the goods stolen from Ransohoff, as well as a quantity of coffee and other articles which were stolen some weeks ago from Mr. [Austin] Shipp, the father of Bro. M[ilford] B. Shipp. The property was found on the premises of a so-called saint by the name of Griffin, of Union Fort, and of another by the name of Geo. W. Kent of Session's settlement. Three gentiles have been arrested, who with Griffin and Kent are now undergoing a preliminary examination before Judge [Elias] Smith; they will undoubtedly be committed, as there is no room for doubt as to their guilt.

I should like to continue to receive a monthly cash statement of the business of your office, and that this may be fully reliable, it will be well to see that your books are kept well posted up, and your cash account regularly balanced as often as once a month at least.

It will be well for you to make inquiries as to who would be the best type-founders to make matrices for our Deseret Alphabet, so that you may have an idea where to get fine, well-finished, elegant type made for our books when we need it. Look around, and see where they can be got, and whether they can be got at all or not, and also ascertain whether we will be under the necessity of sending any person over to superintend the business of getting the type up. You have printers there, probably, who can tell what is needed, and who will know when the types are right in every respect for printing.

Both your families have been visited this morning (the 7th) and your wives and children are all well. Brigham's son, Howard, fell from the foundation in his lot, and hurt or sprained his ankle; this confined him to the house for a few days, but he is now able to wear his boot again and go to school with the other children.

Praying the Lord to bless you abundantly in your labors, I remain your brother in the gospel,

Brigham Young

[Postscript contains drafts on the Liverpool office]

Letter dated October 18, 1865

As Brigham Young, Jr., entered upon his public ministry in 1862, he had felt ill-equipped with the social graces necessary to meet the challenges that confronted him. "I am not a good speaker, and so I try and make up for it bye visiting the saints in their homes—I exort them to live their religion and try to set them a good example," he wrote in his diary. [^46] In explaining the source of his backwardness on one occasion, he said, "My education has been different from that of the young men who are now growing up in the Church. In my youth our parents had sufficient to do amidst the persecutions they were surrounded with, and could not properly attend to the education of their children." [^47] Aware of his weaknesses, Brigham did not refuse the responsibilities that faced him, but showed a dogged determination to overcome the "man-fearing spirit" he possessed.

Although he preferred to visit the Saints in their homes rather than speak in their meetings, he willingly complied with the assignment he received shortly after his arrival in England to travel throughout the British Isles to fulfill the desire of Church members to see and hear the son of President Young. "When I stand up to preach, the persperation roles off me, but I put it through and am determined to learn how to warn the people, and how to make myself intiligable, that the truths of the Gospel may come from my mouth in the Simplest and plainest manner possible." [^48] After a particularly trying day he confided in his diary, "I can hardly contain my feelings neither can I express them to the people, but I shall continue to call upon the Lord in faith until he will unloosen my tongue." [^49] That Brigham Jr. had made some progress in strengthening his confidence before the public was a subject of a letter to his father: "Give my love to Lott Smith and tell him that I am not So afraid to stand up before a congregation as I once was in Farmington where I was called to the Stand and instead of going I ran out of doors. I'me getting broke in a little." [^50]

During his second mission to England, Brigham Young, Jr., undertook an intensive study of French, English grammar, and history, with the hope that "by close application" he could compensate for his earlier educational failings. However, his progress report a year later was fraught with discouragement. "I have come to the conclusion that I must be one of those that mature late in life. It seems astho' I am no farther advanced now than I was a year ago. I have discarded the idea of ever becoming a good preacher, and confine myself strictly to the truth, and cheer up the Saints the best I can." [^51]

On May 31, 1865, Brigham Jr. left England with his family for a visit to the continent, where the little pride he took in his knowledge of French withered in the face of reality. He veiled his discouragement with the assurance that his study of French had not been entirely useless—it had helped him to better understand his own language. One of his reasons for traveling on the continent at that time seems to have been educational. Writing to his father, he said, "I . . . hope you will approve my course in visiting the Continent. I shall try and improve the time. I find however that I am very slow, and do not learn so fast as some others, but I make every day a day of study, and I hope the time will come when I will have acquired a tolerably good education. It is truly my desire to qualify myself for the duties present and future." [^52]

Because of his poor health, the experienced veteran Daniel H. Wells was summoned home from England in August 1865, leaving the administration of the European Mission in the sole charge of the twenty-nine-year-old Brigham Young, Jr. If Brigham's lack of education and oratorical skill had theretofore caused him to shrink from public responsibility, the departure of his talented superior only added to his anxiety. He reflected upon the stark reality of his new assignment in a letter to his father. "When the idea was first suggested of my being left in charge of this mission I felt to shrink, and although I looked upon it as an honor that I scarcely dared to aspire to, yet, I felt my own incapacity; but when I found that Prest. Wells was really going home and would leave me alone, I looked to the Lord for that strength which I knew I must have to honor that station. . . . In these hours of trouble I find a resting place in reflection. I look back into a time when the people of God were driven from their homes, and the enemy, pressing hard in their rear, drove them into an unbroken wilderness, where nought but death stared them in the face. In years gone by I have wondered how you, and those immediately around you, had wisdom to direct matters in such a manner that everything prospered which you set your hand to accomplish. Long since I have ascribed it to the Spirit of God, and I know that he always provides a way for man to accomplish his commands." [^53]

The remaining letters transcribed below were written by Brigham Young while his son presided alone over the European Mission.

Salt Lake City, October 18, 1865

President Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

The last letter which I have received from Bro. [Daniel H.] Wells or yourself was dated August 5th, and was written by you upon your return to England from the continent. Your letters from the continent, describing your travels and the cities and places of note which you visited, have been very interesting to me and the family. My last letter to you was dated Aug. 22nd. Since that was written, I have been almost constantly traveling, and have been compelled to defer writing to you until the present. After writing to you, in company with Bro. Heber [C. Kimball] and several brethren of the Twelve and some other elders we visited Tooele Valley, and met with the people at E.T. City and held a two day meeting with the Saints at Tooele City. On the 4th, September myself and company started on our annual visit to St. George and returned to this city on the 29th of Sep. We had a snow storm at Round Valley and between there and Fillmore. With this exception we had a very agreeable and pleasant journey. In every place which we visited the Saints appeared to feel as well as I ever saw them. They turned out almost in masse to meeting whenever we gave out an appointment, and the Spirit of the Lord rested powerfully upon the elders and the people upon every occasion. The teachings were very practical, and applied to almost every duty and labor connected with life. The people in the southern settlements feel very cheerful and contented this season; their prospects are brightening, and those who have entertained doubts in the past respecting the practicability of being able to make a living in that region have dismissed their fears and have come to the settled conclusion that, after all, the country is habitable. Probably more than half the breadstuffs the people in that section of the Territory need for the year has been raised in the settlements outside of the rim of the basin. A considerable number of improvements made since our last visit are apparent in St. George. The new settlements of the Muddy and the Beaver Dam streams are reported as being very flourishing and the brethren feel sanguine at their prospects. We are informed that the cotton plant grows finely down there, being especially thrifty in the Muddy. I am intending to move my cotton machinery down to that country so as to be in place to manufacture the next crop of cotton, and have selected a site for the factory at Washington, six miles from St. George.

During our absence on this southern trip we held meetings and preached discourses. We did not go any further than St. George, going straight there and returning straight back. Bros. Franklin D. Richards and A[mos] M. Musser struck off from the company at Chicken Creek on our way down, and visited seven settlements on the Sevier, which contained about 432 families. It is almost a matter of surprise even to us, who have traveled more or less every summer throughout the Territory from the first of our settlement here until the present, how the people have increased and are still increasing and spreading abroad. We have been traveling steadily all this summer which is just past, remaining but a very short time in the city between our trips, yet there are a great number of settlements that we have been unable to visit for the want of time. The time is not far distant when the cry will be heard: "the place is too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell," and Zion will lengthen her cords and strengthen her stakes and break forth on the right hand and on the left. The increase of the number of our children throughout our Territory is very apparent, and is a matter of pleasure and gratulation to all the Saints. Wherever we have been this summer the children have been paraded by their teachers, and have lined the streets as we have entered the settlements making our hearts throb with joy at witnessing them. The seed of the righteous is becoming numerous in the earth. When the gospel was first revealed in this generation to the Prophet Joseph there were but very few whom the Lord could call who would obey him and take upon them His name. But what a change thirty-five years have wrought! We have raised up a race in these mountains whose highest desire is to serve the Lord, and whose pride is to be called by His name. The friends of the Almighty, they who are desirous of carrying out His will at all hazards, instead of being scattered one or two in a place, and in but a few places, are now numbered by thousands who are collected together in one land, and are a power in the earth that cannot be ignored or passed by, and are daily becoming more numerous. Nothing like this has been seen in the earth for centuries. The Nephites were the last people of whom we have any account who were united in the desire to do the will of God and to acknowledge Him as their head. Since their apostasy, and the withdrawal of the priesthood from mankind, until the time of its restoration again, the Lord has been without a people whom he acknowledged, or who would have been willing to do His will in all things. The bestowal of the priesthood again upon man brings into existence the union which has been so long lost and mourned over, and erects a standard to which every love of truth and every obedient son and daughter of God throughout all the nations of the earth can rally.

President Daniel H. Wells and wife and child, and Elder Finley C. Free arrived in this city on the morning of Saturday, the 7th instant, enjoying moderately good health, but fatigued from the trip. They came in time to participate in the conference, and they were very warmly welcomed.

Our conference was very numerously attended by the elders and Saints from various parts of the Territory, and was highly enjoyed by all. The conference convened on Friday and continued until Monday evening, and was followed on Tuesday by the meeting of the convention for the regulation of the price of produce, &c. The first three days meetings were held under the bowery, but on Sunday night it rained, and the meetings on Monday had to be held in the tabernacle. It was unanimously resolved at the conference to send five hundred ox teams down in the spring to the frontiers to help up the poor. This will, without doubt, be cheering news to the Saints abroad who are struggling and toiling to emancipate themselves from Babylon. How many of those who will receive help will appreciate the exertions we make to assist them in accomplishing the object for which, at the present time, they so fondly yearn? Many who have been helped through, and who probably would have been compelled to remain in Babylon for years yet to come, had help not been extended to them, come here, and turn away and join themselves to the wicked and abuse the people who have befriended them, and to whom if any regard had been paid to their expressions while they were in the branches where they joined the Church, it might be expected they would be eternally grateful. We have had this to contend with in the past, and we may expect that it will be so in the future while human nature remains so depraved and so subject to sin and sinful influences as it is.

In view of the heavy expenses that will naturally fall upon the Trustee-in-Trust of the Church in sending down so many teams this season to help up the poor, I wish you to be particular in urging upon the people the importance of paying their tithing. Of course, I wish the same policy that has prevailed upon this subject for the past few years to still continue to govern you. Do not make it a matter of fellowship, if men do not pay their tithing. Neither suffer it to be so strenuously urged upon the people as to become oppressive, but let the Saints understand that it is a law of the Lord, and not only a duty but a privilege for them to devote a tithe of their means to the building up of His kingdom on the earth. When they view it in this light instead of it being a task or an onerous burden to pay tithing, it will be a pleasure.

When a man is able, and has something to pay tithing on, and utterly refuses to pay tithing, then they can be cut off from the Church, but when men are poor, they should be leniently dealt with. Persons like the Walker Bros. of this city, who refuse to pay their tithing, we have cut off here, but such cases will scarcely, if ever, occur in your jurisdiction.

I wish you to be prompt and decisive in your counsels to and dealing with the elders, not with harshness or severity, but in a pleasant and kind manner. You know what right is, and you should see that it is maintained.

When the health of any of the elders is likely to fail, continue to take the course which you have done, and move them to places possessing a more congenial climate. In some instances it may be necessary for them to cross the Atlantic to the States; whenever this may be the case it would be well to have them return there.

There have been great expectations indulged in by many who are inimical to us respecting the ingress of a heavy body of troops into the Valley this fall; but, so far, they have been disappointed, and from the best information that can be obtained, their disappointment is not likely to be removed. One thousand men may come in for the purpose of wintering here, but a large portion of them will be composed of men who have served in the rebel ranks, and who enlisted under the Federal flag with the express understanding that they should only be required to fight Indians. It is said that the utmost harmony does not exist among these two classes of troops, the Southern men not being well pleased with the name by which they are sometimes contemptuously called, namely, "galvanized Yanks."

The new tabernacle is being pushed forward and the scaffolding is erected upon which the bents of the roof are to be raised. We hope that by the time for holding our next semi-annual conference it will be sufficiently completed to admit of our assembling in it.

With love to yourself and family, in which Bros. Kimball and Wells and all the brethren join, and praying the Lord to be with you, and to fill you with the revelation and the wisdom which you need for the magnifying of your high calling, and to preserve you in health and peace to return home, I remain

Your affectionate Father,

Brigham Young

P.S. I wish you to purchase three suits of furs namely, a coat, boots, cap and mittens for your Brothers Joseph A. and John W., and Bro. Geo. Q. Cannon. You will know the proper sizes. Bro. Geo. Q. had me a suit of this kind purchased in Copenhagen through Bro. Jesse N. Smith, and there will be the proper place to purchase these suits. They should be carefully packed with camphor and tobacco in oilcloth, and sent across in the charge of careful elders; they can be brought so as to avoid the necessity of paying duty. You can purchase a suit for yourself at the same time, or at any time before you come home, and you should wear fur over your knees, especially in the winter. B.Y.

Letters dated November 17, 1865, and January 22, 1866

One of the most trying responsibilities that had devolved upon the young mission president was the subject of a letter to his father on October 9 wherein Brigham Young, Jr., dwelt at length upon "things which cause me pain and grief," relating cases of fellow laborers who had fallen into transgression. In seeking counsel from his father, Brigham Jr. wrote of his intention to "temper justice with mercy" if there were a determination on the part of the transgressor to mend. President Young responded on November 17, expressing amazement that "men who are called to be teachers . . . should act so utterly at variance with all their knowledge and professions." He urged his son not to be "cast down by the wrong-doing of those who may be called brethren or saints."

Salt Lake City, November 17, 1865

Pres. Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Since writing to you I have received your favors of Sep. 19 and Oct. 9th, and have been pleased to hear of your welfare and the prosperity of the work under your care. It is grievous to hear of the misconduct and transgressions of the elders, and their deviations from the path of honor, but while men will give heed to the adversary, and not control their dispositions and appetites, such results will be witnessed. It is nevertheless strange that men who receive the holy priesthood, and are called to be teachers of men, should act so utterly at variance with all their knowledge and professions, as your letter informs us has been the case.

We have been much exercised this fall by the detention of the immigrating Saints on the road, and earnest and thorough exertions have been made to bring them in. We sent out mule and horse teams, many of which went as low down as Red Buttes—about 380 miles east—to meet the last company. No pains or expense has been spared to bring in the people before the snows and rigorous weather of the winter should come upon them. We have been relieved and gladdened by the arrival on Wednesday, the 15th inst., of the last of the women and children from the hindmost (Cap. W[illiam] S.S. Willis's) company; and should the weather keep favorable, the train itself, with which there is none but men now, will probably reach here in a few more days. We were threatened with an early commencement of the winter; but the storms passed off and we have had a most remarkable fall; the weather has been magnificent, and the last company of teams composed of mine, Joseph A.'s, and some few other brethren's which went out to meet the last company, went from here to Rocky Ridge on the Sweetwater in the charge of Capt. Orson Arnold, and returned without experiencing any but the most pleasant and delightful weather. The Lord has heard and answered the prayer of the Saints in behalf of the immigration, and has averted the storms that are usual in the mountains at this season.

You have doubtless seen in the papers which are forwarded to you a description of the three day muster of the militia of this county on the 1st, 2nd and 3rd instant. The men were favored with very fine weather while they were out, and the display was most excellent. There were many strangers present at the review and the universal expression on all hands was that they had never seen a militia muster in which the men marched and performed their evolutions so well, or appeared to so good an advantage. During the entire muster everyone was cheerful, and not an angry word or unpleasant expression was heard from any quarter. How striking the contrast between a muster of Latter-day Saints in the capacity of a militia in this Territory, with the musters usually held elsewhere. For a muster to be held without any person being intoxicated, or the name of the Lord being blasphemed, or without a fight, as our recent muster was, would be something unexampled and unheard of elsewhere. Considerable interest has been felt of late, both on the part of the officers and men throughout the Territory in military matters, and a very commendable diligence has been shown in attending drill and in purchasing arms and uniforms. At the late muster Bro. Robert T. Burton was elected major general of this division to fill the vacancy occasioned by the resignation of Geo. D. Grant. Gen. D[aniel] H. Wells was on the ground every day, and was in command of the troops.

Quiet prevails in and around the city. The military have been making efforts to obtain suitable premises in which to quarter two companies of troops, but up to the present have not secured any. A man by the name of Potter has built a bar-like structure on Thomas Bullock's lot, next to Bro. [Thomas B. H.] Stenhouse's premises, for a theatre. They have played there three nights, but the last two nights the audiences were very small. This institution has been much lauded by the camp sheet, as being peculiarly gentile and as a place of amusement that ought to be supported.

A hall has also been built on the back part of S.J. Lees' lot, as a place of worship for the chaplain of camp and his fellow-worshipers. They call it "Independence Hall," and they think by such devices and schemes as these to overthrow the kingdom of God! They are a miserably low and contemptible crew who are associated together in these schemes. They are really beneath our notice, and with all their fretting and fuming we have never deemed them worthy of any attention, but have permitted them to indulge in their bluster to their heart's content, so long as they have confined themselves to talk. It is with us as it was with a man who had a dreadful termagant for a wife; she would become so violent at times that her abuse would attract the notice of their neighbors, and on one occasion one of them expressed his wonder to the husband at his patient endurance of her conduct. He replied that, as it seemed to amuse her and it did not hurt him, he did not mind it, but he was willing she should enjoy herself.

The new tabernacle is being pushed ahead as fast as practicable, and the main rafters are looming up and making a fine appearance. The present fine weather admits of work being done upon the building, and advantage is being taken of it to push it ahead.

You have every reason to be encouraged and to persevere in the discharge of the duties of your calling. Be not cast down by the wrong doing of those who may be called your brethren or Saints; but strengthen yourself in the Lord your God and He will bear you off triumphantly at all times and under all circumstances. Be faithful in discharging the duties of your calling, and keep your heart so clean and pure that the Lord can write His mind and will upon it, that you may never be in ignorance or be destitute of His word to impart when needed.

Under date of July 24th I wrote to you to take Bro. [William B.] Preston into the office; he can render you efficient aid, I think, and you will probably need both him and Bro. [Nathaniel H.] Felt. You should also procure you a good, trustworthy bookkeeper if one can be found—a man who will carefully keep the books in complete order and be able at any moment to give an account of the entire business of the office.

I wish you to release Brother Heber John Richards so that he can return here early in the spring.

We were much grieved to hear by telegraph that Elder George Sims, who was returning home from a mission to Great Britain, was drowned in the North Platte, at Red Buttes, on the [blank] of Octr. while crossing the river on horse back after some cattle. His guileless simplicity and strict integrity had endeared him to all who knew him and the regret at his untimely death was universal.

With love to yourself and Katie [Catherine Spencer Young] in which your mother and all the family join, and praying the Lord to give you every necessary qualification to enable you to magnify your calling and to preserve you in health and purity to return home, I remain your father,

Brigham Young

[Postscript contains drafts on the Liverpool Office]

Salt Lake City, January 22, 1866

President Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Your letters of Nov. 25th and 28 and short note of Dec. 7th, with accompanying enclosure, have come safely to hand, and have been perused with interest and the contents duly noted. The release of the elders who are sick to return home is quite proper; no man should be kept there after he has tried different fields without benefit when his health is failing. I have not been disappointed in the result of C[harles] A. Benson's mission; his conduct at home before leaving on his mission did not inspire any of his acquaintances with any very sanguine hopes as to his future, unless there should be a thorough repentance of his past follies.

Until a few days ago, the winter, from the first of Decr. had been very severe. The sleighing has never before, since our settlement here, been so uninterrupted for the same period as it has been this winter. The snow has been very deep throughout the valley, but it is now thawing and the snow is likely, if the weather continues as at present, to soon disappear. The health of the people has generally been very good during the winter, and peace has prevailed, the bitterness and hatred of those who are opposed to us to the contrary notwithstanding.

We have had plenty of rumors and threats circulated by our enemies, but we have pursued the even tenor of our way without minding them in the least, or allowing them to disturb us. From the beginning of the work our enemies have formed an innumerable number of plans for our overthrow, and they have indulged in great hopes respecting the success which would attend their operation, frequently fixing the time when the complete overthrow of the kingdom of God would be consummated, but in every instance, their schemes have fallen to the ground and they have been covered with shame and confusion. Notwithstanding these repeated failures, the adversary does not appear discouraged. He deludes his servants with the idea that success is sure to attend their efforts, and thus he leads them forward one after another, captives at his will. They are blind to the confusion and overthrow which have befallen those who have preceded them in opposing the work of God, and are full of prognostications about what great things they are about to accomplish. It is a glorious consolation for us to know that God rules, and that he can and does control men and their acts to His own glory and the accomplishment of His purposes.

The territorial legislature has adjourned after an unusually heavy session. Several of the most important bills have not been signed by the governor. It is a great disgrace to a republican government like ours to permit such a condition of things to exist as we have had to submit to for years. A stranger is sent out from a distant part of the Union to our country to govern us who is utterly ignorant of the wants of the territory and the measures which are best adapted to the people. He has the power granted to him to veto every bill that may be passed by the unanimous vote of the legislature through any whim, prejudice, or crotchet that he may have, though such bill may be of the most important character and essentially necessary to the well-being of the people and the country. His judgment is permitted to outweigh the judgment of the Territorial Council and House of Representatives, composed, respectively, of thirteen and twenty-six members, and to undo the patient and well-digested labor of weeks. But we must submit to these things and learn patience therefrom. The time will come, however, when we will be freed from such obstacles and have the opportunity of doing every thing necessary for the welfare and prosperity of Zion without hindrance. As it is at present, though irksome and disagreeable, the progress of the great work is not retarded, neither does it sustain any injury which we can not remedy.

The legislature of the State of Deseret met on Monday, and I delivered my message as governor. The members did not deem it necessary to remain long together, merely long enough to enact that the laws of the territory should be made the laws of the state, and to elect the state officers and to take measures to maintain the state organization intact. We wish to keep the machinery all in gear as it is, so that whenever the time shall come to turn the water on to the wheel, we will have nothing to do but hoist the gate.

We are sending down Bro. Thomas Taylor to act again as the agent of the emigration at New York. He will probably start about the fifth of February. Bro. John T. Caine is also appointed to go to New York to act as clerk in the emigration business; Bro. Wm. C. Staines will also start from here about April for the purpose of also assisting in this business. It will be a very great advantage to the emigration and the agents in New York if you would collect the railroad fares of the Saints at Liverpool, also whatever may be due from them on extra luggage. While at Liverpool, and before they embark, the Saints generally have some money with which to pay for their extra luggage, but after they reach New York, in the best of instances they find a great many uses for all the spare cash they have, and the agents pay for the extra luggage, and are put to considerable loss by not being able to collect the money of the people who own such luggage. They have extra baggage when they embark and have not the means to pay for it; they can lessen it to the weight which is allowed by the railroad company, or by disposing of some articles, raise the amount they need. As soon as Bro. Taylor closes a contract with the railroad companies for the transportation of the emigration and freight, he will advise you what amount you will have to collect for fares, and also what weight of luggage is allowed to each full ticket, and the price per pound of the extra luggage.

In shipping provisions for the Saints on the sea the barrels and other packages have not always been marked so distinctly as to prevent confusion and sometimes difficulty in separating them from the ship's provisions. To prevent this in the future, it would be well to have a stencil plate cut, and every package carefully marked with the plate, and then the agent can have no difficulty in separating them at New York from the ship's packages.

I have appointed your brother John W. on a mission to England, and he will start with the other brethren to the States on or about the 5th of Feb'y. He will make a short visit in the States and then proceed to England. I wish you to put him in the best position to be of use and to obtain experience. I would like him to obtain a knowledge of bookkeeping, of which he has a little understanding at present, but I wish the most of his time to be devoted to the work of the ministry—to travel and preaching and the other duties of the priesthood. When not engaged in this manner I wish his spare time to be used in the office. And I hope you will both be economical in the use of funds, and save all that you can.

I have seen a suit of clothing, which you have sent to your children, and you said in your letter that you could send some more to me if it would suit, but you do not say anything about the price, and I do not know what to say about the matter; I should think, however, that it would be a good way to send garments over, cut out and ready made.

Jane [Carrington Young] has just stepped in and is well, and informs me that all the rest are well. With love to yourself and Katie [Catherine Spencer Young] and all the elders, and praying the Lord to bless and preserve you and enable you to fill your high calling, I remain your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated February 8, 1866

The news of the appointment of his brother John Willard Young to serve a mission in England was greeted by Brigham Young, Jr., with surprise and gratitude: "I cannot tell how thankfull I feel for the privilege of having John W. with me the coming summer. Your instructions regarding him shall be attended to, and we will be as economical as possible, and above all strive to be worthy the blessings of God, which are so freely bestowed upon us." [^54] President Young's letter of February 8 brought further detail of John W.'s call and expected time of arrival in England.

Salt Lake City, February 8, 1866

President Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Since my last letter was written to you I have received nothing further from you.

Your Bro. John W., Hiram B. Clawson, Wm. Jennings, Thomas Taylor and J[ohn] T. Caine started from my office in the stage last evening at about 8.15 p.m. for the States. As I advised you in my last, John W. is appointed a mission to Europe. He will stop a few days in the States and visit your Uncle Edward who is living in Wisconsin, and a cousin of mine in Cincinnati, and also some of my connections in the state of New York. He will be accompanied on these visits by Bro. Caine, as if any of them should conclude to come out here, I wish him to be acquainted with them and in a position to aid them. John will probably be able to sail from New York about the 10th of March. Bro. Jennings will sail at the same time. Bro. Jennings will attend to some business in New York, and then cross to England on a short visit to his folks and will labor in the ministry as he may have opportunity. Bro. Thomas Taylor and Bro. John T. Caine will attend to the emigration business in New York, the former as agent and the latter as clerk and assistant. You should open correspondence with Bro. Taylor and keep them fully advised of the prospects and movements that they may make their preparations accordingly.

The time for the election of our city officers is next Monday. Active steps have been taken of late to have all our people naturalized, so that they may be fully qualified as voters. This subject has not received that attention in the past that it will doubtless in the future. While we have a subtle and designing foe to contend with we must take every precaution to maintain our position and influence here and the government which the Lord, thus far, has given unto us. Were the Saints to be negligent in availing themselves of their privileges as American citizens, and not go to the polls and vote, our enemies would be delighted, as such neglect would give them such an opportunity as they desire. There is some talk about their nominating a ticket to run in opposition, but they will accomplish nothing, and it is a glorious consolation to know that they never can obtain any success over the church and kingdom of God unless the Saints should be careless and off their guard.

I have sent a draft by John W. to New York for him to collect and have the money applied to cover any deficiency of funds in the Liverpool office arising from the payment, on your part, of the drafts I have drawn on you. I wish you to keep the money in England that may be paid into the office for emigration purposes, that you may be able, therewith, to meet my drafts on you, and instead of sending over the emigration funds to the agent from that side, as is usual, draw on New York for the necessary amount, and let the agent get the money there. John W. will inform you whom the money will be left with at New York and whom you can draw on there. Should the draft which I have sent not be honored, they will advise me in time to enable me to have funds there by the time you will need them.

General health and peace prevails. The weather is much milder than it has been, and the snow is fast disappearing.

Your family and friends are well.

With love to yourself, family and the elders who are laboring with you, and praying the Lord to bless you, I remain

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated February 27, 1866

One of the responsibilities that devolved upon Brigham Young, Jr., as he took the reins of the European Mission was the publication of the Church periodical in England, the Millennial Star. He declared his intention to write for and edit the periodical, contrary to the policy of Daniel Wells, who had delegated that responsibility to an assistant. "I am desirous of learning how to do these things, and I can never have a better chance," [^55] Brigham wrote his father. His constant drive to overcome his educational failings was at the root of his determination to edit the Star himself. "When I first entered the mission I saw at once that if I wished to make myself useful, I must learn my mother tongue correctly, and with very little exception I have studied grammer pretty faithfully, and more especially for the last two months, but am still dependant on the Sub-editor. How long it will take me to become thoroughly conversant with the English language I know not, but that such a time will arrive I feel confident for I am determined to persevere in my studies." [^56] As he eased into the actual writing of the editorials, he informed his father, "I feel discouraged sometimes in writing editorials because they are very tame, but when ever you want someone else to do that labor, just give me a hint, and I will retire. But I feel it to be my duty, and until I learn it is not I shall continue to fill the editorial columns of the Star." [^57]

President Young's letter of February 27, 1866, assured the young mission president that his course was "wise and satisfactory."

Salt Lake City, February 27, 1866

President Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Since my last letter to you, dated the 18th instant, your favor of January 15th has been received, and the business and other items been duly noted.

I am gratified to read of your welfare and progress, and to notice that you are diligent in attending to the duties which devolve upon you and in seeking to obtain the spirit of your calling and position. There is no reason why you should lack in the least degree the necessary spirit, knowledge and revelation which you require to enable you to magnify your priesthood and fill with honor the station assigned to you. It is a highly responsible calling, that which you now occupy, and your mind should be open at all times to receive the teachings and whisperings of the Spirit, that nothing may be neglected in teaching, counseling, reproving or warning the people, or in regulating the various fields and conferences that would forward the progress of truth or increase the love and understanding of it from growing in the hearts of the people.

So far as I can judge from your letters and the Star, your course in the management of the affairs of the work and the disposition of the elders is wise and satisfactory. You have our prayers and faith continually exercised in your behalf that you may be blessed in your labors and be preserved from every evil.

There has nothing particularly noteworthy occurred here since I last wrote to you. The weather is becoming milder, and good health generally prevails. The news from the East which we have been receiving these past few days is very interesting and spicy and somewhat exciting. Bro. [William H.] Hooper has informed us in his letters that the feeling at Washington was very intense against us, and there was a deep-seated, sullen determination manifested on all hands to strangle the remaining twin [^58] as early as possible. We know what their feelings are as well as they themselves know them. We know that the wicked are uneasy and are plotting continually against the work of God, and the nature of their designs are manifested to us from time to time by the Spirit of God, so that we can be prepared to guard ourselves against their attempts.

Present reports indicate that there are affairs enough of importance to occupy the attention of congressmen at Washington without having any very great amount of spare time to meddle with our business. Our enemies here have been exceedingly jubilant of late in anticipation of the trouble that they have been hoping to bring on us. The train was laid, and as they supposed, it only needed the match to be applied to produce the desired explosion. But they will be disappointed. They will find that when they commence a war with the Almighty and His purposes with a determination to thwart them, they have a power to contend with in the presence of which they are but as vile worms. When they think they have the trap all ready to spring, with the expectation of securing their prey, they will find that the proposed prey is not there.

Measures are being taken at present to organize a company here to supply our northern neighbors in the Territories of Montana and Idaho with flour and other produce at remunerative, yet moderate, prices. It is hoped that if the proposed plan can be fairly carried into operation, it will prevent the unwise competition of our people which has enabled speculators in those Territories to take advantage of them in their dealings. By organization the price can be kept up to something like uniformity, and be a great benefit to our citizens and also to the citizens of the North, as they will not be left to be preyed upon by speculators.

In relation to the chartering of a steamer for the Saints, you had better charter a good sailing vessel or a screw, whichever will answer the best and can be obtained on the best terms.

I am much pleased with the specimen page of the Book of Mormon which you have forwarded. An edition of that size, and in that type, will be very handsome, and I should like marginal notes, if you can obtain them, but if you should have notes arranged, be sure and get as good ones as you can, so that they may be satisfactory.

Your Brother John W. will be with you, I suppose, when you get this. The last word that we heard from the brethren they were at St. Louis, and were well.

With love to yourself and family, John W. and all the elders who are with you, in which the brethren join, and praying the Lord to bless and uphold and preserve you. I remain,

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated May 23, 1866

On April 3, 1866, Brigham Young, Jr., reported the progress of the European Mission under his administration, noting that "inspite of all that I can do, backed as I know that I am by the brethren, baptisms are growing more seldom, and in some instances the people exhibit an apathy that is almost unaccountable." He assured his father that he did not feel discouraged, but in assessing causes for the decline in growth of the mission, he added, "Oh, the corruption that is raging like some terrible epidemic among the people. The primitive innocence so readily found among the rural districts a few years since is fast being replaced by city vices. It seems to me that none are too poor nor too rich to sin—the judge with his perwig [periwig], firey red face and quivering nose, his insufficient legs and gouty toes, rolling homeward in his fine carriage from attending court, exhibits the same markes of disapation that is so indelibly stamped upon the outcast whom he has just sent to the treadmill." [^59]

Having been away from home nearly two years, Brigham received the following letter of May 23 from his father with added joy when he read the invitation it contained to return home for a short visit.

Salt Lake City, May 23, 1866

President Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Your favors of March 27th and April 3rd have been received and the contents duly noted. We have been looking for a letter from you for a few days respecting the chartering of vessels for the Saints, but the mails have been much delayed through bad roads.

Since my last to you, everything has been very peaceable in the city, and we have been enjoying ourselves as well as we do usually. The publication of an ordinance by the city council, giving the marshal authority, upon the warrant of an alderman, to abate illegal liquor saloons, billiard saloons, &c., as nuisances, has created considerable excitement. A petition was signed by about fifteen persons who thought their crafts were in danger from this ordinance, and presented to Colonel [Carrol H.] Potter, commander of the post at Camp Douglas, asking protection from the action of the city council. Col. Potter, accompanied by Captains Grimes and Price, waited upon me on the 8th instant to obtain my promise to the effect that I would prevent the property of gentiles from being destroyed without due process of law. We had considerable conversation, but as I saw there was but little prospect of anything satisfactory being arrived at by such conversation, I requested Col. Potter to communicate his wishes to me in writing, which he promised to do, but which promise he failed to keep, though he did write to me and endeavored to fasten upon me that I had made a pledge to himself and accompanying officers "that the private property of gentile citizens in Salt Lake should not be molested without due course of law." Of course, this was a responsibility that I did not and could not assume; I could not protect the property of gentiles from the thousand and one casualties to which property is subject in this as in all other cities and you would think no person, who entertained the least conception of the duties of citizenship, would make such a request of a private citizen. I had a reply forwarded to him denying the giving of such pledge by me, and reiterating my request to communicate his wishes in writing, and stating that I thought I could answer him satisfactorily. But to this letter no reply was received. There is no doubt that upon consultation with legal friends, shrewder than he, they advised him not to commit himself by communicating to me on paper such requests as he had verbally made of me.

Since receiving this call there has nothing occurred specially worthy of note among the class who felt that they were interfered with by the action of the city council.

The Indians have committed numerous depredations of late, [^60] and have killed several persons in Sanpete and Sevier counties, and one man in Utah County. The people in Piute, Sevier, Sanpete, Wasatch and Summit counties, as well as those living south of the rim of the Basin, have been counseled to abandon their small settlements and move together in bodies of not less than one hundred and fifty men in a place, and to build good, substantial forts for themselves and families and safe corrals for their stock which can be easily protected. This has been counsel which has been invariably given in the formation of new settlements, but the pressure to obtain the privilege of scattering into small settlements where a greed for land and stock could be gratified has been heavy and constant.

Fifty of our young men, well-mounted and well-armed, under the command of Colonel Heber P. Kimball, with a company of a similar number from Provo, have gone to Sanpete and Sevier counties to help the people move together and to guard them against any attack that the red men might feel to make upon them. If the counsel which has been given to the people be strictly observed, these Indian troubles will soon cease and they will sue for peace and stop their depredations.

I have had no word direct from John W. since he left home excepting a few lines which he wrote to me on the eve of his departure for Liverpool. I would like him to write me an account of his travels and visits in the States.

Any time that you should wish to send special word to me upon any subject that you may want to get to me quickly you can write to Bro. William H. Miles, New York, and he can telegraph right through to me and not cost anything. Should you send to him to telegraph me, you must study the words that will convey your ideas in the most compact form, say six, eight, or ten words.

If you should like to leave John W. in England and come home on a visit this next winter—say start from there in July or August—and can leave the mission in such a condition that the affairs and business will suffer no injury during your absence, I should have no objections to your coming. This you can do if at any time you should want to come. Bro. Orson [Pratt] could take charge as well as not, and attend to all the business of the mission, writing for the Star, &c., if he would only adhere strictly to the counsel which was given in my last letter. It would be more pleasing to John W. to have you stay there until he comes home, and as you have a wife you can stay there pretty well; still, if you should like to slip over for a little while you can do so.

Enclosed I send you two cards containing our new alphabet. I wish to have a fount of long primer type cast in the new alphabet by Messrs. Miller and Richard, Edinburgh. The lowercase letters should be smaller in the face than the body of the type, so that when the capitals are cast the full size of the body, the same proportion may be maintained between the capitals and lowercase letters in the new alphabet that now exists in the old or Roman that we now use. In the letters which we send you on the card, you will notice that the thick and fine lines are not uniform, that is, the thick strokes are not of uniform thickness, and the thin strokes of a uniform fineness. In making the punches, this irregularity should be avoided, and the coarse and fine strokes be made uniform as they are in the present Roman letters.

Before the fount is cast I wish to receive a specimen of the letters to inspect them and satisfy myself about their form; if they do not suit me, I do not want them. We did order a fount of this new alphabet east in the States, but the work was so miserably done, and the type made such a poor appearance in print that it has done as much as anything else to create a prejudice against the alphabet. We do not want to have such a failure in this fount which I now order, as there was in that. I send this order to you to have it filled by Messrs. Miller and Richard, having understood that they are very responsible and do good work, in the hope that this type will be finished in the best possible style. The letter should be clear, sharp and distinct. You can give them the necessary guaranty that we will take the punches &c., so that they need be under no expense in this experiment that they will not get paid for, if the work is done to suit in a good, workmanlike manner.

Bro. Orson should be a good judge of this work, both of the shape of the letters and of good type.

Your family and John W.'s are well. The children are feeling very fine; they say they used to want to see Pa and Ma very much, but they do not feel that time is so long with them now as it was.

The folks all join me in love to you and family. Give my love to John W. and Brother Orson Pratt and all the elders.

May the Lord bless you and all the faithful is the prayer of your father.

Brigham Young

Letter dated June 15, 1866

Not the least of the challenges facing Brigham Young, Jr., in his administration of the European Mission was supervision of the yearly emigration of Saints from Europe to the United States, a task that required the provisioning and chartering of ships and the organizing of traveling companies. Plans for the emigration necessarily began early in the year so that emigrants might arrive on the frontier of America in time to cross the plains before bad weather. After the departure of Daniel Wells, Brigham handled the emigration of 1866 alone. Much of his time in the early months of that year was taken in emigration matters. "It has been an eventful period in my life," he wrote his father, "and I had but little experience to bring to bear against the multiplicity of business which accumulated on every side, but with the approving smile of our God thus far have I been successful, and I do verily know that it is possible to do whatsoever He may command if we but do it in His name. I have been blessed far above what I could have hoped; men have almost invariably yielded to my terms, and what occasionally loomed up before me like a high mountain, has dwindled to a mere mole hill when I have asked the Lord to open the way." [^61]

One difficulty facing the mission leader in the spring of 1866 was the scarcity of ships. The business manager of the British shipping firm Guion and Company informed him in March that "vessels have not for many years been as scarce as they are at present." [^62] The scarcity was due to severe storms that had prevailed upon the ocean: within one week 90 vessels were reported wrecked upon the shores of England, and during the first three months of the year 568 vessels were lost at sea. "We hear of shipwrecks every day," wrote Brigham Jr. "Many large vessels have gone down with two or three hundred people on board in mid-ocean, and several of these vessels have been first class steamers supposed to be capable of riding out any gale providing they had plenty of sea room." [^63]

After seeing 3,327 Saints safely leave the shores of Great Britain, and an additional 1,100 depart from Denmark, Brigham Jr. summarized his first experience directing Church emigration in a letter to his father: "When first commencing the business of this years emigration, I trembled for the result. . . . I do verily know that it would have been utterly impossible for me to have accomplished the work required at my hands if the Lord had not softened men's hearts and opened the way that vessels were obtained. Many times have mountains loomed up before me, and I had fainted only that I know in whom to put my trust. The clouds which seemed so oppressive, have melted away . . . and I could smile on what a few moments before seemed insurmountable obstacles. . . ." [^64]

Salt Lake City, June 15, 1866

President Brigham Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Your welcome favor of May 8th containing the intelligence of the sailing of the John Bright and the Caroline, has been received, and been perused with interest. We have been anxious to hear from you and about affairs in your field, emigration, &c., and the receipt of your letter has relieved the anxiety. It is gratifying to read your description of your efforts to obtain ships, and the signal manner in which you have been blessed in securing suitable vessels upon, what may be considered this year, reasonable terms to carry our people. You are obtaining an experience now that cannot fail to be of great benefit to you. We have remembered you constantly in our prayers asking the Lord to open your way in obtaining ships and to bless you in all your labors. The Lord is kind and merciful and never forsakes nor forgets His children who put their trust in Him.

Encouraging reports have reached us respecting the progress of the teams which have gone down to bring up the poor, and we hope that, under the blessing of the Lord, all the trains with the Saints will reach this place early in the fall.

The weather until the last day or two has been remarkably cool and stormy for this latitude. Since the severe storm to which I alluded in my last, we have had considerable rain, and as a consequence the streams are very high; Jordan has never been so high since our settlement here as it is at present. The weather now is fine, and gives promise of being more seasonable than it has been.

President [Daniel H.] Wells started for San Pete County on Monday, the 11th instant, with a company of twenty-five men; he will push forward as energetically as possible the fortifying of the settlements, that the people may be able to dwell secure from Indian depredations and attacks. On Sunday last, the 10th, the Indians made a raid on Round Valley, Millard Co., and drove off 150 head of cattle and 5 horses, and killed Father [James] Ivie and another man. They moved eastward with the stock. At the crossing of the Sevier Gen. W[illiam] B. Pace, who was out with a scouting party of 25 men, fell in with them on Monday, the 11th, and a fight ensued. Though the brethren were outnumbered three to one, without counting the Indians who were guarding the stock, they succeeded in inflicting severe loss on the Indians, and, what is worthy of notice, though compelled to fight on the open ground, and part of the time under a heavy cross fire, they lost neither a man nor a horse, one of the brethren only being shot in the leg, but not so seriously as to disable him from active service. The Indians were too numerous for the brethren to recover the stock. Col. Heber P. Kimball's command came up that evening and on the morning of the 12th a command of about 86 men started for Grass Valley—the rendezvous of the Indians. We are expecting intelligence from them every hour. Since Bro. Wells started, upwards of 80 men have started from this city to San Pete Co. The bands of Indians which surround us do not countenance the acts of this predatory band of outlaws. The success of Black Hawk, and the few who were with him, in murder and robbery last season, has enabled him to collect a band of renegade Indians who hope, under his leadership, to gratify their murderous and thievish propensities. They are not a tribe, neither is Black Hawk a recognized chief, but they are banded together for purposes of plunder. It is hoped that their operations will be speedily checked.

Everything is quiet in the city, and good health generally prevails. The prospects for fruit and grain crops continue good. The families of the elders are well so far as known. Accept my love to yourself and folks, and give my love to John W., Bro. Orson [Pratt] and all the other elders in which the brethren here join. Praying the Lord to uphold and prosper you, I remain your father,

Brigham Young

[Postscript contains drafts on the Liverpool Office]

Letter dated August 11, 1866

Having been informed that his brother John W. had been called to serve a mission in England and would leave New York about March 10, Brigham Young, Jr., became increasingly watchful for his arrival as April dawned. "My eyes are weak looking for him, and I often think of the old adage 'hope defered maketh the heart sick,' but I manage to comfort myself with the idea that he won't be over a month longer, and that will soon pass. I imagine sometimes that when I see John, I shall to some extent behold wife, children, father, mother, brothers and sisters and the friends whom I have not seen for almost two years, all wrapt up in Johnny." [^65]

John W. arrived in England on April 14 and five days later the two brothers left for Denmark on business connected with the Scandinavian emigration. During this trip they also visited Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia. While in Denmark they caught a brief glimpse of European royalty when the king of that country and the crown prince of Russia (who was there to wed the king's daughter), arrived in Copenhagen. Brigham described the spectacle for his father: "They seemed very much like other people, and when I saw the King of Denmark stumble on the stairs I thought him rather more clumsy than men generally are. We also saw the crown prince of Russia talking with a lady, and he seemed somewhat embarrassed twirling his hat in a rather undignified stile." He concluded, "It is the mind that makes the man, Royal birth alone never can." [^66]

In his letter of August 11 President Young expressed his delight at his sons' opportunity for further travel and education in the nations of Europe.

Salt Lake City, August 11, 1866

President Brigham Young, Jr., and

Elder John W. Young

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Sons,

As your Brother Oscar, with Elders F[ranklin] D. Richards and N[icholas] Groesbeck, start to England to fill missions on Monday next, the 13th instant, I take the opportunity of writing to you. Your favors of July 4th, written at Christiania, Norway, were received a few days ago, and have been perused with pleasure. Your travels, as you describe them, and your visits to various places of interest must afford you much pleasure, and you should appreciate the opportunities which you now have sufficiently to profit by all that you see and are brought in contact with. Had I the privilege of traveling in the old world, and visiting the various countries and mingling with the different peoples, I should enjoy such opportunities very much. In these respects the young men of our people who go abroad have many advantages over their fathers. When we visited Europe we could not travel very extensively; the want of means prevented our visiting places that did not lay in our path in calling upon the people to repent. Affairs have changed very much since that time.

Since my last (the 30th ult.) Bro. [Daniel H.] Wells has returned from San Pete in good health and spirits. Washakie and upwards of two hundred of his tribe came a few days ago into the city to see me and renew our friendly intercourse. He and his chiefs feel very fine. We fed them well, and they seemed much gratified by their treatment.

We have had uncommonly heavy rains for the past few days which, added to the rain that fell during the previous week, is likely to do considerable damage to hay and grain. The weather has seemed to be more like English weather than that which we usually have here at this season.

Those companies which have started on their return here with the emigrating Saints are, so far as heard from, making good progress on their journey. The first company, Capt. Thos. E. Ricks', passed Sweetwater bridge today. His is the second company. We hear that the last company left New York for the frontiers on the 1st instant, and we are daily expecting to hear of their arrival at Wyoming and their departure on to the Plains.

Our home telegraph poles are set and are ready for the wire which is being brought by the teams. We have ordered 500 miles of wire with insulators, &c. The new telegraph line wire is being stretched from this city to San Francisco, and another line is being put up between here and Montana. A railroad route is to be surveyed from here to the falls of Snake River this fall. The party is now engaged in surveying from the point where they discontinued their labor last year west of this city to Carson Valley. They are pushing the road rapidly from the east and west. It will soon be up to Fort Kearney [Nebraska] and it is the intention at present to have the road finished up to Julesburg by spring, and to have the gap completed that is now open in Iowa. Should this expectation be realized, there will be direct railroad communication between New York and Julesburg.

From the reports which reach us we judge that at our present outfitting point the people in the neighborhood are far from being our friends. The cattle of one of our trains were seized for damages because they were running on the open prairie, but which was claimed by a person to be his grass land. They also attached the telegraph wire that we had there, on a trumped-up claim of indebtedness on the part of myself, Bros. [Heber C.] Kimball, [Newel K.] Whitney and [Parley P.] Pratt, said to have been contracted in Kirtland about thirty years ago. The wire &c., were only released and permitted to come on by the brethren giving bonds. There was no indebtedness of my contracting left unsettled, and none of the other brethren's of which we can get any knowledge. The whole proceeding is a swindle, and designed to vex and annoy and rob us.

We are expecting Capt. [William H.] Hooper and Bro. [Thomas B. H.] Stenhouse home from the States tomorrow. Gen. John E. Smith, the new Assessor of U.S. Internal Revenue for this Territory, is their fellow traveler.

Everything is moving on smoothly and quietly in the city. General health and peace prevail, and all are as busy at work as bees. Your families are all well; Clara [Stenhouse Young] is quite recovered, and is able to be about as usual. Your mother's health is also usually good. Luna [Young Thatcher] was safely delivered of a fine boy on yesterday morning; the mother and child are both doing well. The elders' families, so far as known, are in good health.

I desire to remind you again on the subject of tithing and the emigration fund. The importance of these duties should be kept constantly before the people. A neglect of these will bring condemnation to all who are guilty. We are living in a day, and at a time, when all persons especially who profess to be Latter-day Saints, should stretch forth their hands and exert themselves to roll forth the work of God and to establish His righteousness. The Saints in Zion have shown their faith by their works, and they are witnessing constantly unto the heavens and the earth that they love the work of God. This year alone the cost of the outfit sent to the frontiers to bring up the poor Saints is but little, if any, less than half a million of dollars. This amount is ventured ungrudgingly and without murmuring. Besides this, there are the other numerous calls to be responded to. These Indian troubles have called away hundreds of our young, able-bodied men from their labor at a time, too, when their services have been most needed. Altogether these expeditions have been a very serious tax upon the entire people in spending valuable time and furnishing outfits which in this country are very expensive. Beside these labors, there have been poles for five hundred miles of telegraph line got out and erected, and money furnished in part and the remainder by myself for the wire, insulators, &c., &c. Then there are roads to build and keep in repair, water ditches and canals to open, school houses to erect, and a great variety of other public labors to attend to, all of which the people of Zion go to with their might to perform. It is a noticeable fact that the more they do the more they are able to do—their exertions increase their capacities and abilities. To keep pace with the people of Zion and to be one with them the people abroad must make corresponding exertions according to their ability in their own behalf and the behalf of the work of God.

Wherever you want Bro. Franklin's [D. Richards] help you can use him. He, as well as Bro. Orson [Pratt], is accustomed to emigration and the other business of the mission, and they both can operate to advantage.

The new tabernacle is being pushed ahead, but the lateness of the season and the heavy rains have retarded the getting out of lumber and delayed the work.

We have but few troops here at present, and they are regulars. [Patrick E.] Connor is out of the service, and is here now as plain "Pat" engaged in mining business, which, as government pap has been withdrawn, will very likely, if he pursue it diligently, burst him up financially. Col. [John E.] Smith still continues friendly. We have had quite an influx of lawyers into the city of late. Like the birds of prey they snuff the carcass from afar. Business is poor where they have been, but they imagine that with the land claims and other business the enemies of the truth promise them here, they will reap an abundant harvest. Armies have not been found to operate well in breaking us up, but it is now hoped that vexatious lawsuits and setting up and enforcing claims for our land may do it.

Your mother and all the family join me in love to you. Presidents [Heber C.] Kimball and [Daniel H.] Wells and Bro. Geo. Q. [Cannon] send their love to you; remember us to Bro. Orson and all the elders.

Praying the Lord to endow you richly with His grace and to make you equal to the performance of every duty,

I remain, your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated March 28, 1867

In response to his father's invitation on May 23 to return home on a brief visit during the winter of 1866-67, Brigham Young, Jr., left his wife and a newborn son in England and departed for home on September 19. On the eve of his departure he reported on conditions in the mission: "the people will not hear the Gospel." [^67] The few who were being baptized, he noted, were mainly from among those who had once been in the Church. He wrote that the mood of the people was ugly—that fear of the hangman was the only thing that restrained them from shedding blood of the missionaries. "The hatred which they bear [toward] the servants of God is quite as deep and bitter as that manifested by the American nation." But, he concluded, "the brethren as a general thing do not feel discouraged, but on the contrary redouble their exertions hoping to see some fruits of their labors, but many of them have been thus far disappointed. Perhaps it may be like bread thrown upon the waters, seen after many days. But it is the opinion of some that the bread has been thrown into the mud and will be seen no more." [^68]

While crossing the Atlantic on September 24 Brigham experienced one of the storms that had wreaked such havoc with shipping, some 1500 vessels having been sunk during the first nine months of the year. "The waves are mountains high. The vessel is shipping seas both fore and aft. At 9 p.m. the wheel house tiller and compass were stove to atoms, severely injuring two of the men, washing one of them clear out onto the upper deck. Also our bowsprit was swept away carrying the foretop gallant mast. The Capt[ain] had another tiller which was connected with the rudder, so that we were soon all right again. The sea is breaking over the vessel, and it seems at times as though she would not be able to rise from the watery grave in which she is litterally buried. There were none of the passengers whom I heard express themselves at retiring, that expected ever [to] see another sun. It was all I could do to keep my faith perfect. Nothing but the power of the Lord did save us. The Capt. did not leave the deck for two days. I prayed fervently for deliverance, and the Lord heard my prayers and comforted my heart."

The next day the storm continued: "The gale is fearful this morning, and the vessel looks very like a wreck. The sea looks like mountains and is one sheet of foam. The motion of the vessel is fearful, and we are making very little headway. For two days the saloon was wholly closed, and we were deprived of fresh air. The water was reported two feet deep in the steerage and many of the cabin passengers were washed out of their berths. We continue to ship immense seas. Towards night the storm was much abated. People have found who I am and Mormonism is on the topic. Many men are making enquiries. I have been respectfully treated thus far." [^69]

Brigham Jr. arrived in Salt Lake City on October 10. After the harrowing experience at sea, his exuberance upon seeing his home is understandable: "Oh! how glorious the valleys and the mountains surrounding them looked after an absence of nearly three years," he records in his diary. "My father met me with every expression of love and kindness, and the spirit of the Lord manifested unto me that my labors were accepted. What joy to meet again wife and children, father, mother, brothers and sisters, relatives and friends. How shall I sufficiently thank my father and my God for all the blessings which suround me. Oh! Lord give me strength to show my gratitude by a long life of faithful service that I may dwell eternally with Thee is the greatest desire of my heart." [^70]

Brigham Young, Jr., spent the winter of 1866-67 in Salt Lake City, during which time he was present in deliberations of the Quorum of Twelve and was named to the exclusive Council of Fifty, an organization that had been created in the days of Joseph Smith as a forerunner of the political kingdom of God. Although his father had given him an option to remain at home or return to England, he chose the latter course of action in order to present his successor in Europe with orderly and well-balanced accounts. He departed from Salt Lake City on February 4, traveling in deep snow that slowed his progress. Even aboard a train powered by two locomotives, he found that progress was measured. As the train plowed its way eastward through snowdrifts, "the concussions were sometimes terrific and then we would become stationary—powerless to retreat or advance, until the road was cleared by shoveling." [^71] He finally arrived in New York late in February and after a short trip to Washington, D.C., continued on to England.

President Brigham Young's letter of March 28 was written ten days after Brigham Jr. arrived back in England. The document reveals that in addition to four of Brigham Young's sons—Joseph A., Brigham Jr., John W., and Oscar Brigham—who had labored or were then laboring as missionaries in England, another, Brigham Heber, was about to be sent there.

Salt Lake City, March 28, 1867

President B. Young, Jr.

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Your letters of the 18th and 24 written from Chicago, New York, and Washington have all reached me though the two former have been much delayed. We have been much pleased to hear respecting your movements, as with the exception of the telegram you sent on your arrival in New York, we had not heard a word from you yourself, or through Brother [William H.] Hooper. I hope you have had a pleasant trip across the ocean, and that you found your family, John W., and the other elders well.

It is our intention to send a number of elders from here at this spring conference, and as we mean to hurry them over, so that they will probably reach England in time, I would like you and John W. to remain till their arrival and see them distributed. You will then have the most pleasant part of the summer in which to cross the ocean and come home. As soon as they are appointed I shall forward you a list of their names. I expect that your Bro. Heber B. will be one of the co[mpany]. Myself and President [Daniel H.] Wells, and Elders G[eorge] A. Smith and Geo. Q. Cannon have been holding a two day meeting at Grantsville, Tooele Co. They have a very fine new meetinghouse there in which the people can be comfortably assembled. The meetings were very much enjoyed by all, both speakers and hearers, and much valuable instruction was given; the Spirit leading us to speak particularly upon the subjects of union, and obedience in temporal matters, and sustaining ourselves, and withdrawing support from our enemies, and combining for the purchase of machinery to engage more extensively in home manufacturers.

The weather still continues very cold for the season. We have had considerable snow this last week, and the mountains are covered down below their bases. We had snow and very bad roads going to Grantsville, and in returning we traveled through a snow storm till we reached the confines of the city; being prepared for such a contingency, however, we suffered no special inconvenience.

I have just received a letter from two young relatives of mine, named respectively, Catherine Morton, and Gertrude F. Lewis, their address is P.O. Box 114, Chicago, Ill. They are granddaughters of two of my mother's cousins. They express a desire to come to Utah. Though they are both young, they say they are obliged to depend on their own labors for a living, and are qualified to teach piano music, and one can teach school. Both have had some experience as teachers. I shall write them today and give them the P.O. address at New York where, to the care of Bro. [William H.] Miles, they can write you and John W. and inform you what their address is &c. I shall inform them that if they wish to come to the valley they can do so when you return.

Peace and good health are general here. Your family and John W.'s, and your mother and the folks are enjoying usual health. They all join in sending love to you, John W., Oscar B., Katie [Catherine Spencer Young] and the elders.

It is very cheering to get such news from Oscar, and I hope through perseverance and the favorable circumstances in which he is now placed that he will improve himself and acquire an education, for he will be very useful in the ministry.

You will please attend to what I have written respecting our relatives in Chicago; they are distant relatives, but still I would like to have you treat them as your cousins.

Praying the Lord to bless and preserve you, and to bring you home in safety,

I am your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated May 21, 1867

Between the time Brigham Young, Jr., returned to England on March 18 and his final departure from the mission on June 29, 1867, he had organized the year's emigration and traveled twice to Paris, France, having been selected by the Utah Legislature to deliver Utah products to the Paris Exposition that year. On both visits to the French capital he went out of his way for a look at European heads of state, which he delighted to describe to his father. In Paris with his brother John W. on May 5, he watched the Emperor Napoleon parade his troops at the Imperial Palace. "He was cheered by the crowd, and the troops followed him with loving eyes, and altho' the French idolize him, yet that cannot keep him from growing old, and it is the opinion of many that he will not live many years longer." [^72]

A month later Brigham was at the northern railroad station in Paris when Napoleon met William, the "grisly old King of Prussia," and the crown prince. "The King appeared a hard featured old sinner, and neither did I like the looks of his son. His countenance did not forshaddow a noble mind, but was rather the harbinger of selfishness and contracted ideas." [^73] As the two leaders drove away seated side-by-side, he expressed amazement that "these two individuals, who were aching to fight each other six weeks ago, had found a state carriage large enough for them and two others." [^74]

The following day Brigham paid twelve francs for a seat to witness the royal review at the Bois de Boulogne. Unbeknown, the price also included the view of an assassination attempt on the lives of the two rulers. After watching a grand charge by some ten thousand cavalry, with helmets and cutlasses glittering in the sun, Brigham saw a "lunatic pole" suddenly take aim and fire at the two emperors. Only quick action by an officer who plunged his horse into the line of fire—embedding the bullet in the animal's head and splattering the royal personages with blood-saved them from serious injury or death. Brigham also noticed the pistol burst in the hand of the would-be assassin, "tearing off two of his fingers." [^75]

Upon returning to England, Brigham Young, Jr., terminated his presidency of the European Mission with a valedictory sermon on June 23. Accompanied by his wife and two children, he sailed six days later for America.

The letter of President Young of May 21, 1867, was the last of his correspondence with this son during the latter's British Mission.

Salt Lake City, May 21, 1867

President B. Young, Jr., and John W. Young

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Sons,

Your favors of March 13 and 28 were received by me on my return from the South whither I had been absent twenty-four days, and have been perused with much pleasure. I write now in hopes that my letter will reach you before you leave Liverpool, as you advise me that you intend to sail on the 29th June. I am depending on your advising me what time you will be at the terminus of the railroad and what you will be likely to need there. My advice is that you buy your own vehicles to ride home in. You probably contemplate stopping in the States to visit your own and Katie's [Catherine Spencer Young] relatives; if so, a telegram from New York may reach me sufficiently early to enable me to have you met at the railroad terminus if it is needed. I calculate there will be a train there for freight between the first and fifteenth of July.

Your brother Heber is about starting from this city on his mission, the train with which he is going down started a day or two ago. He intends to go out with Heber P. Kimball and overtake it. You will probably meet him in New York. I am sure he will be very glad to see you, and you him. Encourage Oscar in his labors; tell him to persevere, seek for wisdom and do right and he will overcome. His family are well. I trust your voyage over will be pleasant to yourselves and Katie and the children, and that you will have a safe and prosperous journey home. Our faith and prayers will be exercised, as they always are, in your behalf.

We have had an exceedingly pleasant trip to Saint George and back. We held thirty-four meetings, at most of which I addressed the people, besides having several councils and attending to considerable other business. The trip was a fatiguing one, though I endured it very well. I suffered on my return with a boil on my ankle, which still troubles me a little.

You have doubtless seen the confession published by Bro. A[masa] M. Lyman. On his return south I was informed that he had conveyed the idea to the people that he had been pinched to make this confession, and that his views were unchanged. His case was investigated as we went south, and it was decided to cut him off from the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and to take his priesthood from him. His erroneous teachings have been found to be more extensive than was imagined.

We had a fine rain on Saturday night and Sunday last which was very timely as everything was very dry. Scarcely a drop of rain had fallen during our absence from the city. The prospects for fruit and crops are very good, though in the north we hear that the grasshoppers are very numerous, whether they do damage or not, however, will be as the Lord wills.

Times are dull and there is but little demand for flour or grain. The merchants on Whiskey St. can scarcely get enough day by day to pay their rents. The people manifest the strongest disposition we have ever witnessed to carry into effect the counsels which have been given respecting the Word of Wisdom and obedience in temporal as well as spiritual matters. There has been no coercion used, no covenants required. The principle has been set forth and the people seemed prepared to receive and carry it out willingly. Peace and good health prevail throughout the Territory.

Your mother and your families and all the folks are well and all join with me in love to you. Give my love to Oscar, Katie, Bros. Franklin [D. Richards] and Orson [Pratt] (if he has not sailed) and all the elders, in which Presdts. [Heber C.] Kimball and [Daniel H.] Wells and Bro. Geo. Q. [Cannon] join, and praying the Lord to bless and preserve you all and bring you home in safety.

I am your father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Thomas L. Kane to Brigham Young, 12 October 1871. Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^2] Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon to Charles W. Penrose, 25 April 1888, Woodruff Letter Book, pp. 253-57.
[^3] Although his methods of building Zion occasionally ran counter to those of his associates, and he ultimately fell short of his goal, John W. Young undeviatingly affirmed his dedication to the cause. To the First Presidency in 1887 he wrote, "I know I am plain spoken, and at times may seem ultra in expressions, and perhaps say things in a way that may not always be agreeable; but underneath these superficial expressions I have a most intense desire to serve the cause we love so well, and to labor for it in that way and manner that will best subserve the interest of our Heavenly Father." John W. Young to John Taylor and George Q. Cannon, 11 July 1887. John W.'s private secretary noted, "He often explained many things of the past, of his great love for this great work and this people how that all he was doing for it and them, and he wanted to place this great work in a better light to the people of the world." John M. Whitaker, Diary, 15 September 1888. University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^4] John W. Young to Lorenzo Snow, 23 September 1898.
[^5] Blessing given to John W. Young by Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Daniel H. Wells, reported by George D. Watt. John W. Young Papers.
[^6] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 21 April 1863.
[^7] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 24 June 1863.
[^8] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 13 March 1864.
[^9] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 11 April 1864.
[^10] Instructions regarding the labors of John W. in England are noted in the letter of Brigham Young to Brigham Young, Jr., 22 January 1866.
[^11] John W. Young to Brigham Young 9 May 1866. Even at the end of his life, living in near poverty, John W. appeared in public meticulously dressed in his frock coat and pin stripes.
[^12] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866. Not a holograph, probably dictated to John T. Caine.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Ibid. See also Journal History, 27 March 1866.
[^15] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866.
[^16] Undated newsclipping from the Auburn Advertiser accompanying John W. Young's letter to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866. John W.'s errand in Auburn also received notice in a Cincinnati newspaper. See Journal History, 25 April 1866.
[^17] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866.
[^18] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 18 September 1866.
[^19] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 15 December 1866.
[^20] Ibid. Shortly before the end of his mission, while in France with his brothers Brigham Jr. and Oscar, John W. saw the French monarch Napoleon at the Paris Exhibition. In a letter to his father he gave his impressions of the king: "The more I see of the world and those that call themselves the wise and great of the earth, the more my heart beats with joy to know that there is something on the earth that is really and truly worth living for, for outside of the Kingdom it seems worse than dros to me. I must say tho' that the first person I thought of while looking at Napoleon was my dear Father, for the bearing and form were so much like yours that it brought immediately your form before me. Napoleon seemed much care-worn and looked to me as if he could not bear up the cares of state much longer, unless there should be a change for the better." John W. Young to Brigham Young, 18 April 1867.
[^21] "John W. Young Interviewed," Millennial Star 35 (9 September 1873): 566.
[^22] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 30 August 1873.
[^23] Brigham Young to John W. Young, 13 November 1874. John W. Young Papers.
[^24] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 21 August 1875. Sentiments of love and esteem characterize John W. Young's writings to his parents. During his mission to England in 1866 he wrote to his father after a long delay: "I seat myself to write to you and it is with great pleasure that I do so because I not only love you as a Father but, respect and honor you as a Prophet of God. . . . I know that you have a great amount of business to continually tax your mind, therefore I do not wish to thrust my communications upon you any oftener than they will be acceptable; if I do not write often enough, all you have to do is to say the word and I will write more frequently than I have done for I always esteem it a great privilege to do so." John W. Young to Brigham Young, 22 August 1866. From New York City in June 1871 John W. penned these lines on the eve of his father's birthday: "I seat myself to pen a few lines in commemoration of the day and to show, although in a far distant city, my thoughts fly back to my dear mountain home to my father whom I honor, love, and desire to obey. The day has been crowded with business but nevertheless my remembrance of you has been in the foreground of everything for I reverence the anniversary of the day that gave you birth, and if my sincere prayers avail anything, your days will yet be many on the earth." John W. Young to Brigham Young, 1 June 1871.
[^25] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 22 November 1875.
[^26] John M. Whitaker, Diary, 11 February 1889. University of Utah. Those who knew John W. Young were impressed with his striking personality. Seven workers who had labored under him laying track for the Utah Central Railroad in 1869 publicly acknowledged him in the pages of the Deseret News: "We take this opportunity of making known to you the admiration we feel for you, as a brother and a gentleman, and for the devotion and gentlemanly manner in which you have looked after our comfort and happiness, and also for the example you have set us as a servant of God." Deseret News, 27 January 1870. John M. Whitaker wrote, "He is a wonderful man, kind, considerate, lovable, gracious, never knows defeat, takes his problems to the Lord, prays about them, seeks divine aid, and is always saying, 'Brother Whitaker, all is for the Kingdom of God.' At other times when aroused, he is like a lion, courageous, brave, fearless, proud, persuasive and very much misunderstood. It seems his great incentive is for human advancement and happiness. . . . He moves among great men with an ease I have seldom seen. One day while we were waiting at the elevator at Exchange Place, it happened to be full and as it passed by him, President Bell, Manager of the Manhatten Club, one of the most exclusive in New York, was asked by another gentleman, 'Mr. Bell, who was that gentleman waiting at the door of the elevator?' Mr. Bell answered, 'That was President Brigham Young's oldest son, and a more perfect gentleman I have never known.'" John M. Whitaker, Diary, 29 March 1889.
[^27] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 22 November 1875.
[^28] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 29 December 1875; 3 January 1876.
[^29] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 14-15 March 1876.
[^30] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 21 March 1876.
[^31] This holograph letter is dated April 7, 1875, which is undoubtedly an error as to the year, since reference to the death of Joseph A. Young, who died August 5, 1875, would require a date after that event.
[^32] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 10 November 1876.
[^33] 33. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 27 August 1863.
[^34] 34. Ibid., 6 July 1862.
[^35] 35. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 12 November 1862.
[^36] 36. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 4 February 1863.
[^37] 37. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 22 April 1863.
[^38] 38. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 21 June 1863.
[^39] 39. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 5 July 1863.
[^40] 40. Ibid.
[^41] 41. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 21 June 1864.
[^42] 42. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 25 November 1865.
[^43] 43. The Union Vedette was a non-Mormon newspaper published at Fort Douglas. The first issue appeared November 30, 1863. On January 5, 1864, the Vedette became the first daily newspaper in Utah.
[^44] 44. Men of General Patrick E. Connor's command from Camp Douglas had discovered gold- and silver-bearing ore in Bingham Canyon west of Salt Lake City in 1863.
[^45] 45. Big Canyon, east of Salt Lake City, was later named Parley's Canyon after Parley P. Pratt.
[^46] 46. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 2 October 1862.
[^47] 47. Address at general council of European Mission held in Birmingham, England, in January 1866. British Mission History, 5 January 1866. MS.
[^48] 48. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 4 September 1862.
[^49] 49. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 5 October 1862.
[^50] 50. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 13 October 1862.
[^51] 51. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 18 May 1865.
[^52] 52. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 7 June 1865.
[^53] 53. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 19 September 1865.
[^54] 54. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 7 March 1866.
[^55] 55. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 19 September 1865.
[^56] 56. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 20 February 1866.
[^57] 57. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 16 March 1866.
[^58] 58. At the time of its inception in 1856, the Republican Party announced as one of the planks in its platform the eradication of those twin relics of barbarism—slavery and polygamy. Following the U.S. Civil War, which terminated slavery, the nation's lawmakers turned their attention to the "strangling of the remaining twin." The best treatment of the subject is Richard Poll's "The Twin Relic: a Study of Mormon Polygamy and the Campaign by the Government of the United States for Its Abolition, 1852-1890" (Master's Thesis, Texas Christian University, 1939).
[^59] 59. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 3 April 1866.
[^60] 60. At this time, Utah was embroiled in its costliest Indian war. The Black Hawk War commenced in April 1865 in Sanpete County. When the conflict ended three years later, seventy-five settlers had been killed and twenty-five settlements abandoned in five counties. At one time some 2500 men of the territorial militia were in the field, and expenses were incurred in excess of one and a half million dollars.
[^61] 61. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 8 May 1866.
[^62] 62. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 27 March 1866.
[^63] 63. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 17 January 1866, 26 March 1866.
[^64] 64. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 9 June 1866. Faced with the prospect of sending one company of emigrants on the Constitution—an inferior vessel—Brigham approached Guion and Company seeking to charter a better ship, the John Bright. At first the company "utterly refused" to consider his request, stating that they already had 700 passengers booked for the John Bright. "I went from their office feeling that if the Lord wanted our people to sail on the 'Constitution' (for I had found out that she was what they call a very wet ship) that He would temper the winds and the waves. I had scarcely got out of sight before Mr. Norris—Guion's business man—overtook me, stating that I might have the ship 'John Bright' . . . as fine a vessel as sails out of the port of L-pool." Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 8 May 1866.
[^65] 65. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 3 April 1866.
[^66] 66. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 21 June 1866.
[^67] 67. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 19 September 1866.
[^68] 68. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 28 August 1866.
[^69] 69. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 24-25 September 1866.
[^70] 70. Ibid., 25 October 1866.
[^71] 71. Ibid., 15 February 1867.
[^72] 72. Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 5 May 1867.
[^73] 73. Ibid., 5 June 1867.
[^74] 74. Brigham Young, Jr., to Brigham Young, 5 June 1867.
[^75] 75. Ibid., 6 June 1867.
