Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

John Willard Young

1844-1924

On February 11, 1924, John Willard Young, the third son of Brigham and Mary Ann Angell Young, died in an obscure apartment house overlooking Broadway in New York City, where he had supported himself as an elevator operator during the closing years of his life. The obscurity of his final years was not characteristic of his life. Motivated by an intense desire to build up Zion and break down the prejudice that existed against the Latter-day Saints, John W.'s life was an ambitious succession of business enterprises, promotional schemes, and church service that extended from Mexico's Pacific coast to the financial capitals of Europe. Possessed of a suave, flamboyant personality, expensive tastes, and unexcelled drive and determination, John W. admitted that in some instances he had been unwise and overzealous, creating some of the prejudice he had sought to dispel, but he maintained a staunch loyalty to the Latter-day Saints and died asserting that all he did in life was in their interest. "In the character of John W. Young, I find zeal and discretion combined," wrote Thomas L. Kane to Brigham Young after personally meeting the President's son. "His prepossessing appearance and address introduce him favorably to the most prejudiced. I know no one whom you can employ to more advantage for intermediary oral communications. I have given him my own confidence. He loves you." [^1]

Born in Nauvoo, Illinois, on October 1, 1844, John W. was four years old when his family arrived in the newly settled Salt Lake Valley. In 1857, at age twelve, he accompanied his father on the expedition to Fort Limhi on the headwaters of the Columbia River. That same year, having organized a juvenile detachment of the Nauvoo Legion, John led his uniformed cohort of fifty peers in review before the Saints congregated in Big Cottonwood Canyon at the 24th of July celebration. He also performed messenger service between Salt Lake City and militia encampments in Echo Canyon during the Utah War. In succeeding years he hauled poles for the transcontinental telegraph line and labored on the construction of the Salt Lake Theatre. In 1862 he enlisted with Robert T. Burton's command, which had been called to protect the overland mail and telegraph lines from Indian depredations. Struggling through deep snow and intense cold, Burton's men faced almost certain annihilation at one point of their campaign when Crow Indians stole all of their horses. John was one of several men who tracked the thieves and recovered the animals.

John Young's introduction to the New York business world, where he was to spend much of the remainder of his life, came in 1863-64 when he assisted Horace Eldredge, William Staines, and his brother Joseph A. Young in the Church immigration business.

Although ordained an apostle by his father on November 22, 1855, at age eleven, John W. was never included as a member of the Quorum of Twelve. At nineteen he was appointed an assistant counselor to the First Presidency. Subsequently, he labored as a missionary in England, was a member of the Salt Lake Stake high council, president of the Salt Lake Stake, and first counselor in the First Presidency. After his father's death in August 1877 he continued as a counselor to the Twelve Apostles until financial difficulties compelled him to resign in October 1891.

A nineteenth century Utah railroad magnate, John W. Young began his railroad building career in 1868 on the transcontinental line through Utah, contracting a portion of the Union Pacific road through Echo Canyon. A year later he was appointed secretary of the newly organized Utah Central, connecting Salt Lake City with the main line at Ogden, Utah, and supervised the track-laying of that road. In following years his railroad enterprises injected economic life into numerous Latter-day Saint communities. His most notable efforts were in connection with the Atlantic and Pacific road in Arizona; the Utah Northern, a narrow gauge line from Ogden, to Franklin, Idaho; the Salt Lake and Fort Douglas Railway, a belt road connecting the Utah Central and depots in Salt Lake City with the Denver and Rio Grand Western; the Salt Lake and Eastern, linking the mines at Park City with Salt Lake City; the Utah Western, built to haul salt, sand, and passengers between Salt Lake City and the lake twelve miles to the west; and street railway in Salt Lake City and Provo. His most ambitious railroad scheme was a 1500-mile line through northern Mexico, planned to link the Mormon colonies in Chihuahua with Deming, New Mexico, to the north and Guaymas on the Mexican Pacific coast to the southwest. Soon known as the "Manana Railroad" because of repeated delays of promised payrolls, the North Mexican line failed from lack of finances before any track was laid.

In addition to his railroads, John W. Young was a prime mover in other diverse enterprises including the Deseret Museum and Menagerie in Salt Lake City; a woolen factory at Moencopi, Arizona; two large Arizona cattle companies; the Salt Lake Supply and Forwarding Company; the Salt Lake Rock Company; the Great Western Iron Mining and Manufacturing Company; a two-and-a-half-million-acre land purchase in Mexico; and a pickle factory in Salt Lake City.

During the 1880s John spent much time in the East assisting in efforts of the Church to gain political independence for Utah and freedom from oppressive anti-polygamy legislation. Operating behind the doors of his North American Exchange Company, located across the street from the New York Stock Exchange, and through the pages of his newspaper, the Saturday Evening Globe, John wielded an influence with important men in government, finance, and newspapers, which had a definite ameliorating effect upon hostile legislation and sentiment. Significant were his efforts in defeating the Edmunds-Tucker bill and in furthering Utah's bid for statehood in 1887. However, due to his unyielding advocacy of the achievement of Church political goals by a lavish expenditure of Church funds to purchase influence, and his support of the Democrats as the party best able to provide Utah statehood at a time when Church leaders had become disillusioned with that party and were seeking support of the Republicans, his effectiveness in the cause of Zion began to wane. "It is a great pity that he cannot work in harmony with his fellow servants and bring his mind down to be governed by whomsoever may be appointed to take the lead. He is a man capable of doing great good; but of what use are his talents . . . if he will not work in the line which is indicated . . . by him who has the right to dictate?" wrote the First Presidency in 1888. [^2]

By the turn of the century, despite nominal success in his business ventures and lobbying activities, John W. Young's course had led to financial ruin, tarnished his dream of building Zion, strained the confidence of his associates, and had a divisive effect upon his family. "The edge of the knife of misfortune is sharp, and cuts to the very core," he noted in recounting the sequence of events that had brought him short of his goal. Struggling to pay a $50,000 debt incurred on his Atlantic and Pacific railroad contract in 1880, he had turned to the development of other railroad and business interests in Utah when he was summoned to Washington, D.C., to assist in the struggle against the anti-polygamy campaign. In 1888, faced with mounting debt from unfinished business interests in the West, and a lavish outlay of money in the political struggle in the East, he prematurely undertook the building of the Salt Lake and Eastern Railway, hoping to check his deteriorating financial condition. Added to this was the purchase of two and a half million acres of land in Mexico in an effort to block the encroachment of outside interests upon Mormon colonists there. To bolster his mushrooming financial plight, he successfully borrowed in excess of one million dollars from European financiers to pay off his accumulated debt in America, including his railroad construction expenses, and was negotiating for an additional sum with which to complete his railways and put them on a paying basis when the failure of the Baring financial house in London in 1890 terminated his contracts for additional money at that time. By 1897, when Utah creditors sued for contract payments, it was too late for any further help from England.

Still seeking to redeem his financial failings in his later years, John W. engaged in maritime enterprises in the United States. In 1908 he wrote the First Presidency soliciting a contract to transport Church members from the defunct Turkish Mission to the United States on a newly established steamship line. Later, he promoted a plan to consolidate ship-building along the eastern seaboard, with a view to standardization of design. His most auspicious promotion was an elaborate 300-million-dollar facility for New York harbor, containing theaters, restaurants, shops, etc., where ocean liners could dock and visitors conveniently enjoy all the comforts of the city.

The misfortune that beset his public career also affected John W.'s domestic life, as four of his five wives left him. "My children will never know in this life what the word father means," wrote one of his wives in a letter of complaint. In 1903 John W. was sorely tried when one of his sons was convicted in a bizarre New York murder case and sentenced for life in Sing Sing prison.

After reviewing the events that led to his financial embarrassments—"I cannot say failure, for I do not acknowledge the significance of that word in my life's work"—John confidently wrote from Paris in 1898: "I have full faith that the Lord will yet reward my labours sufficiently to enable me to pay every debt I honestly owe, and I am thankful to say I owe none, not one, that was contracted otherwise than honestly. . . . My intent has always been to build up the enterprises necessary for the development of Zion, [^3] and break down, as far as it lay in my power, the outside prejudice against us, in which in some few instances, I have failed, and may have created it where it did not exist. . . . Whenever I have been successful in raising funds for an enterprise, I have taken them home to Zion and paid them out there. I have never turned from the poor; I have never left a brother or a friend in need when I had the means to relieve them. I never sued a human being in my life, although I have scores of thousands due me at home and abroad; nor have I ever taken a cent of interest from any person for loans or advances. My debts are not accumulations for extravagances of my own, but have been incurred in the manner briefly explained." Convinced that he had "fought a good fight and kept the faith," John W. confidently hoped to "return to Zion with means to settle everywhere, all I owe." [^4] He did not live to see that day.

Letter dated June 13, 1863

In March 1863, John W. Young was called on a mission by his father to assist Horace Eldredge, Feramorz Little, and Lewis S. Hills with Church immigration in New York City. Venturing into the fleshpots of the East for the first time, he was given a special blessing by his father and other members of the First Presidency on March 8, just prior to his departure. "Inasmuch as you have desired to go to the Eastern Lands, to see, to learn, to understand, and to assist your brethren in the arduous work of gathering the saints, we seal upon you the blessing of wisdom, understanding, forethought and foresight, to be a wise and safe and efficient counselor to your brethren wherever duty shall call you. Wherever you may go you shall be blessed with wisdom and power to elude the grasp of the enemy, inasmuch as you are humble and faithful before the Lord your God; and great wisdom shall be given unto you, and sound understanding and judgment. Go with your Br. Horace, and be a faithful assistant to him . . . . Pray continually that you may be able to do good on this mission; and inasmuch as you desire with all your heart to do good, and to glorify your Father in heaven, you shall have power over your enemies inwardly and outwardly and no accident shall befall you, . . . and no power of evil shall injure you, inasmuch as you shall be faithful. . . . We pray our Father in heaven to preserve you, and guide your mind while it is young and tender, that you may delight in truth and righteousness, in peace and uprightness, in honesty and equity, delighting to do good to your fellow creatures. Seek to build up the Kingdom of God, to redeem and build up Zion, and to establish it no more to be removed. . . . Let your mind be centered on the things of God, and suffer it not to wander after the things of this world. Seek unto the Lord your God, that you may have the Holy Ghost constantly abiding with you." [^5]

Writing ten days later about his trip across the plains, John W. noted that "the hand of the Allmighty has Ben over us. We have ben Blessed beyound almost what we could hope." While en route to his destination, he visited points of interest in Philadelphia and New York, including an Italian opera at the Academy of Music. "It was very nice siting all the evening and not understand[ing] a single woord. However the House is well worth going to see." Marked by poor spelling and little detail (a sharp contrast to letters he wrote a few years later), John's letter to his father concluded with these words: "I don not want to say too much in my letters or Els I will have nothing to tell when I get home. Wall I've ben writing untill I have got to the woord home and there I stick. So I think it is time to wind off this. I don not call it a letter, this batch of scribleing. Father I hope By the time I get home your Sun will Be a better Boy than when he left it. . . . Praying the Lord to Bless you, and all the good, roll on his Kingdom on the Earth. Hope that I may be humble and Be counted worthy of being crowned with all the Sanctifyed is the Prayer of your affectionate Sun and Brother in the Church." [^6]

The letter of Brigham Young to John Willard Young, dated June 13, 1863, was received after the latter had arrived in New York City.

Salt Lake City, June 13, 1863

Elder John W. Young

13 Broadway, New York City

My dear son John W,

On the 4th inst. I wrote you at length in reply to yours received up to that date, and on the 3rd I wrote to your brother Brigham, since when your kind and good letter to your mother has come to hand.

I am much gratified that all your letters are written in the enjoyment of such good health and spirits, and evidence that the sight-seeings and temptations of the lower world have not weaned your affections from your religion and home, but seem to have increased and strengthened them, which I doubt not will continue to be the case until we are privileged to welcome you home in health and safety, every way improved by your trip. The courteous treatment you receive from those you meet is also gratifying, for it indicates that our enemies are foiled for the present, and that your conduct and conversation are commendable.

The sojourners on the Bench are few and quiet, and you were quite right in your statement that they would not be able to accomplish anything to our injury.

[Stephen S.] Harding left by stage for the East on the 11th inst., and there were none of any party who thought enough of him to notice his departure. [Patrick E.] Connor is still here, a brigadier without a brigade or the prospect of one, and said to be anxious to get away, with the expectation of soon being gratified by being recalled or ordered to more active service and a wider field. Under these circumstances the mischievous clique, in such full feather not long ago, is entirely broken, and I presume despair of being able to carry out any of their evil plans.

The weather continues unusually dry and warm, and City Creek has not had its usual high-water period, yet gardens and fields look luxuriantly and give a promise of abundant harvests of the rich products of the soil.

Work of varied kinds is so crowding that no common laborers are in the streets seeking employment, which is proof of a healthy feeling and action among the people.

Your brother Joseph A. is busily engaged in overseeing the lumbering business of my mills in Big Cottonwood and City Creek Canyons, and George W. [Thatcher] is looking after matters at the grist mill and its vicinity.

On the temple block the foundations for the pillars for the bents of the new tabernacle, to be 150 by 250 feet outside measure, will soon be laid, and masons are busily occupied upon the pillars. Work is progressing very satisfactorily upon the temple, several teams being busily occupied in hauling the huge granite blocks, which the stone cutters are rapidly shaping, and the masons placing them in the walls.

The parquette of the theatre is being fitted with a sectional floor to extend over it on a level with the stage for the purpose of accommodating large parties, of which one will come off on the 3rd, one on the 16th (Pioneer and Battalion), and one on the 24th of July next.

A few days ago, a band of Indians attacked the California mail stage in Cedar Valley about two miles west of the Jordan River, killed the conductor, Wood Reynolds, the driver, and two horses, cut the mail bags, cushions, and curtains of the coach, and then made off, taking the other two horses with them. I understand that troops have been sent from Camp Douglas to chastise them.

My health, your mother's, that of my family, of Joseph A. and family, of Brigham's family, and of your other relatives, friends, acquaintances, and the people in general is good.

Bro. Thos. W. Ellerbeck's wife died on the 11th inst., and was buried yesterday.

That you may be abundantly blest and rejoice with us in a safe and prosperous return to your home in due time, having accomplished a good work is the prayer of,

Your father,

Brigham Young

P.S. Should Bro. Horace [Eldredge] get through with his business and be returning home before Brigham arrives, you are at liberty to come with him or wait for Brigham as you may choose.

Letter dated February 7, 1866

"With what joy I perused [your letter] no one can appreciate or understand my feelings, except they have experienced the same under similar circumstances," wrote John W. Young from New York in response to a letter from his father on June 4, 1863. "I can go to what few labors I have to do with double the energy now than I could before. If when I get home you can take me by the hand and say that you are satisfyed I shall feel happy." While in the East this youthful son of Brigham Young was in more than usual demand as a speaker. After addressing the Saints a number of times, he wrote his father that his discourse "comes very hard but I can see every time it is easier. Oh, how I think if the young men could only see the opportunities they are throwing away—but it seems they cannot until thrown on their own responsibility, then it is felt keenly I assure you. I know by painful experience." [^7]

After returning from his mission to New York in 1863, John W. was sent back again to assist his brother Joseph A. with the immigration the following year. Having been appointed an assistant counselor in the First Presidency by his father prior to his departure, John shows in his letters during the year an awakening to a sense of duty and a desire for improvement and a renewed devotion to the principles of his religion. "I feel it more necessary to live nearer the Lord every day of my life and keep my armor bright that when the final day comes I may not be found wanting," he wrote his father. "You said to me just before leaveing to improve every opportunity to talk and make myself acquainted with the gospel and with the help of the Lord I intend to do so." [^8] A few weeks later he continued the theme: "I am not experienced enough in writing to cloth my ideas in [illegible word] language as I would like but I am aware the only way to do is to strive to learn continually, seek opportunities to get experience &c., but that will come along in time. I feel the Lord has blessed me with everything I could desire in righ[t]eousness and my desire is, to do his will continually." [^9]

The immigration business took Joseph A. and John W. Young to England in 1864, the latter for the first time. While in Europe they traveled to Denmark, Holland, Germany, Switzerland, and France, before returning home. Less than two years later, John W. was back in England, this time as a missionary. His brother Brigham Jr. was president of the European Mission at that time. [^10] Before departing on this mission, John W. received instruction from his father on February 7, 1866, to attend to some long-standing business in New York on the way.

Salt Lake City, February 7, 1866

Elder John W. Young

My dear Son,

The following are a few items of business I wish you to attend to.

A man by the name of Richard Steel kept a drug store about forty years ago in Auburn, N.Y. He had my note for three dollars ($3.00), which I wished to take up; but he could not find it, and said that I must be mistaken about it. I offered to pay the amount, but he refused to receive it. years afterwards, I heard, and do not now recollect how I heard, that he had found that note. I wish it settled. He may be dead, but his heir or heirs may be living.

A note of mine, which was drawn August 28th, 1829, at Bucksville, Cayuga Co., seven miles north of Auburn, for thirty-one dollars and fourteen cents ($31.14), in favor of Aholiah Buck, or bearer, has been presented by Messrs. Holladay and Halsey to me for settlement. My impression is that the note was paid, but was not taken up. If this were so, I would like to find it out. I wish you to ascertain whether Mr. Buck is living, and by whom this note was forwarded here, and to ascertain whether it will be right for me to pay it here, and if I do, whether it will ever get to Mr. Buck, or if he is dead, to his heir or heirs.

The enclosed copy of a letter, which I lately received from Mr. Ezra Sheldon, of Mendon, N.Y., explains itself. The note to which reference is made is dated November 26th, 1829, and was drawn in his favor for ten dollars ($10). I find three dollars ($3) endorsed on the back as having been paid June 15, 1851. I wish you to see Mr. Sheldon and pay this note and interest which will amount to $32.28.

Give my kind regards to all the folks in that country who may know me.

Your father, Brigham Young P.S. If you pay any of these notes, pay nothing but simple interest on them at the rate of 7 per cent.

B.Y.

Letter dated February 5, 1867

On February 7, 1866, in company with Hiram B. Clawson, William Jennings, Thomas Taylor, and John T. Caine, who were going east on Church business, John W. Young left for his mission to England. Four detours en route to New York delayed his departure, however. Feeling duty-bound not to separate from his traveling companions, he stopped first in St. Louis, where the businessmen Clawson, Jennings, and Taylor put up at the finest hotel in the city, the Southern Hotel. In following suit, John W. explained this extravagance to his father: "As it was generally known that I was your son, I felt I could do no less than stop at the finest hotel also, and be as respectable as the rest of them. Personally, I feel no desire to make a show, but when the eyes of many are directed towards me and it is said, 'there is a son of Brigham Young,' I feel that to look and act respectable is my duty." [^11] This statement may help explain John W.'s flair for princely attire and fashionable and expensive tastes throughout his life.

A second detour was made to visit an uncle, Edward Young, whom his father had not seen in thirty years. Arriving at Medina, Wisconsin, with John T. Caine after a snowstorm, John W. hired a man with a sleigh to take them the last few miles to their destination. Confronting his Uncle Edward for the first time, John W. was introduced by Caine as a son of Brigham Young, which "made his eyes hang out considerably"; his wife almost fainted. "If a thunder-bolt had fallen at her feet she could not have looked more surprised." Edward "shook me cordially by the hand," John continued in relating the incident to his father, "but eyed me closely. I returned his look without flinching until he seemed fully satisfied it was a real son and no mistake. By his conversation I concluded that he thought you and your brothers had been seeking more after the 'gold of Ophir,' than after the Lord, and had become very wealthy. For us to find him in a log house cut his pride deeply; he soon rallied from this however, when he found that our answers to the questions he propounded were so frank and open, for they just suited his notions, and we were soon on good terms engaged in an interesting conversation upon Mormonism."

During the visit with his uncle, John W. succeeded in breaking down some of the prejudice that had separated him from the rest of the family. "His wife is a woman of very jealous disposition and I am of the opinion that she is the cause of Edward being separated from the Church; for, as I talked with him and became better acquainted, I found him to be a real Mormon at heart although he did not realize it. The only principles he objected to were those that he did not understand and looked at through the eyes of prejudice; but when I explained them to the best of my ability he seemed fully satisfied. I think he partially realizes the 'wool' has been pulled over his eyes, and that he has been kept from his friends. During the two days we remained with him his wife softened considerably. He acknowledged to me just before we parted that he did not think 'polygamy' so bad after all, for he had had a great deal of difficulty with his wife but now he was bound to have peace. He enlisted in the army for three years during the war, but fortunately for him, he was stationed near New Orleans with those troops that were discharged after ten months service. Soon after his return . . . he lost two of his children, but by the blessing of the Lord his three other children . . . were preserved; it took all of his bounty money to pay the doctors bill, and again he was left with only his hands to depend upon. They day before we left Edward's, he asked us if we would have any objection to him inviting in a few of his friends, and have a social meeting. Of course we were glad of an additional opportunity of bearing our testimony. In the evening there was twelve or fifteen came in to hear what the 'Mormons' could say for themselves. We talked freely and answered all their questions. When we came to part they seemed to do so with great reluctance and I believe many of them viewed the Church of Latter-day Saints very differently from what they had done, for they pressed us to remain a few days and preach in their school house. I feel confident that a good work might be done in their midst."

On March 2, as Edward drove his visitors to Appleton to continue their journey, "he promised . . . if it was possible for him to leave his family so they could live during his absence, he would visit Utah this season. His house and five acres of land that he has cleared, would pay his debts and leave him two or three hundred dollars. I slipped $20 into his pocket and asked him to buy his wife a dress, for I knew that would do more with her than all the Gospel I could preach. He was very unwilling to take anything, but I knew he needed it and pressed it upon him. We parted the best of friends." [^12]

A third stop before his departure for England found John W. with John T. Caine in the nation's capital, where they visited Utah's congressional delegate, William Hooper; President Andrew Johnson; and the popular Civil War hero, Ulysses S. Grant. John reported his impressions of the visit to his father. "My private opinion is that Bro. H[ooper] ought to have some good prayerful man with him who would preach faith into his ear. Bro. H. can do all the wire working, for he perfectly understands the ropes to pull, but he is so very fluctuating in his temperament—either up in the garret or down in the cellar—that it needs some one to apply a little restoration in his desponding moments. The feeling of hatred towards us is intensely strong with the majority of the head men at Washington, but I feel, as I told bro. Hooper; that 'so long as the Saints continue to do as near right as they are doing, I cannot fear.'" [^13]

On March 14 John W. Young was introduced by delegate Hooper to President Johnson and General Grant. As they waited to see the President, John observed, "Republicanism was beautifully illustrated, for I could see from diamonds of the millionaire down to the greasy coat of the poor artisan brushing side by side with equal rights to be introduced to the President, and to promenade in the grand saloons." When the third son of Brigham Young was presented to the President, it "excited a great deal of curiosity and caused many a stare." [^14] Upon meeting General Grant in his headquarters in Georgetown, John W. found him to be "a perfect stoic, and I think his great forte lies in him knowing just enough to hold his tongue. However, he shook hands very cordially when we took our leave." [^15]

John W. Young's final detour before leaving for England came on March 15, when he traveled to western New York to pay the notes designated in his father's letter of February 7. At Clayville he found Richard Steel, who seemed pleased to hear from Brigham Young, and "especially at the prospect of getting a little money." Ezra Sheldon at Lima was also glad to receive some money, but "acted as if he did not care how soon we left after he got it; but I excused it in a 'childish old man,'" John reported. The visit of a son of the illustrious Mormon leader, one of Auburn's former citizens, attracted the notice of the local newspaper: "A son of Brigham Young, (we didn't learn his number,) was in town this morning, and called at a business house in Genesee St. to settle an account by his numerous progenitor some thirty years ago. Brigham is honest—in some things, but rather slow. The debt discharged by him was, we understand, for borrowed money." [^16]

In company with William Jennings, John W. Young finally left New York City on April 4 for his mission to England. While crossing the Atlantic they encountered a terrific storm in which three passengers and one steward had their legs broken "in a most shocking manner" by being dashed against the side of the cabin. "I made myself as useful as possible by assisting the surgeon in taking care of the wounded, for most of the passengers were housed and praying for dear life. Fortunately, I had done my praying beforehand. I made myself so handy that even the surgeon himself took me for a surgeon. Bro. Jennings was sick the whole way; but thanks to the Almighty, I was well during the voyage." [^17]

John W. Young arrived at the mission headquarters in Liverpool on April 14, where he began his missionary labors under the presidency of his brother Brigham Young, Jr. Twice during the first five months of his mission he traveled to the continent with Brigham Jr., visiting Germany, Denmark, Norway, and Russia.

John W. Young's time in England was spent in traveling, speaking to the Saints, working in the mission office, and assisting with the Church emigration. Assessing the work of proselyting in that land, he noted that "there are but very few who seem to pay the least regard to the admonitions of the Elders." Talking to the people "seems like talking to a wall, or some object that has no ears to hear or heart to understand anything about the Gospel." [^18]

On November 29, in the absence of his brother Brigham Jr., who had returned to Utah on a visit to counsel with their father, John W. witnessed the unveiling of an equestrian statue in Wolverhampton by Queen Victoria. After three hours in a biting north wind, when the pealing of bells and the roar of artillery announced the arrival of the Queen, John watched with a critical eye the majestic ceremony that followed. As the town council and some of the borough officials were presented to the Queen, "they passed muster like a lot of frightened sheep; some two or three turned their backs, walked away, which, according to court etiquette, is unpardonable, and some others almost tripped up in endeavoring to retire gracefully. . . . My big opera or field glass done good service that day; for when I looked through that, the Queen, with all her personal defects, stood right before me. My opinion is that Holland does not contribute as much to the healthful appearance of Victoria as some say; but, I think that it is owing to a very wise course on the part of the Queen, for she certainly looks like she had been a true wife and mother." [^19]

Shortly before receiving the following letter from his father, and prior to the termination of his mission, John W. reflected upon his missionary experience in England in these words: "I can say that I have enjoyed my mission; and one thing that has added greatly to my joy and peace of mind is, that I am learning to keep cool, and not to get in a hurry, but, do the best that I can, as each successive day with its accompanying events rolls around. The Lord knows the desires of my heart, consequently I feel to trust implicitly in the guidance of His holy spirit. My labours so far, have resulted in great good to myself; for they have learned me that without the assistance of our Heavenly Father, I am a mere cipher, and a very small one too." [^20]

Salt Lake City, February 5, 1867

Elder John W. Young

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Your brother Brigham started at 8.45 yesterday morning, accompanied by Bro. Geo. D. Watt, on his return to his field of labor in England. We heard from them this morning. They were at Weber last evening and well, though it had been stormy all day. The roads through the mountains are likely to be bad, but further east they are said to be tolerably good. Traveling to the States now is not what it was before the railroad had been pushed so far this way. The time spent in staging is much shortened, lessening the fatigue and the duration of the journey. It is interesting to us out here to see the eagerness with which they are pushing this great work ahead. It will be sure to help us, and be advantageous to the Zion of our God, though the wicked are contemplating terrible things respecting us as soon as they can finish the railroad. The waves of civilization to use their own figure will then surge right up against the walls of barbarism in which we are entrenched and wash them down. We and our religion can then be wiped out and no longer offend the fastidious tastes and senses of the priests and politicians of this enlightened(?) age. We shall see. Had we nothing to depend upon but our own strength and wisdom, then our condition would be pitiable indeed. But can man arrest the diurnal or annual revolution of the earth? Can he say to the sun that it shall not shine, and that its rays shall not illumine and gladden and impart heat unto our planet? Or can he pluck the stars from the firmament? His power is very limited. Disease and death prostrate their victims. They snatch the loved ones from man's arms, and he is powerless to resist or prevent. In a thousand ways is his weakness apparent, and yet he presumed to measure arms with Jehovah, and declared that Zion shall not be built up, the rule and dominion of the Kingdom shall not prevail when God has declared that these things shall all be done.

With Him to sustain us what have we to fear? Men feel strong and capable to accomplish mighty conquests when they have powerful navies and armies at their command, but we have the Lord of Hosts to uphold us, before whom man, with all his boasted pomp and power is as a grasshopper of the field. Improvements will progress, railroads and telegraph lines and cables will be built and stretched; but instead of these things acting as an aid to our enemies, they will increase our facilities and accelerate the progress of the work of the Lord.

The news which we hear from you from time to time respecting your labors and movements is very pleasing. It is a great joy to me to see my sons bearing the holy priesthood and seeking to magnify the same among the nations of the earth. My prayers are constantly offered up in your and your brothers' behalf, that the blessings of the Lord may rest upon you, and you be enabled to do a good work.

We have had very quiet times in the city and Territory this winter. The winter has been open, but we have very bad roads, so much rain and snow having fallen it has made our main roads almost impassable. General good health prevails. Your mother's health and that of Lucy [Canfield Young] and Clara [Jones Young] and the rest of the folks is usually good. Brigham has enjoyed his visit very much, and has been well repaid for the fatigues and trouble of the trip. He will be able to give you many particulars which I cannot write. He will, if he can spare the time, and not miss a good and safe steamer by so doing, make Captain [William H.] Hooper a visit at Washington.

The election for delegate to Congress and for the state representative, &c., came off yesterday. Captain Hooper was our nominee, and a Mr. [William] McGrorty was the nominee of the clique, twenty of whom at their mass meeting voted for him, the brethren present for curiosity giving no vote.

I expect you and Brigham and family will start for home in July or August, as may be convenient. Bro. F[ranklin] D. Richards will be left in charge of the mission; Brigham will give him such instructions as may be needed respecting matters.

Your mother and all the folks join me in love to you. Give my love to Katie [Catherine Spencer Young], Oscar and all the brethren. Praying the Lord to bless you, give you great success, and bring you home safely, I am, your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated July 31, 1873

John W. Young had been in England with his brother Joseph A. on emigration business in 1864, and had returned as a missionary in 1866-67. In 1873 he crossed the Atlantic for the third time on business connected with the Utah Central and Utah Southern railroads. The following letter of instruction from Brigham Young, dated July 31, 1873, preceded John W.'s departure on this assignment.

At the time of John W.'s departure, the suit for divorce of Brigham Young's seventeenth wife, Ann Eliza Webb Young, had focused the attention of the people of the country upon conditions in Utah and Mormon life in particular. Consequently, when John W. took a room at the fashionable St. Nicholas Hotel in New York, en route to England, he had not been there long before a reporter of the New York Herald contacted him for an interview. As the reporter entered John W.'s room, he saw a pleasant-looking, well-built, heavily mustached young man of about thirty reclining in a large armchair, attired in a black velvet jacket faced with light blue silk. John Willard cheerfully welcomed the Herald reporter and willingly answered questions regarding the Mormon faith, mode of life, and the suit pending against his father. [^21]

Arriving in England on August 28, 1874, John W. Young embarked upon his assignment there with a letter of assurance to his father: "My trust is in the Lord; and my prayers ascend to him continually that I may be permitted to accomplish this business with honor to the Cause, and satisfaction to you." [^22]

Salt Lake City, July 31, 1873

John W. Young, Esqr.

My dear Son,

As you are about to start for England to negotiate, sell, or dispose of the Utah Central and Utah Southern Railroad companies bonds belonging to me, I wish to impress upon your mind the necessity of strictly confining yourself to that business, unless you shall be instructed otherwise hereafter.

This is your first visit to England on such business and I hope you will be wise and discreet in the management of it.

Should any influences be employed to direct your attention to business other than the above, pay no regard to them, further than making memoranda for future consideration.

Preserve a steady, calm, and deliberate demeanor and show that you are master of yourself.

Do the business assigned you as promptly as circumstances will permit and return soon as completed.

Elder James T. Little will accompany you for at least a portion of the time, and render you all the assistance in his power.

It will be right for you to make any exchanges to your advantage, of outside stock and bonds in said railroads, provided that such exchanges shall in nowise interfere with your duties as specified.

May you be preserved to return in peace and safety, having accomplished the work assigned to you with success,

Your affectionate father, Brigham Young

Letter dated October 26, 1874

Involvement in business enterprises increasingly demanded John W.'s time away from home in the financial centers of the East. Having been ordained an apostle in his youth and carefully groomed for leadership, he was appointed a counselor to his father in the First Presidency in 1873, with specific responsibilities in southern Utah and Arizona. However, extended absences threatened to minimize his effectiveness in this calling. Writing to his son in the fall of 1873, Brigham Young had urged, "as the time is fast rolling on, and winter approaching, and affairs at St. George and the south require someone to attend to them, I would like to know definitely when you receive this whether it is your intention to return home immediately so as to take the position assigned to you in the south: if such is not your intention I would like you to say so and we will appoint someone else." [^23]

On October 26, 1874, Brigham Young wrote another letter to his son in New York on the same theme.

Salt Lake City, October 26, 1874

John W. Young

New York, New York

My dear Son,

Your welcome favor came to hand. I was glad to hear of your good health and hoped you would have completed your business in the East and returned home ere this. You know my feelings on this point. I desire you may complete your business arrangements at an early day so that you will not have to return east again very soon and come here and throw your energies in with ours to move on the great cause. There are too few laborers now in the field and where God has given evidences of his work it is an obligation we owe for the knowledge imparted to blend our energies for the accomplishment of his great work.

I am pleased to have you visit Ferry [Feramorz] and to hear of the good counsel which you give to all with whom you meet, and trust you take a course to enjoy the spirit of the Lord altho I think you might have much more of that good spirit if you would follow out my counsel in relation to your mission in the South.

From your letter I presume you are getting along pretty well with your business. I would like very much if you would manage it so as to clear my bonds and give them to Bro. John Sharp to bring home. You will see him, no doubt, although he does not expect to remain away from here very long.

I hope to go south before long and would like to loan or buy some of your furniture and beds which you have in the South, unless you expect to be there to use them yourself. Please write and let me know as early as convenient. Direct outside envelope to A[lexander] F. McDonald, St. George, Washington County, etc.

If you see Gen. [Thomas L.] Kane and family present my compliments and say that I often think of the pleasant hours that I have passed in their society, and the interesting conversations which I had with the General during our southern tour. I hope to meet them again at no very distant day and pray the blessings of Almighty God may attend them through the journey of life.

Your mother's health is pretty good generally and she wishes to be remembered to her dear son John. Alice [Young Clawson] is still stopping with her, but expects to leave for the South with her boys in about a week. She seems determined to make the South her home for she really believes that the boys will have a much better opportunity to learn the principles of their religion far from the turmoils and temptations of this much demoralized city.

Mrs. Eleanor Pratt died very suddenly last evening of apoplexy, sick but a few hours.

Your wife Libbie and friends started east yesterday so I understand. Lutie [Thatcher] remains with the children who are looking well, so I hear.

B. Young, Jr., sends his love. So do all the family. Luna [Young Thatcher] and her family are pretty well now but some of her children have been very sick with scarletina.

The courts are not doing much, neither the grand juries at Beaver nor in this city. They try hard enough but it is hard kicking against the pricks. The Lord has overruled most admirably, and the Saints are pushing forward the good cause. The temple is looming up fine and we may expect the rock work to be pushed another season as it has never been. Our increased facility for laying rock and the prospect of working into the United Order bid fair to complete both temples at an early day. Some three hundred men from the northern countries have volunteered to go to St. George for the winter which will expedite matters in that region of country.

I believe that all is right with a majority of the Saints, and God will bring us safely through if we are faithful.

God bless you and preserve you in the truth is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated August 7, 1875

Within nine months in 1874-75 a brother and a sister of John W. Young passed away. Alice Young Clawson, the wife of Hiram B. Clawson, died on November 2, 1874, at thirty-five years of age, and Joseph A. Young, John W.'s oldest brother, died suddenly on August 5, 1875, at forty-one. News of his brother's passing was the subject of the letter of Brigham Young to John W. on August 7, 1875.

Salt Lake City, August 7, 1875

Elder John W. Young

My dear Son,

As Dr. [Joseph M.] Benedict purposes starting for Long Island tomorrow, and has kindly proferred to take a letter to you, expecting to call upon you, I hasten to write a few lines.

One week ago yesterday, July 30, your brother Joseph A. left this city with me and others for Provo, apparently usually well, but complaining some of a disagreeable feeling from the ether he had recently taken when having a tooth pulled. Previous to his late visit here he had been traveling and preaching very laboriously for some two weeks in the district over which he presided, over-laboring in the extremely dusty and hot weather. A week ago today and tomorrow, July 31st and Aug. 1st, he attended a two-day meeting with us in Provo, still feeling a little unwell from the ether and over-fatigue. On the 4th, he reached Manti, having had an attack of congestive chills while passing through Salt Creek Canyon. On the 5th he ate breakfast with apparent good appetite, also dinner, and in the afternoon drove in a buggy with his son and B[righam] T. Young's wife to the site we selected on my late visit to Sanpete for a temple near Manti. Soon after returning from his short ride his health failed rapidly, and at 8.45 p.m. he ceased breathing.

Your mother was on a visit at your brother Brigham Jr.'s when she heard the melancholy news, which she received with much of the spirit of resignation. Your mother, Brigham Jr., and his wife Elizabeth [Fenton Young] came here on last evening's train. Your brother Joseph A's. wife, Clara [Stenhouse Young] and her children are expected here tonight, and the funeral will be observed at the White House tomorrow at 10 a.m.

Bishop Wm. Miller died at Provo last night, and Bro. Alfonzo Green, of American Fork, and Bro. Amos Fielding of this city, the night before, although the health of the people is generally good, the mortality in this city for July not being 45 per cent of same time last year.

My family are generally well. My wife Emmeline [Free Young] was buried three weeks tomorrow, and a short time previous to her death, your brother Joseph A. remarked to her that he should soon follow her.

Your telegram of today was received at 9.30 this morning cheering us with word that your health is improving.

Ever praying for your true welfare, I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated August 30, 1875

"Sorrow is our heritage in this life," wrote John W. Young upon receiving news of his brother's untimely death. "How does poor Mother bear the sad loss? Her faith I know, therefore do not feel as though it would prove more than she can live through, but two (dear Alice) out of five, in eight short months, must wring a mother's heart. You, dear father, have other sons, and many to comfort you, but poor Mother so wrapt up in her children. Thank the Lord my brother Joseph died with the Gospel harness on his back. To die so is to give exaltation to the man, honor to God and a living joy to those who mourn and half the grief is taken away—we know he has gone to a far Better world. May we all meet there. . . . Please give my love to dear Mother and accept dear Father that portion which belongs to a Prophet of God and a dear father combined. . . ." [^24]

John W. Young's religious background was a strong motivating factor in his life. Not only did he regard his numerous business enterprises as contributive to the building of the kingdom of God, but as his circle of friends and associates among influential men increased, he often found opportunity to inform them on matters of his religion. While engaged in railroad business in the East in 1875, John W. met a prominent attorney, a Mr. Olmstead, as he traveled from New Haven, Connecticut, to New York, with whom he discussed the subject of Mormonism. Before the two men parted, Olmstead "asked for some of our works and remarked that a great many people wanted to know what we believed. I read to him from the Compendium which I had with me and preached to him all the way. He invited me cordially to see him, and often." On another occasion, John W. met H. K. Beecher, a brother of Henry Ward Beecher, who was so impressed with John W.'s beliefs that he proferred the use of his new church, "a very fine building," for the Mormon missionaries. [^25] After observing him at close range for many months, a secretary noted of John W. Young that "he preaches the gospel to all friends and in his letters he often expresses his living faith in God and inspires even strangers, and it seems very strange to see such a business man spending so much of his time remembering his Heavenly Father." [^26]

During his labors in the East in 1875, John W. Young's health became impaired, and his condition was aggravated by the pressure of fatiguing work, resulting in surgery and much suffering. Apprised of his son's ill health, Brigham Young wrote the following letter on August 30.

Salt Lake City, August 30, 1875

Elder John W. Young

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

My dear Son,

I was exceedingly glad to hear from you through your letter of the 21st inst. Though extremely pained to learn that you had suffered so much, my great hope is that the operations that have been performed upon you will exercise no permanent injury upon your constitution. I could wish that you would take more care of yourself. When you are in good health do not overwork; be regular in your meals, and more carefully observe the general laws of health.

Bro. William W. Riter will hand you this and pay you a short visit. I do not wish you to keep him with you however much I should like you to have his company, were it possible for him to stay. But the railroad to Coalville requires his presence. Besides, his health will not admit of a prolonged absence from home.

President George A. Smith was until a few days ago rapidly improving, but I regret to say has suffered a relapse. He gets but little rest; he cannot sleep more than three or four hours out of the twenty-four.

I received a telegram from your brother Brigham this afternoon from which I learn that his health is at present not very good. Elder Geo. Q. Cannon is about to visit Cache Valley and Brigham intends to meet him at Mendon on Thursday afternoon.

Joseph A.'s family are doing nicely. Brothers [Albert K.] Thurber and [William H.] Seegmiller and his son Brigham T. have been appointed administrators to his estate. Mary [Ann Ayers Young] and Clara [Stenhouse Young] will go south, may possibly live together at Richfield, whilst Margaret [Whitehead Young] will remain in this city.

I shall not write you a long letter this evening, but leave it to Bro. Riter to detail to you the principal items of current news, but will add that I am thankful to be able to say I am in the enjoyment of excellent health, calm and buoyant in spirit, and as ever, rejoicing in the gifts and blessings of our Heavenly Father. Your mother's health is good, so is that of the family very generally. Peace be with you, and may you be abundantly blessed of the Lord in all your labors is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter of December 17, 1875

Expecting John W. home before the holidays, Brigham Young expressed disappointment when his son failed to arrive by December 17. A copy of the President's letter, written on that day as dictated to a scribe, appears in a Brigham Young letter-press book in the Church Archives. Missing, however, are a few penciled lines, written upside down in Brigham Young's own hand, crowded around the salutation of the original letter, which is filed at the Brigham Young University library. The holograph, which is added below as a postscript, shows the intense concern of Brigham Young for the return of his son.

Salt Lake City, December 17, 1875

Elder John W. Young

New York, New York

My dear Son,

I received your letter of Nov. 22d in due course, but did not answer it, as I had been expecting to see you home. I thought you would have come with Bro. [William C.] Staines, and if not with him, would have been with us at the holidays. But as you have not come, I now write you this, with the hope that on its receipt, you will settle up your business, as such is my wish, and come home and stay with me and help me, as I have much to do, in which I should like you to assist me. I read your letter to your mother and was pleased to hear from you, and the reason of my writing this is that I there learned you could not come until along in January. Your mother was delighted to hear from you; she is in good health as am I also, with the exception of a very slight touch of rheumatism. The family are mostly well though the present is not a very favorable time for health. A thick white frost has covered the city as with a fog for several days past, and coughs and colds are becoming abundant. I am thinking of going to Provo by special car tomorrow morning and shall probably stay until Wednesday. On my return I have an appointment to meet the priesthood of Davis Co. on the Friday of that week.

We have excellent news from the missionaries throughout the country, baptisms are not unfrequent and much preaching is being done. The brethren generally realize that the Lord is working with them and for them, and opening up their way marvelously. We think of yet sending out other elders to open up fresh places this winter.

The new ZCMI building is now completely covered in and the elegant iron front in place. You will be surprised to note the difference in Main St. when you return, the improvement manifest in the erection of the massive new Co-op building, and the imposing structure on the Deseret Bank corner, whilst the late fires have made ugly gaps in the Mathieson block and at the First National Bank building, which will not be filled up for some time yet.

Judge [J. Alexander] White, accompanied by his son and Col. Betts, leaves for California in a few days. He does not expect to return before the opening of the January term of the Supreme Court of the Territory. I want you here.

With much love, I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

O Jonna I pr[a]y for you and yours continuly. If you nue [knew] how I want to see you, you would come. My dear Jonna, I due hope you will see as we see thing[s]. I send your dear Br Brigham and Br Stanes to prevale on you to come home and stay with us. M[a]y God Bles my d[e]ar Boy. B.Y.

Letter dated January 11, 1876

Neither his father's caution against overwork nor his own severe illness in 1875 served to change John W. Young's work habits. "In your surmises of my over working," he explained to his father, "you were quite right for it has seemed impossible to get along without using every moment, and I feel the need of rest and quiet for a month or two, but my business prospects are not in a condition to warrant me in taking one day." [^27]

When Brigham Young, Jr., arrived in New York City to visit John W. in December 1875, he saw the tenacity with which his younger brother pursued his work and the telling effect it was having upon him. The two brothers met at a hotel in Bridgeport, Connecticut, about eight-thirty on the evening of December 29: "It was a joyful and sorrowful meeting," noted Brigham Jr. "We thought and talked of our dear brother Joseph, our parents, home, the Kingdom. . . . John still troubled with piles, his wounds are not healed. John says he will do everything in his power to get released so as to go home. But there is no one to lift the obligation of the UWRR [Utah Western Railroad], only he. I mourn to see my dear brother with not a moment to call his own." Five days later he added, "I have passed a miserable day seeing John harrassed by duns. My head is like to split with the noise and worry of Broadway and Wall streets. Money could not hire me to endure the torture which my poor brother suffers every day. I know it must be terrible on his mind. . . ." [^28]

In a brief respite, on December 31, 1875, four sons of Brigham Young met in John W.'s room in the Metropolitan Hotel in New York City to usher in the New Year together. Besides John W. and Brigham Jr., Willard had joined them from West Point and Don Carlos from Rensselaer Polytechnic. After a pleasant reunion, the four, along with George Q. Cannon and William C. Staines, attended Booth's Theater.

The opening paragraph of the letter of Brigham Young to his sons Brigham Jr. and John W., dated January 11, 1876, refers to letters written by Brigham Jr. after he had met John W. in the East. Although copies of the letters have not been found, the contents may well be imagined from Brigham Jr.'s comments noted above.

Salt Lake City, January 11, 1876

Brigham Young, Jr., and

John W. Young

New York, New York

My dear sons Brigham and John W.,

It was with no ordinary feelings of emotion that I perused the contents of Brigham's letters of Dec. 29, and Jan. 1 and 4. To me they were a sad commentary on the condition of John W.'s affairs, and I more than ever fear that if he does not soon manage to throw off some of the harrassing cares and embarrassments that now beset him, his life will be the forfeit of his persistency. But cannot this be done? Cannot he transfer his business into someone else's hands, so that they will carry the burden instead of him, and he be relieved from the annoyances and worry that are incidental to his present responsibilities? If he could do so I should be more than pleased, and have him come home and rest, and build up his body, and then, when he became strong enough, to work with all his heart with the rest of us in building up the kingdom of God. I sincerely hope you will come home together and that before long.

My health is excellent, your mother's is now good; she was a little unwell last week and did not leave the house for several days. The weather was exunpropitious. The family generally are in good health.

The Legislature met yesterday afternoon at 2 o'clock. All the members present were sworn in with the "Iron Clad" by Sec. [George S.] Black, except Mr. [Erastus S.] Foote, the "ring" representative from Tooele Co., whose seat is contested by Bro. Geo. Atkin. Elder Lorenzo Snow was elected president of the council, and Orson Pratt, speaker of the house. The governor informed the committee appointed to wait on him that he would communicate with the assembly at two this afternoon.

The Supreme Court of the Territory met yesterday. It is probable that the term will be a short one as there are at present only nine cases on the calendar, eight of which are from this district. It is possible that one or two others may be added before the term closes. Bro. [George] Reynolds' case will most probably go over to June.

Yesterday morning father James Allred of Spring City, San Pete, Co., died at the ripe old age of 92. I well remember how hearty and well the old gentleman and Sis. A. seemed when I saw them last summer when I was in San Pete.

Many of the members of the Legislature have called in to see me; they all appear in splendid health and excellent spirits, and bring very encouraging reports from their various localities.

As Bp. [John] Sharp starts east tomorrow morning on business connected with the Union Pacific Railroad and other matters, I thought it would be a favorable opportunity to let you know I had received your letters. Since writing the above I have received John W.'s note of the 5th inst. I am very glad to hear he is better in health and I am much pleased at the expression of his feelings contained therein. I hope you will both write to me often and let me know how things are. May the Lord bless you all; may His preserving and guiding spirit be continually with you and may you soon again be with me in the home of the Saints,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated March 29, 1876

Arriving in Salt Lake City from New York on February 14, 1876, John W. Young was home for one month before the relentless demands of his railroad affairs called him east again. On March 14, the day before John W.'s departure, his father blessed him that if he were faithful, he would have power to free himself from his railroad bondage, for he wanted him to return to Utah. The President added that he desired to make John his first counselor in the First Presidency if he would walk up to his duties. As he bid his father goodbye the next day, John W. expressed a determination to terminate his business affairs and begin to labor for Zion. [^29]

In his first letter to his father after arriving in New York, John wrote, "I can truly say dear Father I am really pained at being back here again and most truly and humbly desire and pray that the Lord may open the way for my speedy return." [^30] His father's reply is dated eight days later.

Salt Lake City, March 29, 1876

Elder John W. Young

134 Grand St., New York

My dear Son,

Your telegram from Omaha and Elmira and your letter from New York [were] duly received and much satisfaction received from their perusal. I am glad the fatigues of the lengthened journey had no ill effects upon your system. My own health has been improving ever since you left, and now that we are treated with a spell of moderately fine weather, I am enjoying myself excellently. Your mother's health is good and so is that of the family generally.

Things here are quiet and still; we have no very marked opposition to contend with just at present. Judge [Philip H.] Emerson still continues to find excuses for putting off the hearing of the arguments in the Ann Eliza case. I presume he wants to stand from under the responsibility of giving an opinion thereon, and thinks that a little judicious delay on his part will stave it off until Judge Coughlan comes, who, by the bye, it is rumored, does not exactly know if he will accept the nomination or not, as he is earning more in his present position than he would as chief justice of Utah.

It would please me very much if you would let me take little Johnny and take care of him, and see that he is well done by. I had only seen him once since you left until today, when I went down to the house and saw him. The next day after you went away he went out and did not return at the time he was told to. And since that time his mistress has not let him come out, except last Sunday when his grandma sent little Walter for him and she ventured to let him come up.

ZCMI is busy removing its stock of goods to the new building where we intend opening next Saturday, April 1st. It is quite a work to transport so heavy a stock so short a distance even as between the old store and the new and it keeps a number of hands and several teams constantly employed. The stock of goods is in excellent condition and the institution is on a far firmer footing today than it has been for many months past.

Your Uncle Lorenzo [Dow Young] has resigned the bishopric in the 18th Ward. He found his health would not permit him to attend to the active duties of his office, so preferred to give way in favor of a younger man. Elder John Nicholson will probably be his successor, with two of the younger brethren as his counselors.

I am glad to hear that you had a pleasant visit from Spencer [Clawson] and Nabbie [Young Clawson]. Whenever you see them give my best respects to them, as also to Willard, to Rudger Clawson and to any other of the brethren or our friends whom you may meet.

I hope that you will be successful in settling up your business so that you can return home.

If you will let me have Johnny telegraph immediately. Just use these two words. "Take Johnny!" That will be all sufficient, I will pay it.

Your mother joins me in love and prayers in your behalf.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated November 23, 1876

Brigham Young's repeated plea to his son John W. to settle his business affairs in the East and return and dedicate himself more fully to the building up of the kingdom of God struck a responsive note in the mind of his son. Writing on April 2, 1876, shortly after his return to New York, John W. took occasion to pour out the deep feelings of his soul, not only on the subject of his business affairs, but also his feelings toward his father.

"It is with more than ordinary interest and affection that this letter is penned for your perusal. My confidence, esteem, and love, can be three times estimated; first by the undying and unbounded confidence I have in your mission as a Prophet of God bearing the Holy Priesthood; second, by the duty I owe to an able, faithful leader of a Great People; third, by the warmest affection that burns within my heart for a beloved father. In writing this letter there is but one object, that, to assure you the Gospel burns within my bosom. In my prolonged absence from home there has been no private motive of mine save as the business in which I am engaged compels me. So completely has my mind been on Utah, her interests, and our people, that I suppose I have never realized my absence as my friends at home do. Where one conversation has been upon business, many have been upon Religion, and it may not be that the Lord condemns me for my labor.

"My protracted illness of last summer, although severe, was productive of good: it gave me time to think, to contemplate, to see my work, to contrast an occupation for lucre, with that for Eternal Lives, and Glory in God's Kingdom.

"The death of my dearly beloved brother and sister, Joseph A. and Alice, sank deeply, and I said, by the Lord's help, when I die, I will die too with full harness on, and not tear and wear my strength and life to shreds promoting any private enterprise. By thus speaking of my labors East, I do not wish to convey the idea that money has been my object, for the Lord knows it has not, but to build up the Country occupied by the Saints, and learn the commercial and material standing of the world and show them ours, and this, that I might be more useful at home.

"The light in which it presents itself is this: where is the place for a servant of the Lord to do the greatest work. The answer comes, at home, in Zion! My mind is fixed dear Father, and just as soon as I can complete my labors here, and discharge my duty to others honorably, command me then henceforth, and with God's help I will obey. . . . Hereafter it will be my delight to pass all the time alloted in your society and under the counsel and control of your great experience. . . . Sincerely praying God to give you health and happiness, and power to lead the people and defeat our enemies, and with love to all the Brethren I am, your affectionate son, John W. Young." [^31]

By October 1876 John W. had so arranged his railroad affairs in the East that he was able to return to Utah and accept the appointment as his father's first counselor in the presidency of the Church, to which position he was sustained in general conference six days after his return.

Writing to his father in St. George, Utah, a month after his call, John W. assured him, "The responsibility of the position which you have called me to is ever before me and I am, with the help of the Lord, bound to honor and magnify it, and let the follies of this world go, and occupy my time with the Things of the Kingdom; all I want is to get out honorably." [^32]

The following letter of Brigham Young, written about two months after John W. Young's appointment to the presidency, shows that the son was already engaged in the responsibilities of his new calling.

St. George, Utah, November 23, 1876

John W. Young

Salt Lake City, Utah

My dear Son,

I have received some few telegrams from you, and I believe all are answered.

This morning you asked if I would sell Bro. John Parry some thirty acres of land south of the city, near Shirtliff's place. I would rather not do so at present. The land I would rather keep than sell short of fifty dollars an acre. The Co-op stock that you mentioned in your telegram as part pay is good for to keep, but not to sell. I would not give more than thirty five cents on the dollar for it. And I am opposed to the brethren [selling] so cheap. I control some three hundred and fifty thousand dollars worth of this stock. This is as much as I ought to carry. The people that own the stock ought to keep it. The institution is for the benefit of the people, and they do reap the reward whether they know it or not, though not in the shape of dividends but in keeping down the price of goods. I did not say as much to you in my telegram about the railroad as I wish to. As to the Pacific R.R. company buying my stock and bonds, they are not disposed to do any such thing unless they can make a speculation of it. I do not care about their buying it. If they would bring our coal for a reasonable price we would rather they should do so. We would be willing to furnish our own cars, and if they will not do this I think the people had better build a road to the coal fields. If we build a railroad I want to do it openly and on the square, not in secret.

I do really wish you was not obliged to go east again this winter, but could spend a little time here in St. George with me.

I am glad to hear you are doing all you can to encourage the brethren where you are. If Bro. Edward's wife is not able to go to the farm over Jordan this winter, he can go and take care of the things through the winter and come home at night.

I have answered a letter from Bro. [Daniel H.] Wells about Grantsville. You and Bro. Wells had better go over there and ordain a bishop; Edward Hunter, I think, should be the man; he lives there.

I am thankful that I have you to help me. Brigham is here but his health is not very good; his head troubles him some, but is doing what he can. He has just returned from a short tour south with Bro. [Erastus] Snow and others to hunt out a road to a large field of pinion pine and cedars.

How is your mother's health? And Libbie and the children, and all the rest of the folks?

How does Bro. [Joseph H.] Ridges prosper in getting up the work in the new house?

How is the Co-op doing, are things prospering there? If it comes right, get some one to buy back the Hooper carriage and your carriage. If not handy, no matter, there are plenty of carriages in the world and they are making more.

I said to you in one of my telegrams: If you are obliged to go east take no one with you and bring no one back, and stay as little time there as possible. Learn to save your dimes, that you may have dollars, and your dollars that you may have hundreds and thousands, so that you can do business and not be distressed or worried at any time.

I wish you could be with me the most of the time, and you could were it not for your railroad business, but you must get along with it and it will give you a valuable experience.

I wish Joseph F. Smith could look into the temple in this place before he goes to England. I think it would do him good. And I think it would do you good to do so. If Joseph F. could come down and make a flying visit before he leaves I would very much like it.

If you were at leisure so you could take him in a light buggy you could put him through in quick time.

The temple is now almost entirely completed. The upper room needs a few days more labor; then it will be finished.

Give my best respects to Bro. Wells and the brethren and to all my wives and children.

I pray for you constantly and for all the Saints. God bless you.

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Dennis Michael Quinn, "Organizational Development and Social Origins of the Mormon Hierarchy, 1832-1932: A Prosopographical Study" (Master's Thesis, University of Utah, 1973), p. 289.
[^2] Heber Young, Diary, p. 9.
[^3] Heber Young, Diary, 24 May 1867.
[^4] Ibid., 26 June 1867.
[^5] Ibid., 26-27 July 1867.
[^6] Heber Young to George Q. Cannon, Deseret News 17:239.
[^7] Journal History, 12 December 1868.
[^8] Heber Young to Albert Carrington, 1 August 1869, Millennial Star 31:550.
[^9] Heber Young to Brigham Young, 9 February 1870.
[^10] The Godbeite movement in Utah had its beginnings as early as 1864, when a group of prominent Utah merchants and intellectuals became critical of temporal and economic policies of Brigham Young. After its leaders, Elias L. T. Harrison, William S. Godbe, Edward Tullidge, and Eli Kelsey, were excommunicated in 1869, they formed the Church of Zion, which sought to revitalize Mormonism but which, by the late 1870s, had dissipated itself in spiritualism and contention. The movement provided the initial thrust for the main nineteenth century anti-Mormon vehicles of dissent: the Liberal Institute, the Salt Lake Tribune, and the Liberal Party. See Ronald W. Walker, "The Godbeite Church of Zion" and "The Origins of the Godbeite Protest: Another View," Typescripts, Church Archives; and Grant H. Palmer, "The Godbeite Movement" (Master's Thesis, BYU, 1968).
[^11] John W. Young to Brigham Young 9 May 1866. Even at the end of his life, living in near poverty, John W. appeared in public meticulously dressed in his frock coat and pin stripes.
[^12] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866. Not a holograph, probably dictated to John T. Caine.
[^13] Ibid.
[^14] Ibid. See also Journal History, 27 March 1866.
[^15] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866.
[^16] Undated newsclipping from the Auburn Advertiser accompanying John W. Young's letter to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866. John W.'s errand in Auburn also received notice in a Cincinnati newspaper. See Journal History, 25 April 1866.
[^17] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 9 May 1866.
[^18] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 18 September 1866.
[^19] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 15 December 1866.
[^20] Ibid. Shortly before the end of his mission, while in France with his brothers Brigham Jr. and Oscar, John W. saw the French monarch Napoleon at the Paris Exhibition. In a letter to his father he gave his impressions of the king: "The more I see of the world and those that call themselves the wise and great of the earth, the more my heart beats with joy to know that there is something on the earth that is really and truly worth living for, for outside of the Kingdom it seems worse than dros to me. I must say tho' that the first person I thought of while looking at Napoleon was my dear Father, for the bearing and form were so much like yours that it brought immediately your form before me. Napoleon seemed much care-worn and looked to me as if he could not bear up the cares of state much longer, unless there should be a change for the better." John W. Young to Brigham Young, 18 April 1867.
[^21] "John W. Young Interviewed," Millennial Star 35 (9 September 1873): 566.
[^22] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 30 August 1873.
[^23] Brigham Young to John W. Young, 13 November 1874. John W. Young Papers.
[^24] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 21 August 1875. Sentiments of love and esteem characterize John W. Young's writings to his parents. During his mission to England in 1866 he wrote to his father after a long delay: "I seat myself to write to you and it is with great pleasure that I do so because I not only love you as a Father but, respect and honor you as a Prophet of God. . . . I know that you have a great amount of business to continually tax your mind, therefore I do not wish to thrust my communications upon you any oftener than they will be acceptable; if I do not write often enough, all you have to do is to say the word and I will write more frequently than I have done for I always esteem it a great privilege to do so." John W. Young to Brigham Young, 22 August 1866. From New York City in June 1871 John W. penned these lines on the eve of his father's birthday: "I seat myself to pen a few lines in commemoration of the day and to show, although in a far distant city, my thoughts fly back to my dear mountain home to my father whom I honor, love, and desire to obey. The day has been crowded with business but nevertheless my remembrance of you has been in the foreground of everything for I reverence the anniversary of the day that gave you birth, and if my sincere prayers avail anything, your days will yet be many on the earth." John W. Young to Brigham Young, 1 June 1871.
[^25] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 22 November 1875.
[^26] John M. Whitaker, Diary, 11 February 1889. University of Utah. Those who knew John W. Young were impressed with his striking personality. Seven workers who had labored under him laying track for the Utah Central Railroad in 1869 publicly acknowledged him in the pages of the Deseret News: "We take this opportunity of making known to you the admiration we feel for you, as a brother and a gentleman, and for the devotion and gentlemanly manner in which you have looked after our comfort and happiness, and also for the example you have set us as a servant of God." Deseret News, 27 January 1870. John M. Whitaker wrote, "He is a wonderful man, kind, considerate, lovable, gracious, never knows defeat, takes his problems to the Lord, prays about them, seeks divine aid, and is always saying, 'Brother Whitaker, all is for the Kingdom of God.' At other times when aroused, he is like a lion, courageous, brave, fearless, proud, persuasive and very much misunderstood. It seems his great incentive is for human advancement and happiness. . . . He moves among great men with an ease I have seldom seen. One day while we were waiting at the elevator at Exchange Place, it happened to be full and as it passed by him, President Bell, Manager of the Manhatten Club, one of the most exclusive in New York, was asked by another gentleman, 'Mr. Bell, who was that gentleman waiting at the door of the elevator?' Mr. Bell answered, 'That was President Brigham Young's oldest son, and a more perfect gentleman I have never known.'" John M. Whitaker, Diary, 29 March 1889.
[^27] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 22 November 1875.
[^28] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 29 December 1875; 3 January 1876.
[^29] Brigham Young, Jr., Diary, 14-15 March 1876.
[^30] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 21 March 1876.
[^31] This holograph letter is dated April 7, 1875, which is undoubtedly an error as to the year, since reference to the death of Joseph A. Young, who died August 5, 1875, would require a date after that event.
[^32] John W. Young to Brigham Young, 10 November 1876.
