Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Brigham Heber Young

1845-1928

Brigham Heber Young, the son of Brigham and Lucy Ann Decker Young, was born June 18, 1845, at Nauvoo, Illinois, amid preparations for the Latter-day Saint departure from that city. Having survived the rigors of crossing the plains, the small child arrived with his mother in the Salt Lake Valley in the fall of 1848. Growing up in the new settlement, Heber assisted in odd jobs at home and was educated in the family school. He excelled in mathematics and expressed interest in engineering but did not pursue higher education in that field.

There is evidence that Heber was one of at least four of Brigham Young's sons ordained apostles by their father, although he was never numbered with the General Authorities or named to the Council of Twelve. [^1] During his teen-age years he traveled extensively with his father and brothers Joseph A., Brigham Jr., and John W., visiting the settlements of the Saints. At seventeen he drove an ox team to the Missouri River to assist with the Church emigration. In the summer of 1865 he was employed by the Union Pacific Railroad under Samuel B. Reed on survey work between South Pass and Humboldt Wells. A few days after returning home, Heber and seven other young men were sent east with provisions as part of a relief force to assist the Willis emigrant company, which had been delayed on the plains by a stampede of their cattle and heavy snow. The relief column found the emigrants in a destitute condition at the Sweetwater River. "The morning we met the company they had eaten nearly the last of their provisions and were much pleased to see us with fresh supplies," Heber noted. [^2] In 1866 he was again employed with the railroad survey along the Humboldt River to the California border.

At the general conference of the Church in Salt Lake City in April 1867 Heber was one of fifty missionaries called. A month later he was en route to Europe, where he served a year in England and two years in Switzerland. Five months after his return to Salt Lake City, he married Vilate Ruth Clayton, a daughter of William Clayton, on November 24, 1870. To them were born three daughters.

After receiving a special blessing from their father, Heber and his brother Arta De Christa traveled to Soda Springs, Idaho, with their families in the spring of 1872; there they opened a branch of Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution. Not accustomed to the climate of Idaho, which he described as a "godforsaken isolated snow prison," Heber remained less than a year in Soda Springs. Subsequently, he moved to Logan, Utah, and finally in the fall of 1873 back to Salt Lake City, where he spent the remainder of his life. In the settlement of his father's estate Heber received $18,000, which provided a basis for his support in following years. Upon moving to Salt Lake City he was employed by the Deseret Woolen Mills and E. J. Swaner and Company, a watchmaking and jewelry firm; and, beginning in 1889, he engaged in the insurance and real estate business, where he became president of the Young and Fowler Company.

Heber Young died June 3, 1928, in Salt Lake City at eighty-two years of age.

Letter dated September 30, 1867

Having been called as a missionary at the general conference in April 1867, Heber Young and some twenty others started east for the railroad terminus with John Sharp's wagon train on May 10. The missionaries had just headed up Emigration Canyon when the wagon containing Heber's possessions tipped over and rolled into the creek. The accident forced him to return to the city and delayed his departure another two weeks. "Many and strange were the thoughts that crowded my breast as I left the home of my friends, my companions of youth, and all that was dear to me on earth. As the City grew small in the distance, and I was to take, for some years, my last look upon the valley I loved so well, clouds of trouble seemed to be lowering around me. I was young, I was inexperienced and my only solace, was trust in a gracious God," [^3] the twenty-one-year-old missionary wrote in his diary.

As they traveled to the railroad terminus at Julesberg through inclement weather, Heber noted, "We had a good trip and were signally blessed and protected by the unseen hand of providence, for while we were allowed to pass, not only uninjured, but really uninterrupted, many a poor unfortunate soul, whose bones now lie mouldering on the desolate plain fell a victim to the remorseless savage. Many mail stations were still burning, which had been destroyed by the Red Man, as we passed along. Destruction of mail matter and pools of human blood where had been committed the most formidable massacres, were still the unwelcome sight to those who ventured along that dreary road." [^4]

At Julesberg Heber saw his first railroad train. The missionaries continued east by rail to New York City, and after "a dire voyage of thirteen days," they arrived in Liverpool, England. After being greeted by the mission president, "who promised us work for the future two or three years," Heber went shopping and bought a "neat clerical suit, which felt as uncomfortable as it seemed to me to be misplaced." The following day, Sunday, he gave his maiden speech, "which was as short as it was meaningless. I thought I would drop through my collar into my boots, but by one overwhelming effort I managed to survive and believed I should yet live for many years." [^5]

Assigned to work in the London Conference, Heber Young left Liverpool on July 28 for his field of labor. About three months after his arrival in London, he received the following letter from his father, the contents of which so motivated him that he had the epistle published in the British Mission periodical, the Latter-day Saints' Millennial Star.

Salt Lake City, September 30, 1867

Elder Heber Young

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Your letter of [blank] was received and perused with pleasure. I am glad to learn that you feel so well in your ministry, and I trust that this feeling will increase within you so long as you remain on your mission. I hope you will write to me often and keep me informed of your progress and labors. You have now entered upon a new sphere of action; the responsibilities and cares of manhood, and especially those which pertain to the priesthood, are resting upon you, and much more is expected from you now than ever before. There is this consolation which God has given to His servants—that as their day their strength shall be, and He will bestow His grace upon them so that they may be equal to every responsibility and emergency. You are now in a position to find Him a present help in time of need, and He will be to you all that you can desire if you only seek to Him with faith and diligence.

There is no position a young man can be placed in that is better adapted to give him a knowledge of God and of His holy Spirit than to be sent on a mission. If you are humble and prayerful He will reveal Himself to you with a power which you have never heretofore known, and you will have greater joy in your labors and in your existence than you have ever before been capable of comprehending. We pray for you constantly, and we feel assured that our prayers will be heard in your behalf. It will give us great pleasure to hear of your success and of your magnifying your priesthood and fulfilling this mission which has been assigned you honorably before God and your brethren, that when you return you may come pure and unspotted. To this end I pray you to remember your high calling. You are young and inexperienced in the ways of the wicked world, therefore as Paul wrote to Timothy, so write I to you, "Flee also youthful lusts." Bring your passions and appetites and all your feelings into complete subjection to the mind and will of God. If you are determined to maintain the mastery you can do so by the Lord's help. The man who suffers his passions to lead him becomes a slave to them, and such a man will find the work of emancipation an exceedingly difficult one. Make the doing of God's will and the keeping of His commandments a constant habit with you and it will become perfectly natural and easy for you to walk uprightly before Him. The time of youth and early manhood is the proper time in which to form such habits.

You know the truth sufficiently to be capable of teaching it. Let your example show it forth more strongly, even, than your words, that others seeing your good works may be constrained to acknowledge that they are better than theirs and may, perchance, be influenced to go and do likewise.

Your mother and the children and all the family are well. Alice [Young Clawson] buried her youngest child yesterday, and one of Vilate [Young Decker]'s is buried today. The present is rather an unhealthy season and we have had a good many deaths among the children, but it is hoped that the cool weather will correct this and make the elements more healthy. The grasshoppers or locusts that we have had have probably helped to poison the atmosphere and produce sickness, and the high waters may have had a tendency in the same direction.

Everything is peaceable in the Territory. We have never been more free from annoyance on the part of our enemies than at the present time, and the Saints are rejoicing in their religion and are increasing in the works of righteousness.

In company with a number of the Twelve and other elders I left this city on the 2nd instant on a visit to Bear Lake Valley. We returned on the 17th, having traveled three hundred miles and held twenty-five meetings while we were absent. It was one of the most agreeable trips I ever made, though in returning from Bear Lake we had a two-day snowstorm. We noticed great improvements in the settlements and in the circumstances of the people. Much valuable instruction was given to the people during our sojourn amongst them.

Our new tabernacle, though not quite finished in every respect, is yet so forward that we expect to hold our fall conference in it, commencing next Sunday. It has been pushed forward during the latter part of the summer with great diligence, and the workmen have manifested great zeal in their labors. It is a magnificent place and will answer the purpose for which it was constructed, admirably.

Brigham Jr., John W., and Katie [Catherine Spencer Young] and the children with a number of other returned missionaries have reached here in good health and spirits. We had discourses from several of them yesterday in the Bowery, all expressing their delight at reaching home. The company of immigrating Saints will probably be in within two weeks. Six four-mule teams, besides many individuals who have friends in the company, have gone out to meet and assist them.

Give my love to all the elders who are with you, and accept the same to yourself, in which your mother and the family and Presidents [Heber C.] Kimball and [Daniel H.] Wells join, and praying the Lord to be with you, and to bless you with the power and wisdom necessary to magnify your calling, and to fill your mission with honor, and to preserve you and to bring you home in peace and safety, I remain,

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letters dated September 3, 1868, to February 16, 1870

After laboring nearly a year as a "traveling elder" in the London Conference of the British Mission, Heber Young was transferred to Switzerland, where he continued his missionary work for another two years. In company with Willard B. Richards, he left London on July 6 and reported to Karl G. Maeser in Switzerland two days later. "We are now in the beautiful country of Switzerland, where we can enjoy the pure mountain air, which brother W. B. Richards and myself highly appreciate, after being cooped up in smoky London for the past 12 months. . . . One thing I think worthy of note," he continued, "is that farming can be carried on, wheat can stand out in the open field without being protected by stone walls, and still permitted to grow and not be subject to prowling 'critters' which are so great a pest in our own country." [^6]

Accepting the challenge of a foreign language, Heber made rapid progress with the new tongue. After attending his first conference, shortly after arriving in Switzerland, he confessed that because he was not able to speak German he was unable to give much instruction. However, within a few months Karl G. Maeser wrote Brigham Young that "beyond my expectation, I found your son Heber so much advanced in German that he preached here on Sunday Nov. 29 in my presence a fine German discourse without using a single English word to the edification and understanding of a large congregation." [^7]

In August 1869 a meeting of the Saints in Fuerstenau, Germany, was interrupted by two Methodist preachers who ridiculed the Mormons, Utah, and Brigham Young, whereupon Heber arose and, in the most fitting terms he could muster, informed the gentlemen that he was a son of Brigham Young and that he had been raised in Utah and was well versed in Mormon habits and customs. He corrected the statements of the clergymen and testified to the integrity of his father and the Latter-day Saints in general, and after talking with the visitors for some time, "found more toleration than I had dared to hope for." He concluded, "I think their visit will aid to slacken the bands of bigotry and prejudice which have existed to so great a degree in the past." [^8]

Desirous to retain his knowledge of the German language, Heber wrote his father before leaving Switzerland for some money with which to purchase a good German dictionary and some German publications, "as I do not wish, as soon as I reach home, to forget the little I have learned, and for which I have so assiduously studied." [^9]

During his stay in the Swiss-German Mission, Heber Young successively presided over the East Swiss Conference and was secretary of the mission, president of the Zurich District, and first counselor to President Maeser in the mission presidency, before his release in June 1870. The following letters of Brigham Young dated September 3 and October 22, 1868, and February 16, 1870, were written to Heber Young during his stay in the Swiss-German Mission.

Salt Lake City, September 3, 1868

Elder Heber Young

Swiss, Italian and German Mission

My dear Son,

Your letters of the [blank] insts. are received and it was very satisfactory to me to hear that your health was good and that you enjoy your mission and like your new field of labor; it is a source of great benefit to the elders to travel in different countries and preach the gospel; they become acquainted with the various habits and customs of the nations, and learning other languages gives them a more perfect knowledge of their own.

It is good to hear that the spirit of inquiry is increasing among the people in that region and that some are embracing the truth, for the time is near when judgments will overtake the wicked and they will have cause to mourn for the manner in which they have treated the message God has sent His servants to declare unto the nations. Since last I wrote you, Israel has endured the loss of one of her chieftains, President Heber C. Kimball, who passed away on the 22nd of June after an illness of ten days. We feel his loss and his memory is held dear among all the faithful Saints at home and, I trust, abroad. Capt. Wm. H. Hooper arrived lately from Washington. He has had quite a contest with [William] McGrorty, who made an absurd attempt to rob our delegate of his seat, but the effort proved as unsuccessful as it was illegal.

The railroad is progressing rapidly. A great portion of the work on my contract is completed and considerable interest is manifested in the matter. It is not yet known on which side of the lake the line will run, but it is probable we shall soon hear the snorting of the iron horse through our valleys giving us the facilities, commercial and otherwise, which invariably accompany such a speedy mode of transit.

Your brothers Joseph A., Brigham Jun., and John W. are actively engaged in the work as my agents. The grasshoppers have done some damage to our crops; in Morgan, Summit, and Wasatch counties they have taken pretty much all the grain, but in Davis and Cache the brethren have sown such a quantity that I think with prudence and economy we shall have sufficient to last us till another harvest.

Bro. Albert Carrington left on the 17th ult. for Liverpool to take the presidency of the European Mission.

Some of the trains loaded with immigrants have arrived, others are expected shortly; the Saints look well and appear to appreciate being gathered home. It is a great privilege to those coming from other countries now, to be able to perform so much of their journey by rail, leaving but about 350 miles to travel with teams. The journey is far less tedious besides the advantages gained in the saving of time.

Your mother is well and also the children. Ernest is my main man on the forest farm.

I started on the 17th ult. accompanied by Bros. John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Geo. A. Smith, Geo. Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, A[mos] M. Musser and others on a trip to Cache Valley. We held meetings in the principal settlements and preached to the people on their various duties, urging upon them to keep their covenants sacred, take care of their grain, and live uprightly before the Lord; we returned on the 25th in good health having held fifteen meetings and traveled 176 miles.

The brethren join me in kind love to you. I trust you will continue to enjoy the spirit of your mission, and labor for the spread of the gospel with that energy which shall rid your garments of the blood of the nations to which you are sent.

Be faithful to your religion. Remember your covenants. Eschew all impure thoughts and feelings and live humbly and prayerfully before the Lord, and that you may be greatly blessed and prospered in the ministry and return unspotted from the world, is the sincere and earnest prayer of

Your father,

Brigham Young

P.S. I received both your letters referred to, but I handed them to your mother to read, and they have got misplaced.

Salt Lake City, October 22, 1868

Elder Heber Young

Zurich, Switzerland

My dear Son,

The perusal of your letters always affords me great pleasure, manifesting as they do, by the spirit in which they are written, that you realize the importance and sacredness of your calling as an elder in Israel sent to bear the glad tidings of the gospel of salvation to the nations who sit in darkness and unbelief. If there is anything that gives joy to the hearts of the fathers in this kingdom it is the knowledge that their sons seize the holy principles for which they have so long labored in the name of Jesus, and that their children are preparing themselves by faith and good works to bear off the kingdom triumphant and accomplish the work their fathers have commenced. Be prayerful to the Lord continually and humble in His hands; trust in Him for His holy Spirit and in every circumstance remember how great is the responsibility placed upon you to set an example amongst Saints and strangers worthy to be copied by all men, that the cause of God may be honored in your life, and His name glorified by your good deeds.

I wrote to you on the 3rd of last month. I hope my letter has reached you safely before this. Yesterday I read your letter to your mother of the [blank] Sept. I was pleased to hear you were well and enjoying your mission.

Myself, your mother, and your brothers and sisters are well. Exactly at twelve o'clock last night Fanny [Y. Thatcher] had a fine girl; mother and daughter are both doing well. Ernest is now on the road having gone to meet the last of the immigration, those who were detained at New York through sickness. They will be here the day after tomorrow. They compose the last company I anticipate we shall have to send out to meet, as before another immigration season comes around we have every reason to believe the railroad will be running through these valleys.

Joseph A., Brigham Jun., and John W. are busily engaged on my grading contract. Joseph A. is associated with Bro. John Sharp in a large contract in Weber Canyon. They have some very heavy work to do, including two tunnels. John W. has a contract also. His is a heavy piece of work in Echo, while Brigham is engaged in superintending the whole of the work as my representative.

The brethren have now got used to the labor and can work to much greater advantage than when they first started. A great portion of the earth work is now finished, but there is a large fill at the head of Echo which we are now crowding with all our might. The tracklayers are advancing with giant strides. Already they have passed Brian, 18 miles this side of Green River, and they intend to make a temporary track round the tunnels and heavy work that may not be finished in time. Dr.[Thomas C.] Durrant, the vice-president of the road, was here a few weeks ago. He talks of getting the road through to this valley in sixty days. He has not yet learned what it is to crowd tunnel through our canyons in mid-winter.

Hyrum, Arta, and several of the other boys are attending the classes at the Commercial Department of the University of Deseret under the care of Elder David O. Calder; they are there practically taught in the various branches of a business education by actual business transactions, which familiarizes them with the practice as well as the theory of commerce.

Caroline [Young] and Zina [Young] have been married within the last few weeks, Zina to Bro. Thomas Williams and Caroline to Mark Croxall. At our last conference the vacancy caused in the quorum of the First Presidency by the departure to another sphere of usefulness of Bro. H. C. Kimball, was filled by the appointment of Elder Geo. A. Smith, Brigham Jun. being called to be a member of the Quorum of the Twelve to fill the vacancy caused by Elder Smith's removal. About one hundred and sixty elders were also then called to strengthen the mission on the Muddy, the majority being residents of this city, but quite a number also from American Fork, Pleasant Grove, Farmington, and other settlements. They are most of them men of weight in the places in which they have lived, and I expect to see the southern mission greatly benefited.

Remember me most kindly to Elders [Karl G.] Maeser, [Octave] Ursenbach, [Willard B.] Richards and the other elders associated with you in the Swiss and German Missions, and to the Saints.

May God our Heavenly Father continue to bless you and give you the wisdom of His Spirit, and power to do much good that you may return home when the time comes full of joy and gladness, is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

P.S. You need not marvel to see some of the boys with you next summer. I rather think I shall send James Little. I wrote to Bro. Maeser yesterday; he will no doubt show you his letter. From it you will be able to learn the steps we are taking to build up Zion in our deal and trading.

Salt Lake City, February 16, 1870

Elder Heber Young

Sihlhalle, Aussersihl, Zurich

My dear Son,

Your welcome letter of Jan. 11 has been received and read not only by myself, but by some of the brethren who frequent the office, by your mother, and others of the family and we are extremely well pleased to hear from you and of your continued good health and prosperity in your field of labor.

For my part, I had supposed that a letter was long since due from you, but upon inquiry I have ascertained that your last, having been taken into the house for the folks to read, was not returned to the office and hence was not answered.

It is truly gratifying to hear of the spread of truth in Switzerland and of the faithfulness and zeal as displayed by the elders—native and foreign. May God bless them with joy and peace in their labors and crown them with success. We are constantly receiving communications from the elders laboring in the States, but how different is their testimony with regard to the work of God there. There is a coldness in the minds of the people, a total indifference to the gospel and its glorious truths and the whole sum of their inquiries [is] how and where can we make the most money. Of course there are a few exceptions, but what a condition of things does this indicate! Every species of wickedness is on the increase, and so rapidly, that it is difficult to conceive otherwise than that the people are fast ripening for destruction. And why is this? The gospel door was opened on this land, prophets and apostles have traversed it preaching the divine message, temples have been erected upon it where the sacred ordinances of the priesthood have been administered, but these ordinances have been held in derision, the truth has been rejected, prophets and apostles have been slain for the testimony of Jesus, and now the people have become hardened in iniquity and are led captive to the will of that evil power they prefer to serve. Yesterday I read in a N.Y. paper of the discovery of a secret organization there, where perjurers could be hired to give evidence on any subject, at so much an oath.

The times are interesting and probably there never was any more opposition manifested to the kingdom of God than there is now. Foes without and foes within, apostates and outsiders, and among the former class are some who have hitherto professed the strongest fidelity to the kingdom of God. We have, verily, the world, the flesh, and the devil to contend with. All are against us, but those among us who have understanding and in whom the light of Christ dwells feel as unruffled as the bosom of the ocean when heaven is smiling and the winds are at perfect rest, or, to speak more popularly, they feel that God and one good man are a vast majority. No less than five bills are now before Congress, having in view the disintegration of Utah and, in short, to deprive us of every vestige of constitutional liberty and reduce us to a condition of moral and political serfdom but, as the proverb says, "man proposes, but God disposes."

The Godbe Planchette Church, [^10] of which you have doubtless heard, is not making the progress its founders and advocates anticipated, but it is picking up a class who have already apostatized and who, like a drowning man, are ready to catch even at a straw. Their doctrines are as antagonistic to God and his righteousness as hell is opposed to heaven. They ignore the efficacy of the atonement, and they practically repudiate celestial marriage on the plea that the principle may do in the heavens, but they are not pure enough for it on the earth. On the 10th inst. we had a mass meeting in this city of a somewhat peculiar character. It appears that a few nights previous to that, the Godbe clique held a caucus, and got up an opposition ticket for city officers. Accordingly, they placarded the city with bills, the object of which was as set forth, "for the nomination of a people's free and independent ticket for mayor, aldermen, councilors &c. to be voted for on Monday the 14th inst." This bill was headed "Come one, come all!" and was subscribed "many voters." The consequence of such a general invitation was not what was expected by those who issued it, for at an early hour "Walker's Original Store" was crowded with our citizens, who, in an orderly, systematic manner, elected chairman, secretary, reporter &c., after which the chair announced that nominations were in order, and the legitimate ticket was put and sustained with extraordinary unanimity. The president or chairman of the meeting was Col. J. C. Little, (not Eli B. Kelsey, as had been intended) and the Planchetteites felt rather crest-fallen at the unexpected turn things had taken. But the invitation was to all the citizens, consequently, there was a large attendance. On Monday (14th) the election of city officers was held. The opposition votes were 297, the legitimate ticket, 2004. About 25 women voted, on the occasion. You must know that woman suffrage is a law now in this territory! Last week it passed both houses and on Saturday was signed by the governor.

I expect to start with a small company for Dixie and probably across the Colorado. In the latter event we may be gone perhaps a couple of months.

The Utah Central Railroad is a success. Trains are running regularly and the business bids fair to be very prosperous. The cost of constructing and furnishing the road will reach about one and a quarter million dollars, not a dollar of which is owing to anyone outside of the Church. It will seem a novelty to you that we have a railroad of our own running into this city, but so it is, and we hear the steam whistle in the office with great plainness as the iron horse comes snorting on to the Babbitt block. The fare to Ogden is $2.00 at present, but it will be reduced for the benefit of our citizens in way of excursion trains and return tickets to about half that rate.

My health, I am happy to state, is at present good, and has been as a general thing, through the winter, though I suffered a little with the mumps. Your mother is well and so are all the folks. Fanny [Young Thatcher] is visiting at the Beehive House. She is afflicted some with her eyes. Bro. [George W.] Thatcher has moved all his family to Logan.

Remember me affectionately to all the faithful brethren and an especial manner to Bro. Maeser. We pray for you continually that you may be blessed in all your labors for the welfare of Israel.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Oscar Brigham Young to Brigham Young, 29 April 1873.
[^2] Heber Young, Diary, p. 9.
[^3] Heber Young, Diary, 24 May 1867.
[^4] Ibid., 26 June 1867.
[^5] Ibid., 26-27 July 1867.
[^6] Heber Young to George Q. Cannon, Deseret News 17:239.
[^7] Journal History, 12 December 1868.
[^8] Heber Young to Albert Carrington, 1 August 1869, Millennial Star 31:550.
[^9] Heber Young to Brigham Young, 9 February 1870.
[^10] The Godbeite movement in Utah had its beginnings as early as 1864, when a group of prominent Utah merchants and intellectuals became critical of temporal and economic policies of Brigham Young. After its leaders, Elias L. T. Harrison, William S. Godbe, Edward Tullidge, and Eli Kelsey, were excommunicated in 1869, they formed the Church of Zion, which sought to revitalize Mormonism but which, by the late 1870s, had dissipated itself in spiritualism and contention. The movement provided the initial thrust for the main nineteenth century anti-Mormon vehicles of dissent: the Liberal Institute, the Salt Lake Tribune, and the Liberal Party. See Ronald W. Walker, "The Godbeite Church of Zion" and "The Origins of the Godbeite Protest: Another View," Typescripts, Church Archives; and Grant H. Palmer, "The Godbeite Movement" (Master's Thesis, BYU, 1968).
