Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Oscar Brigham Young

1846-1910

The only son of Brigham Young and Harriet Elizabeth Cook Young, Oscar Brigham was born in the Nathaniel Ashby home in Nauvoo, Illinois, on February 10, 1846, five days before his father left Nauvoo to lead the Mormon exodus to the west. Harriet and her small son joined Brigham Young in Winter Quarters later that year, and they continued on to Salt Lake Valley in September 1848. Before the completion of the Lion House in the mid-1850s, Oscar lived with his mother in a one-room log house on a hill north of the city. His mother was known to Indians in the area as Brigham Young's brave squaw from an incident in which she had courageously driven a thieving Indian from her home and chased him over the sagebrush-covered hills, beating him with a broom. Oscar's frequent contact with Indian children rewarded him with a fair knowledge of their customs and language.

Oscar attended school in the Lion House, where his mother, who had been educated in a private school in Pennsylvania, taught Brigham Young's children. He also studied at the family school east of the Eagle Gate and later at the University of Deseret. Although he loved to read and draw, his fondness for the outdoors eclipsed his desire for education—a fact he later regretted. One incident during his school years that reinforced his dislike for formal education occurred when he was placed on a stool with a dunce cap before the class on one occasion, after having been caught drawing instead of working an arithmetic assignment.

At sixteen Oscar assisted with the Church emigration, driving an ox team to the Missouri River and back. His marriage in 1865 to Paralee Russell, by whom he had one child, terminated in a divorce a few years later. Prior to this he left his wife and child to serve as a missionary to England for nine months in 1866-67. While living with his mother at Leeds, Washington County, Utah, in his early twenties, Oscar learned the blacksmith trade and established the only blacksmith shop in town. Later he worked at his trade in Salt Lake City in a shop on North Temple Street, servicing teams and tools for the workmen on the Salt Lake Temple. Severely injured in an accident that resulted in occasional mental disorder, Oscar nevertheless led a normal, active life as a blacksmith, farmer, rancher, railroad worker, and manager of the Deseret Woolen Mill.

In October 1875 Oscar married Annie M. Roseberry, a daughter of Swedish converts to the Church. They became the parents of eleven children, including three sets of twins born within three and a half years.

While living in Salt Lake Valley, Oscar resided first near the mouth of Parley's Canyon and later on an eighty-acre farm in Sugar House. In 1890 the family moved to Provo, where the children attended the Brigham Young Academy, and Oscar served as a member of the Board of Trustees until shortly before his death from a paralytic stroke on August 4, 1910.

Letter dated March 16, 1867

Leaving his wife and a three-month-old daughter, Oscar B. Young boarded a stagecoach in Salt Lake City on August 13, 1866, to begin his mission to England. Crossing the Atlantic on the steamer City of Paris in the record time of ten days, on September 11 he arrived in Liverpool, where he was greeted by his brothers Brigham Jr. and John W., who had preceded him as missionaries to England, the former as president of the European Mission. Except for a visit to the Paris Exposition with his brothers in the spring of 1867, Oscar spent the nine months he was in England laboring in the London Conference.

Two months before the termination of his mission, Oscar received the following letter from his father, dated March 16, 1867. Oscar's response some six weeks later is the only example of his rough but sensitive prose in the Church Archives. The document gives some insight to his personal feelings and character: "I have resived the lettear that you seante me. [Oh] the joye that it gave me to resived a lettear from my Father. . . . I have visetied the Paris Exhibition and it was . . . a veary nise time. Brigham and John W. neaver was more kinde to a brother than they ware to me. . . . If God gives me poweare I will returne a beatere man than any one in the City of Greate Salt Lake thought when I leafte . . . but thare is meany things in which I wish to inprove. The expearince that I have gained is good. Thare is a good meny of the Elders that will returne some of which are going to make greate men in this kindom they are them which have lived the relinen [religion] of Jesus Christ the Survents of the moste High. The Brothen teale me that I muste not preach to you. They say that you know all that I can teale you and a greadel more but then it is borne in me. . . . The injoymente of pleasure in this greate worke is to me one of the greates blesings that I can injoye. . . . The way that this Cuntrey a greeas with me is beatere than I could like. The saints are veary kinde to me. The Bretheren give me good counsele. . . . The time that I have been in London the saints have showen the veary beaste of fealings the way that you have showen the fealings of a veary kinde Fathear. . . . Please Remeambeare me to all the Bretheren that wourke for the Bilding up of the Kindom of God, to J. A. Young, the Famley, to mothear, all my Brothers and Sistears, the Prayears of A Kinde Brothere is raised for them eveary night. The Bleasings and Pawear of God be with you is the Prayear of your Kinde and A Effectnet Son in the Gospel and the New and Eveary Lasten Covenant the Powere of God unto selveation and your Son. Oscar B. Young. P.S. this Country a greeas well with me. OBY." [^1]

Salt Lake City, March 16, 1867

Elder Oscar B. Young

42 Islington, Liverpool, England

Dear Son,

Two letters have been received from you, in both of which I was pleased to see the good feelings and desires expressed by you respecting your mission. It gratifies me to see my sons manifest a desire to magnify the holy priesthood, for I know if they are faithful in the callings of that priesthood, their power and influence on the earth will increase and they will have the favor of God and His people. You are called in your youth to go forth and bear the message of life and salvation to the nations of the earth, and this is the most honorable and glorious calling that our Heavenly Father can bestow upon His children in this life. Since you left home you have no doubt seen considerable of the glory of this world. London is one of the greatest cities in Christendom; the wealth of ages has accumulated there, and human dignity receives the greatest honor that can be bestowed. But there is no king or queen, or potentate of any kind, whose honor can be compared to that which God bestows upon men when He gives to them the holy priesthood. Their glory fades away; it lasts only while life endures, but the holy priesthood when received and magnified by man is an eternal honor, which increases as years roll by, until, by faithfulness, man is brought back into the presence of his Maker, and is crowned with glory, immortality and eternal lives. By faithfully keeping the commandments of God and living humbly and faithfully before Him so as to partake of His power, while you are on your present mission, you will lay a foundation for future usefulness in the kingdom of God. If there be any difference in missions probably the first mission that a man takes has more influence on his future than any that he may take in after life. On his first mission he lays the foundation and adopts the principles which are to guide him through his future career, and it has seldom been the case that a young man who has been dilatory and careless while upon his first mission has ever recovered the ground he then lost or obtained the confidence of his brethren to the extent that he would have enjoyed had he been more faithful. You now have opportunities of gaining experience in, and a knowledge of, your religion that you could not have obtained and to live so near to the Lord that you will have his holy Spirit to rest upon you to enable you to teach the people. This experience, if properly appreciated by you, will be of great benefit to you through your future life. When you are in the presence of elders who are older and more experienced than yourself, listen to their counsels and teachings, and try and profit by your intercourse with them. By watching their course among the people and listening to their teachings you will obtain a better idea of what is required of you, and when you go forth and have to act as counselor and guide to the people, you will be better prepared to assume that responsibility. I am desirous of seeing my sons honor the holy priesthood, and be faithful and reliable servants of God. Nothing connected with them would give me greater pleasure than this, for I know if they take this course everything else will be added to them. You and your brothers have my prayers for your continued preservation from every evil and for your safe return in peace and purity to your home.

Your mother's health is much better than it has been, and the family generally enjoy good health. Paralee [R. Young] and child are well. Paralee appears very steady.

We have had very peaceable times in the city this winter, and but little or no drinking. Money is very scarce and times dull. The strangers here have but little money to spend in drink; the result is that Dr. [Jeter] Clinton has but little to do. The few soldiers who are here are scarcely noticed, and were it not for the presence, occasionally, of an officer or soldier in uniform on our streets, we would not know that there was a camp in our vicinity. The regulars who are here are much more peaceable than the volunteers we had here a year or two ago.

The winter has been rather mild, but we have had considerable rain and snow. We are having colder weather now than we have had previously during the winter. There is a prospect of high water. The banks of the River Jordan are now full, and there is a probability that all the streams will be filled to their utmost capacity.

The telegraph wire is in successful operation from Logan to Saint George, and there is a branch line extending from Nephi to Manti in San Pete. All the offices are occupied by our boys as operators and this reports very well. This institution is a great benefit to the people and the Territory.

With love, in which your mother joins, to you [illegible] and to Brigham and John W., and to all the elders and Saints who may be with you, and praying the Lord to fill you with His holy Spirit, to give you wisdom and power to discharge the duties of your mission faithfully and acceptably before Him, and to bring you home in safety, I remain,

Your father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Oscar Brigham Young to Brigham Young, 29 April 1873.
