Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Ernest Irving Young

1851-1879

Ernest Irving Young, the second son of Lucy Ann Decker and Brigham Young, was born April 30, 1851, in the newly established town of Salt Lake City. Ernest received his education in his father's private school, located first in the Lion House and later in the white schoolhouse east of the Eagle Gate. On November 19, 1871, he married Sybella White Johnson, to whom were born five children. He was called to the Salt Lake Stake high council in October 1873 and eight months later, in May 1874, his name was read in general conference to serve as a missionary in England.

After returning from his mission in June 1876, Ernest was employed in his father's office, and he worked for a short time at ZCMI. A letter addressed to his father in St. George, Utah, on December 27, 1876, containing a request for a farm, is the last known communication of Ernest to Brigham Young. "Since I returned from England I have been thinking, I would like to follow farming, and earn my livelihood in that manner should it meet with your approval. I am tired of depending on other people for work, and if I can get a farm, I feel assured I can, at least, make a living, and that is all I have done by working for other people. Heber and myself are of the same mind on this subject, and we thought if it met your mind (for us to so make a start) we would ask you to give us the Mill Farm. We believe we have brain and muscle enough to make a success of such a business. We hope you will think so too, and grant our request." He closed the letter with a Christmas greeting and best wishes to his father. "Christmas passed off very quietly, and all seemed to have enjoyed themselves, and have had generally a good time. The Mattinee at the Theatre seemed to be the Center of Attraction, and hundreds of children went to witness the performance of 'Cinderalla' and the young folks enjoyed it hugely. I am very sorry to hear of your being sick. I hope and pray this will find you enjoying as good health and spirits as I do, for I am well and happy as the day is long. With fondest love from all at home to yourself, and all with you, wishing you and all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year, I remain your son, Ernest I. Young." [^1]

Little is known of Ernest's activities after this. Following the death of Brigham Young, Ernest was one of the seven litigant heirs in the suit against the administrators of his father's estate. [^2]

After retiring and complaining of a severe headache, Ernest I. Young died suddenly the night of October 8, 1879. He was twenty-eight years of age.

Letter dated February 4, 1875

At the general conference of the Church held May 9, 1874, Ernest I. Young, twenty-three-year-old member of the Salt Lake Stake high council, was called, with others, by vote of the conference to serve as a missionary in England. Traveling with a cousin, Brigham T. Young, Ernest arrived in Liverpool on June 14, 1874, and was immediately appointed chief clerk of the mission.

From St. George, Utah, where he had gone to supervise construction of the temple, Brigham Young addressed the following letter to his son Ernest on February 4, 1875.

St. George, Utah, February 4, 1875

Elder Ernest I. Young

Liverpool, England

My dear Son Ernest,

Your welcome letter of January 3d was duly received by last mail and was read with much satisfaction. I am glad that your health is so good in the English climate, and trust that you may continue to enjoy the blessing of health and vigor to minister in usefulness wherever the Lord may direct you to labor.

I am much gratified, my son, that you are able to write: "I feel good continually, and feel that I am blessed beyond expectation." It is your privilege to feel thus as a laborer in the vineyard of the Lord; for the powers of the heavens are on your side, while you seek to walk in the path of your duty in trying to promote the interests of Zion, True, you must be tested in the great school of mortal experience. There are, as you properly state, "many temptations, seen and unseen, to lead one astray, the tempter being always ready to take advantage where he can." This is the common lot of man, but especially of the young and inexperienced. There is no exception. It was written of our Savior, that he "was in all points tempted like as we are." But our duty is pointed out by him in the words, "watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation."

It should ever be borne in mind that sin does not consist of simply being tempted to do, to say, or to think wrong, but that the sin is in yielding to the temptation.

One strong safeguard against doing evil is to cultivate good thoughts, and when evil ones are presented, to promptly and manfully reject them, to dismiss them from the mind at once. This habit, together with never knowingly or heedlessly putting yourself in the way of temptation, will greatly aid in proving to you the truth of the scripture which saith, "Resist the devil and he will flee from you." And further, this course will assist in cultivating that high moral and religious tone which is indispensable to those who would wield the power of the holy priesthood.

My son, I am pleased to read your expressed determination to pursue a course which shall be acceptable to our Heavenly Father. May God aid you in all your efforts to this desirable end. This determination is right, at home or abroad, at all times, and in every place.

You, and all the brethren with you, and all the Saints in every land, have my constant prayers that the righteousness of God may increase on the earth.

I am thankful to our Father that my health is reasonably good. I have deemed it prudent to refrain from speaking much in public this winter. Last Sabbath and the Sabbath before, I addressed the Saints in the St. George Tabernacle.

I and Brother George A. Smith leave this city on the 10th inst. for Salt Lake City, if all is well. We expect to stay and attend the April General Conference at Salt Lake City, and then return to St. George.

We are vigorously pushing forward the building of the St. George Temple; it is progressing finely. A goodly number of volunteers from the North are assisting, and a good spirit prevails.

Just as soon as the roofing is on, and it is safe inside, we shall begin that great and all important work on baptizing for the dead, and attend to other ordinances of the gospel, as the building can be got ready.

Remember me kindly to Brother Joseph F. [Smith] and to the other brethren with you.

May the God of Israel ever bless and empower you, my son, for every good word and work, is the fervent prayer and desire of

Your father,

Brigham Young

Latter dated August 24, 1875

In addition to his assignment in the mission headquarters at Liverpool, Ernest traveled and spoke extensively in the various conferences of the British Mission. As he visited London for the first time in March 1875 with L. John Nuttall, an associate on the staff of the Millennial Star, Ernest viewed the metropolis as the most impressive sight he had ever seen. "It makes me wonder where all the people come from, and where they are all going, and how they live. Judging from the appearance of some of them, I should say, they don't live, but get along in a way not much to be envied." [^3]

Writing in March 1875, Ernest expressed gratitude for the good counsel he had received in his father's letter of February 4, and added, "I will endeavor to put it into practice." He spoke of the contentment of mind that his missionary experience had brought him, and described the nature of the proselyting work in England. "It is a hard matter to get the people to turn out and visit our meetings for the Clergy are doing all they can to prevent those who would attend. The minds of the people are prejudiced to a considerable extent, and it requires constant labour with them to allay this prejudice, and when once allayed—sometimes they will stop to reason with you and ascertain what we do believe in—then they conclude that the Latter-day Saints teach sound doctrine, and they will often obey the Gospel. These cases are few and far between, still there is some few. I hope that God will open the hearts of the people that they may receive the truth. For I believe there are many honest in heart in these lands, and would embrace the Gospel if they could only be reached through the right channel, but this channel is hard to find, and unless God will show unto the Elders the way, and lead those souls to the place where they can hear the sound of the everlasting Gospel, I dont know in what manner they can be reached." [^4]

On May 29, 1875, Ernest's brother Arta De Christa arrived in England as a missionary and was assigned to the Nottingham Conference. Although separated from each other in their missionary work, the two sons of Brigham Young were co-recipients of the following letter from their father dated August 24, 1875, which brought news of the death of their brother Joseph A.

Salt Lake City, August 24, 1875

Elders Ernest and Arta D. Young

England

My dear Sons Ernest and Arta,

I have taken the occasion of the departure of Elder Albert Carrington for Liverpool to take charge of the churches in Europe, to write you a few lines, to express the happiness I feel at the favorable reports that have reached me of your health, progress, and general welfare, as well as at the feelings and desires expressed in the letters I have at different times received from you. I shall be greatly pleased to hear that Ernest is seeking to overcome his diffidence with regard to public speaking, and that he, trusting in the strength of the Lord and the assistance of the Holy Spirit, is aiding his brethren in proclaiming the truths of the gospel to the nations who wait in the darkness of unbelief.

You were no doubt very much surprised and deeply grieved at learning of the death of your brother Joseph A. which occurred very suddenly at Manti, San Pete Co. on the 5th of this month at 8.40 p.m. Joseph had been paying a visit to this city, and left with myself and other brethren on 30th July to attend a two-days' meeting at Provo, from whence he started at my request for Manti to make some drawings of, and to superintend the erection of, the temple at that place. Whilst on his way up the canyon from Nephi he was suddenly seized with cramp or inflammation of the bowels. The next day, however, though sick, he visited the spot selected for the building of the temple and from thence drove to the house of Bro. Geo. Peacock, where the same evening his spirit took its departure from our midst. His remains were at once brought to the city and he was interred in my family burial ground on the Sunday morning following.

I have had much comfort and satisfaction in the last days of Joseph's mortal sojourn upon the earth. He had labored with great zeal, diligence, and wisdom in establishing the United Order in the midst of the Saints in Sevier Co. by whom he was highly respected as a president and greatly beloved as a brother. His labors in establishing the order of Zion amongst the Saints under his watchcare were greatly blessed of the Lord, and are made manifest in the harmony and union existing among the people, and the affection they bear for him who was their leader and guide in this work of regeneration and advancement to celestial lives.

Last week I had a very pleasant visit amongst the Saints in Cache Valley. Your brother, Brigham Jun., returned to the city with us, stayed a few days and returned to Logan yesterday. He is laboring assiduously and doing much good in instructing the people in the principles of the United Order whilst the feeling amongst the Saints is improving, with an increase in the comprehension of the laws of the gospel of the kingdom. In Salt Lake City a few of the brethren have united with the intention of devoting the whole of their surplus property, that is, all they do not require to support their families with economy, to the building up of the kingdom of God as directed by a board of directors which they have chosen. In other words, to consider first the kingdom of God, to give their hearts to him, and their lives with all they possess to his service. In fact, to hold themselves subject in all things to the voice God has placed upon the earth, to put into active practice that which as Latter-day Saints they have always professed to believe.

President Geo. A. Smith's health is now rapidly improving and we earnestly hope that the improvement may be permanent. Regarding my own health I am pleased to be able to say that it is good, and my feelings are as calm and buoyant as ever. Notwithstanding the desperate and almost frantic attempts of the power of evil to do us harm, those who are living their religion realize that no power can hurt those whom God has in his watchcare.

The health of your mother and the family is good and they join me in love to yourselves. Remember me most kindly to the brethren from Zion, and the elders and Saints amongst whom you labor.

May God bless you abundantly in all your labors, strengthen you to accomplish all his righteous will concerning you, and bring you home safe to us when your work abroad is accomplished is the heartfelt prayer of

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated December 13, 1875

Ernest Young was released from his mission in June 1876, after two years in England. Two months before his release he traveled among the Saints on the continent and in Scandinavia with his brother Arta and the mission president, Albert Carrington. The following letter of Brigham Young sent to his sons Ernest and Arta was written six months before Ernest left England for home.

Salt Lake City, December 13, 1875

Elders Ernest and Arta D. Young

England

My dear Sons,

Since my last letter to you I have heard from you several times, either directly from yourselves, or indirectly through Bro. Carrington and other elders. I am pleased to be able to tell you that all that I have heard has been grateful to my feelings and fills me with the hope that I shall continue to receive cheering news of your welfare, your labors, and your progress until you are honorably released to return to your friends and families in the valleys of Israel.

I have no doubt but that you appreciate the privileges you possess as ministers of salvation to the nations who sit in the shadow of the darkness of unbelief and of ignorance of the ways of the Lord. You have also had opened to you an inviting entrance to the living world of human thought and action. You are surrounded by influences from which you can learn lessons that will be of increasing influence in after years, and by comparing things as you meet them today with what they will be when the truth holds the sway, you will create within you a becoming respect for the dignity and honor of our sacred religion, and of the responsibilities of your holy calling. There is no position a man can occupy in this world, be he young or old, rich or poor, wise or simple, wherein he can learn so much of that which is truly valuable and worthy of acceptation as that of an elder in the Church of Jesus Christ in the active discharge of his calling. The present is the day of your opportunities, to mold your characters, to strengthen your faith, to develop your powers of mind and thought, and to acquire knowledge of men and manners that no books can teach or theoretical instruction impart. Stores of information surround you; you are in the midst of the world's activities. The discoveries of science and the masterpieces of inventive genius are within your reach and you have many bright opportunities of increasing your range of knowledge and widening your views of man and nature.

My health has been exceedingly good of late, though I had quite a severe attack of rheumatism in the stomach on Saturday last, but I am thankful to say it left me after a severe struggle of probably sixteen hours. Today I am in real good health with the exception of a very slight touch of rheumatism in my lower extremities. Your mother, brothers, and sisters are all well, as are also your immediate families. Richard W. [Young] goes down to Manti tomorrow to take charge of the high school at that place. Mahonri and Lorenzo are at the Co-op, Hyrum on the railroad. I often hear from Willard, Alfales, Don Carlos, and Feramorz; they are all doing admirably. Willard speaks of his duties as light, instructive, and interesting, giving him considerable time to study, which he assures me shall be used to the best advantage. Alfales appears to be very successful in his studies and is laboring energetically to make himself proficient in the profession he has chosen. Feramorz became a little discouraged a short time ago, but he is now gaining on his studies and has acquired fresh courage to master the difficulties that occasionally confront him.

I feel as contented, peaceful, and unconcerned as a human being can possibly do. Our enemies are active, but their labor is lost, that is, so far as their desires are concerned.

The grand jury at Beaver—all outsiders with one exception—has presented a stinging arraignment against the condition of things in the U.S. Marshal's Office, which plainly charges wholesale speculation and organized stealing on the part of [George R.] Maxwell, or whoever acts for him. They state that thousands of dollars entered as paid out to witnesses, jurors, &c., on the marshal's books have never been received by the parties named and that the vouchers therefore have been forged. This will doubtless give use to a very pretty little quarrel in that happy family known as the "ring."

Your mother and the family generally join me in warmest love and heartfelt prayers for your welfare, happiness and salvation.

Hoping you will write to me often, I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Willard Young, address at the semicentennial celebration of Brigham Young University, October 15, 1925, The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, 17 (January 1926):10-11.
[^2] Deseret News, 20 (8 June 1871):220.
[^3] Willard Young, address at the semicentennial celebration of Brigham Young University, October 15, 1925, The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, 17 (January 1926):11. See also Leonard Arrington, "Willard Young: The Prophet's Son at West Point," Dialogue 4 (Winter, 1969):39.
[^4] Willard Young, p. 13.
