Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Willard Young

1852-1936

Willard Young was the first native-born Utahn and first Mormon to enroll at the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York. "Joven," as he was known to his classmates, was born in Salt Lake City, Utah, on April 30, 1852, the only son of Brigham and Clarissa Ogden Chase Young. While enrolled under Karl G. Maeser in his father's private school, Willard and one of his brothers, in typical teen-age fashion, thought they knew about as much as they could learn from school, and went to their father one day and asked if they could not leave school. "Brother Maeser," they reasoned, "couldn't teach us very much." "Well, if that's your attitude," replied Brigham Young, "I see no reason why you should not leave school and go to work. I will let you go to work—but with the understanding that you cannot go to school until such time as you are willing to stay put." Whereupon, Willard and his brother were permitted to work nine months and attend school three months in the winter. [^1]

Willard's preparation for the Military Academy consisted of driving a supply wagon between Salt Lake City and the Missouri River by the age of fourteen and later, attending classes at the University of Deseret, where he was studying at the time of his appointment. He entered the academy in July 1871, at a time when national sentiment against his father, and the Mormon people generally, was very unfavorable. Prominent national news sources and some of his fellow classmates resented the tincture of "polygamy" that Willard's enrollment placed upon the Military Academy. However, at the time of his graduation in 1875 he was highly respected among his associates, and he graduated among the top students of his class with a commission in the Corps of Engineers. His classmates at West Point included a son of the Civil War general Ulysses S. Grant; Tasker H. Bliss, chief of staff of the Army during World War I; and Robert P. Wainwright, father of the World War II general Jonathan M. Wainwright. Following his graduation Willard served two years with the engineer battalion at Willet's Point (later Fort Totten), New York. While there he saw special service in Baltimore and Philadelphia, when federal troops were called to quell violence that had erupted in the wake of railroad strikes in the East in the summer of 1877. Later that year he was appointed to the Wheeler geographical survey west of the hundredth meridian, which undertook, among other things, a careful scientific study of the Great Salt Lake, defining its shoreline, measuring volume of inflow, evaporation, and other factors necessary to determine the volume of that body of water.

Willard returned to the Military Academy in 1879 as an assistant professor of civil and military engineering for four years. He proudly numbered among his students George W. Goethals, the builder of the Panama Canal. The congressman who made possible Willard's professional career in 1871 also provided him with a wife on August 1, 1882, when he married Hattie Hooper, daughter of Utah's former congressional delegate, William H. Hooper. They became the parents of six children. Between 1883 and 1887 Willard supervised the construction of the Cascade locks, forty miles west of Portland on the Columbia River in Oregon, the completion of which permitted navigation along 230 miles of that river. After this he directed harbor improvements at Portland and construction work on the Mississippi River at Memphis, Tennessee. In February 1891 he responded to a call by President Wilford Woodruff to resign his commission in the army and accept the presidency of the Young University in Salt Lake City. In 1894 he was appointed Salt Lake City engineer, and he later became state engineer of Utah.

Willard returned to military life in 1896 as head of the Utah National Guard with the rank of brigadier general, a post he resigned in 1898 to accept a commission as colonel in the regular army. He organized and commanded the Second Regiment of the U.S. Volunteer Engineers during the Spanish American campaign in Cuba. After the Cuban War he was named superintendent and later president of the National Contracting Company, a New York engineering firm engaged in several large building projects, which included a drainage system for New Orleans, electric power construction at Niagara Falls, excavations for the Boston subway, a sewer system for Boston, and an electrical power dam at Glen Falls, New York.

A devoted Church member, Willard served as president of the Latter-day Saints University in Salt Lake City from 1906 to 1915. He was assistant to the president of the Logan Temple, where he was serving when he applied to General Black for active service with the U.S. Army engineers in World War I. General Black refused the request because of Willard Young's age, but he asked him to become U.S. agent in charge of the army's Kansas City Engineer District, thereby relieving one or more officers for active duty. He accepted. Stationed at Kansas City, Willard supervised improvements along the Missouri, Osage, Gasconade, Kansas, and Republican rivers until his release in July 1919.

Upon returning to Salt Lake City, Willard was placed in charge of all LDS Church construction, remaining in that capacity until his death in Salt Lake City on July 25, 1936, at the age of eighty-four. At that time he was the oldest living son of Brigham Young.

Letter dated May 19, 1871

In May 1871 word was received in Utah that a vacancy existed at the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, and that Utah's delegate to Congress, William H. Hooper, would name a candidate to fill the opening. When John R. Park, president of Deseret University in Salt Lake City, was asked if he had any students sufficiently advanced for consideration, he named, among others, Willard Young, the nineteen-year-old son of President Brigham Young, who was regarded as the "best scholar and strongest boy at the University." [^2] After expressing a desire to enter West Point, Willard was told by his father, "I will let you go but will send you as a missionary," [^3] whereupon the young man's name was presented for approval at a general priesthood meeting, and he was set apart for his mission under the hands of the First Presidency: "We set you apart to this mission and we seal this Priesthood upon you, even the Priesthood of the Most High, with the blessings pertaining thereunto, that you may go and fulfill this high and holy calling and gain this useful knowledge, and through the light of truth, make it subservient for the building up of the Kingdom of God." [^4]

Willard's name appeared on the missionary lists of the Church for the next twenty years. Four days prior to his departure from Salt Lake City he received the following letter from his father.

Salt Lake City, May 19, 1871

Mr. Willard Young

Salt Lake City

My dear Son,

As you are about to leave home for a season and those with whom you have been in the habit of associating for years, many of whom are near and dear to you, a few words of advice may not prove unseasonable.

In entering the academy at West Point you are taking a step which may prove to you of incalculable advantage. You are thereby enjoying a privilege which falls to the lot of comparatively few. You will do well to treasure up the instruction so abundantly provided there, that in after years you may be prepared to take a place even in the foremost ranks of the great men of the nation. Experience will teach you that the greatest success does not attend the over-studious, and a proper regard must be had to physical as well as intellectual exercise, else the intellectual powers become impaired; and therefore, bodily recreation and rest are as necessary as they are beneficial to mental study.

Every facility will be afforded you at home by your friends in the furtherance of your studies, and I have no doubt that a straightforward, manly, upright course on your part will give you favor with and ensure you valuable aid from your fellow students.

Bear in mind, above all, the God whom we serve. Let your prayers day and night ascend to him for light and intelligence, and let your daily walk and conversation be such, that when you shall have returned home you can look back to the time passed at West Point and see no stain upon your character. You will doubtless have your trials and temptations, but if you will live near the Lord, you will hear the still, small voice whisper to you even in the moment of danger. Attend strictly to your own business, be kind and courteous to all, be sober and temperate in all your habits, shun the society of the unvirtuous and the intemperate, and should any person ask you to drink intoxicating liquor of any kind, except in sickness, never accept it. Select your own company rather than have others select yours.

If at any time you feel overtaxed or homesick, seek relaxation in the society of our elders in New York, or in other places where they may be traveling, that is, when the rules of the institution or special license permit you leave of absence.

Write to me frequently and any assistance you need that I can furnish will be provided. May God bless you and preserve you from every snare and give you His holy Spirit to light your path before you, and help qualify you for usefulness in His kingdom.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated June 17, 1871

On May 23, 1871, Willard Young left Salt Lake City for West Point, accompanied by his oldest brother, Joseph A., who was well accustomed to travel on the Great Plains, having served as a missionary in England and having assisted with emigration and railroad matters between Salt Lake City and Boston.

In an era dedicated to the eradication of those "twin relics of barbarism," slavery and polygamy, the coincidental admission of the first Negro and also of one of Brigham Young's sons to the West Point Military Academy in 1871 did not go unnoticed by those who monitored the nation's conscience. As observers across the country anxiously watched this "outrage," the Chicago Evening Post reported that the colored appointee passed his entrance examination with higher marks than a large number of the white applicants, and that Brigham Young's son "came out from the ordeal unscathed." The paper added, "It is time that West Point began to be considered something better than an asylum for dandies." [^5]

After passing the entrance requirements, Willard was admitted as a cadet on July 1, 1873, the first native Mormon to be so honored. In a letter to his father on June 3 he wrote of his successful completion of the entrance tests and enclosed a certificate of acceptance to be signed by his father and returned to the War Department. "Since leaving home I have seen much that is new, and to me very interesting, and have enjoyed myself immensely. Joseph A. seemed to very well employ the time in showing me all there is of importance to be seen." Reporting on his initial impressions of the academy, he continued: "The older students of the school here ask many impertinent questions, and in many cases act very ungentlemanly toward the new Cadets. This, it seems, cannot be helped, as the students of any class are obliged to obey the commands of those of a higher class." However, he concluded, "West Point is a most delightful place: and the members of the Academic Board, so far as I have seen, are perfect gentlemen." [^6]

Salt Lake City, June 17, 1871

Mr. Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear Son,

Yours of the 3rd inst. with your certificate of acceptance enclosed for my signature [was] duly received.

We were all well pleased to hear from you, and to know that you passed a successful examination. This news was considered of sufficient importance to be flashed across the wires with the general telegraphic dispatches.

I signed the certificate and forwarded it yesterday (16) to the Department. I have instructed Bro. [George Q.] Cannon [^7] to send you regularly a copy of the Deseret News which will keep you posted in general news. Anything else you require from time to time, let us know and we will endeavour to supply you.

It appears from some of the eastern papers, they are rather exercised over your admission among the cadets and one correspondent writing from this city to the N.Y. Herald wants to know, "Will the boys permit the outrage?" It is easy to guess the source whence this emanated, some member of the notorious ring [^8] here who leave no stone unturned to create friction between us and the Government. You are aware how signally they have failed and this malicious though very paltry effort only serves to show them up as they are.

Since I wrote to you on the 19th May nothing out of the ordinary course has transpired here. I will mention, however, a very agreeable circumstance which transpired on the 1st of June—that being the 70th anniversary of my birthday—a surprise was prepared for me which, though it has been in preparation several days, was kept entirely from me. I stepped into dinner as usual, suspecting nothing, and was greeted by a concourse of children in the lobby, neatly dressed and each bearing a bouquet. I was ushered into the parlour where to my astonishment I was met by not less than 80 persons assembled to congratulate me on the occasion. We all proceeded to the dining room and 87 persons sat down to table. An address prepared by Sister Eliza R. Snow was then read to me, which embodied in a beautiful composition the affectionate sentiments of my family and immediate relatives and friends. While it was being read, many were moved to tears, and altogether it was a really pleasant time which will not easily be forgotten by those who were present.

Work progresses finely on the U.S.R.R. [^9] The iron is laid for miles and the grading continues steadily along.

We are having a novelty in the shape of a Methodist camp meeting [^10] located on the Orson Spencer lot just across the street north of Henry Lawrence's house. Meeting is held in an extraordinarily large tent said to accommodate 3000 persons. I am not aware they have made any converts as yet, though a large number of our people attend nightly. We have advised all to attend, young and old. I have only been present at one meeting. The affair is very dry. Mr. Boole who preached on that occasion put me in mind of an old, dried-up wooden pump, laboring and creaking in a dry well, working very hard but producing no water. I understand their services will close tomorrow.

Though you are absent from us and far from home and your dearest friends, be assured we are not unmindful of you. Our prayers are constantly exercised in your behalf that you may be kept free from the contaminating influences that will doubtless surround you. Let me again advise you that you cannot be too careful to shun the temptations of the day. We are not afraid of you, but you are in a more conspicuous position, probably, than you realize. The eyes of many are upon you to see what is likely to be your future. You will meet with those of your companions who will try every means to induce you to deviate from the path of virtue; but with a firm front, you can easily parry every such effort and still be kind and courteous. And rest assured that this course will win for you far greater respect, even from the unvirtuous, than that which would follow, were you to fall in with the dissolute habits of the day.

Above all things, seek closely to the Lord. Pray for His holy Spirit to guide your steps and to deliver you from every snare.

Write to us often, and at length; your letters will be looked for with pleasure.

You will be pleased to learn my health is good, and that all the family are well.

May peace be and abide with you, and the blessings of heaven constantly surround you.

I was just about to mail this when your letter to the folks was handed me to read which I did with great interest. When you write I would like to learn in detail the routine of your daily life, and what your studies will consist of. Whether your friends are allowed to visit you, and if so, are they restricted to certain times? Indeed, a brief description of the entire rules of the academy would be quite interesting to us, and might furnish an interesting article for the News.

Your letter to me of the 11th I have just this moment received. Thank you for writing me, and should you meet Gen. [Rufus] Ingalls again soon, present my compliments to him.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

June 20.

P.S. I am particularly desirous to know the regulations about visitors because, if allowed, I shall request all our elders visiting in your neighbourhood to call upon you, Bishop Sharp sends his respects and will be with you to see you while he is east, which will be shortly.

Letter dated July 25, 1871

Away from home in a strange environment for the first time, where he was confronted with a hostile press and subjected to the usual trials of a plebe at the Military Academy, Willard Young was not without friends. Members of his family and friends who were engaged in Church business in New York or studying and traveling in the East frequently visited him. In addition, friends of his father went out of their way to meet the son of Brigham Young. Shortly after arriving at his new quarters on the Hudson, Willard was contacted by General Rufus Ingalls and ex-Governor Johnson of California, both of whom wished to be kindly remembered to their friend Brigham Young and expressed their willingness to do anything in their power to aid and comfort his son. On June 18 Joseph A., who had been in New York on business, paid Willard a surprise visit. As he departed he presented his brother with a "fine gold watch."

In a letter to his father on June 11, Willard wrote that although West Point was a "most delightful place," his appreciation would no doubt increase when he had more to engage his mind. "The academic duties do not commence until about the first of September; and as our military exercises are conducted by the older cadets, I have not yet become acquainted with the preceptors of the Academy." [^11] A few days later he noted that "conformity to military rule seems to agree with me, my health being excellent. I think I will find many friends as you promised me before leaving home I would do if I conducted myself in a straight-forward, upright manner. The cadets, unless having conscientious scruples, are required to attend church each Sunday morning, the service being that of the Protestant Episcopals. Do you wish me to attend? If not, please let me know. I desire your faith and your best wishes, which no doubt I have, to enable me to master the work before me, that I may be fitted for future usefulness." [^12] Brigham Young replied on July 25.

Salt Lake City, July 25, 1871

Mr. Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear Son,

When your last letter to me reached this city, I had started for Soda Springs [Idaho], accompanied by a small party of brethren and sisters from this city. We started on the 26th June and returned on the 24th July, staying at Ogden City to celebrate the pioneer anniversary and got home in the evening.

A synopsis of your letter was telegraphed to me at Franklin [Idaho], which I was pleased to receive. I wrote to you on the 17th June, which I suppose you have received. On the 16th I signed and forwarded your acceptance to the department. In case my letter failed to reach you, I will briefly repeat the substance of a portion of it. Bro. [George Q.] Cannon has been instructed to mail the Deseret News to you regularly. And anything you may require from time to time, such as books, or anything else, let us know and we will endeavour to supply you. We would like to learn in detail the routine of your daily life, what your duties and exercises consist of, what the regulations are about visitors, whether ladies have access to the cadets and under what restrictions, if any. This last is a matter I am quite concerned to know about, as I understand you cadets are exceedingly popular with the fair sex. And some of them are very, very dangerous when so disposed, just for the sake of having a laugh at their victims. Shun such as you would the very gates of hell! They are the enemy's strongest tools, and should be resisted as strongly. Beware of them!

I think that such a description of the rules and routine of the academy as I have mentioned would form an interesting article for the Deseret News, and would be read with great interest, not only by your relatives and friends, but by our citizens at large.

Since your letter, Bro. Dusenbury wrote to me concerning your progress, and with verbal reports from John W. and Bishop [John] Sharp we hear considerable about you. The bishop tells me you are kept so busy that you have barely time to attend to your correspondence. All who have written to or spoken with me are well satisfied with your course so far, and the bishop assures me whatever may have been the feelings of the cadets towards you at the first you are now looked upon by them as "a pretty good fellow." I will go still further with this and say that we hope yet to see you a pattern for all of them. By exhibiting your character and the principles you profess in your daily walk and conversation, and by refraining from every appearance of evil, you will not only be admired by the good and the upright, but you will command that respect that even the most unvirtuous are willing to accord to those who truly deserve it. There is no question but you can do a great deal of good among your fellow students and we hope to see you accomplish it. No matter what the world at large believe, or say about the Latter-day Saints, if we do our duty, and live for it, we will be found, among the children of men, at the head, and not at the tail.

With regard to your attending Protestant Episcopal service, I have no objections whatever. On the contrary, I would like to have you attend, and see what they can teach you about God and Goodliness more than you have already been taught. When the Methodist big tent was here I advised old and young to attend their meetings for that very reason, but I was well satisfied it would not take our people long to learn what Methodists could teach them more than they had already been taught.

Our celebration at Ogden was a spirited affair, as was also the celebration of the 4th in this city. [^13] You have doubtless heard and read a great deal about the latter, but the facts are that the brethren had one of the best, if not the very best, ever had in the mountains. As to what some term the backing down of the Lieut. Gen[eral], the only backing down was done by the self-styled "acting governor and commander-in-chief of the Nauvoo Militia," for, according to his own statement, he had orders to suppress the procession if the militia marched in it, and on the 3rd inst. he voluntarily assured Gens. [Philip Regis] De Trobriand and [Henry A.] Morrow that he would make no arrests on the 4th. With this concession Gens. De Trobriand and Morrow, with U.S. Marshall [M.T.] Patrick and Attorney [Charles H.] Hempstead, waited upon Prest. [Daniel H.] Wells, and upon the urgent solicitation of De Trobriand, it was finally decided, after consulting with our committee, that the militia would not carry arms while in the procession.

My health is good and I feel first rate with the exception of being a little tired, which is rapidly wearing off.

I will write you again as soon as I hear from you. May God preserve you from every evil, and bestow upon you every requisite blessing.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated January 26, 1872

After some six months in the East, Willard reported to his father on December 9. "Thinking that perhaps a few words from me would prove interesting to you, remembering that when I left home you told me to write often, I improve the present opportunity. I am happy to tell you that your promises to me when I left are being fulfilled. I am succeeding quite well with my studies, and I never enjoyed more the spirit of our religion." With reference to the adverse comment that his entrance to the academy had brought forth from among his classmates, Willard added, "I have heard several of the young men here, who, no doubt, six months ago were 'death on the Mormons,' say that the U.S. officials were entirely wrong." [^14]

Having received the November progress report from the academy which showed Willard Young near the top of his class, Brigham was surprised to notice that the number of demerits charged against his son was considerably higher than the average. In his letter of January 26, 1872, he requested an explanation.

Salt Lake City, January 26, 1872

Mr. Willard Young

West Point, N.Y.

My dear Son,

On my return from the south I was much pleased to receive and read your letter of Dec. 9th. We returned from our trip to southern Utah on the 26th Dec. not only in time for my trial on the day fixed by the court, but soon enough to enter court one week before that time to answer to a charge of murder, [^15] the writ for which had not then been served, and to ask for bail. The judge refused to take it although Mr. [George C.] Bates, the U.S. district attorney, strongly urged him to, and it was expected some regard would have been paid to the fact of my voluntary appearance in court. But the judge saw proper to refuse, and stated that as there was no U.S. jail in the Territory, and as it was at the option of the military officer commanding the post to receive or refuse prisoners, and as he understood the defendant was the owner of several houses, he said he would consign him to the custody of the U.S. marshal in any one of those houses he might select. The result of this decision is that I am held a prisoner in my own house, although, partly from the kindness and good sense of the deputy marshal, Capt. Evans, and partly from his instructions, the burden imposed upon me is not very hard to bear, while at the same time Judge [James B.] McKean has added another laurel to his judicial crown which he wears with most unenviable notoriety. All jury cases have been postponed until the March term pending the settlement of the question whether or not the U.S. will pay the expenses of those prosecutions.

The 9th of Jan. had been fixed by the inexorable judge as the day for my trial although my attorneys had asked for a continuance until the March term, and our return to this city from St. George was necessarily made in very severe weather with snow, rain, and mud in superabundance in the most inclement season of the year. It soon transpired, however, that it was not my appearance that was wanted but my dis-appearance and, failing in that respect, the court, at the instance of the prosecuting attorney, without any further application on my part, granted a continuance until the 2nd Monday in March.

My health is much improved and had I been left alone in the south until March it would, doubtless, have improved still more. However, I am thankful everything is as well as it is, and so far as I am personally concerned, as well as what pertains to our affairs in general, I have no doubt of their final success and the entire discomfiture of our malicious enemies.

Capt. [William H.] Hooper, after spending the holidays here, returned to Washington on the 15th full of hope, and filled with a firm determination to battle for our rights as American citizens. Mr. [George C.] Bates, district attorney, started 2 days earlier. As he is going to Washington it is supposed a part of his business will be to raise funds to carry on the trials, and in a short time, doubtless, we will learn the result.

For my part I do not believe Congress will so far countenance these unhallowed persecutions as to appropriate one cent towards continuing them, and, if I am not mistaken, the reign of the McKeanites is drawing to an inglorious termination.

We have had a remarkably mild winter, although a great deal of rain and some snow has fallen; but for the last few days, the frost has been more severe, and today the wind is blowing as fiercely cold as I ever felt it in this valley.

I suppose the folks keep you posted with regard to family matters, and I will merely remark, we are all pretty well. My health has much improved by my trip south, and my spirits are light and buoyant, for which I feel very thankful.

I find from the inspector's report for November that your record shows you to be in Sec. No. 1 in mathematics, and No. 4 in French. We were much gratified to hear of your success, especially in mathematics. This report shows the total demerits since the commencement of the academic half-year at 18, and I observe while the average number on the reports is 4, the one for Sept. shows 8, and as this is so much above the average, I would be pleased to ascertain the reason, or whether there is any mistake in the report.

Your offer to furnish any desired information concerning West Point, I accept, and will always be happy to hear of your progress as often as you can find opportunity. Your success and welfare is the best information the institution can furnish for your friends here. Still, if it were not for the press of your studies, there is much interesting detail concerning the affairs and management of the academy that would doubtless form an article for our newspapers, and be read by the people with considerable relish. But I have no desire either to overtax you or seek to infringe upon your allotted studies.

May your heart be comforted, and the light of the good spirit abide with you continually to direct your steps and inspire you in all your pursuits. We pray for you continually and it is our earnest desire that you may be preserved from every evil.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

P.S. As you will naturally feel anxious to know to what extent I am deprived of liberty, I assure you anyone would find it difficult to know there is any guard here at all. The marshal sits in my office or goes outside to walk, or ride, or go to the theatre, or elsewhere, but never follows me, nor asks any questions, nor knows where I go. If I go out to ride I ask him to accompany me—if I feel like it. If not, he stays in the office; he eats in the east house in company with Bro. [David] McKenzie, takes breakfast at 8, dinner at 1, and supper at 6. He sleeps in the little room between the offices in the rear of the telegraph office, but never goes into any other room than the one he eats in. From this you will readily perceive the whole thing is a farce, and we have many a joke about it.

B.Y.

Letter dated August 14, 1872

Receiving a bundle of mail from home after the "long blockade" of the winter's snow, Willard read his father's letter of January 26 "with more than ordinary pleasure." He wrote, "your kind assurance that I ever have your faith and prayers will indeed incite me to greater efforts. My constant desire is to satisfy your wishes, my dear father, and to honor the people whom I represent. Having you and the folks at home to pray for me, I trust I may live so as to merit that favor of our Heavenly Father which alone can enable me to succeed."

In explanation of excessive demerits on his November progress report from the academy, Willard gave a lengthy reply to his father's inquiry. "As you perhaps do not know what these demerits are, I will mention a few of the many ways in which they accumulate. If, by chance, we happen to be a few seconds late at any of the formations during the day, we are reported; if at inspection of quarters the wash-bowl is not inverted, the towel not neatly folded, shoes or articles in clothespress not neatly arranged; or, if the room is not properly swept and dusted, we are reported. If at drill or parade we do not understand the command distinctly, and execute or commence to execute the wrong movement, we are reported. If, by mistake, we send clothing to the laundry with an incorrect list, sending perhaps one handker-chief more than thereon marked, or perhaps a collar or a pair of gloves not marked with name, we are reported; at any of the inspections under arms, if our trimmings are not adjusted just so, if our belts, gloves, or collars are soiled, if there is any dust or dirt about our guns, or if our shoes are not blacked, we are reported, and so on in almost hundreds of ways we may get reports, and each report gives a certain number of demerits, ranging from 1 to 5, according to its grade. You see from this, that what are recorded against us as demerits, are not so bad as the word demerit would ordinarily imply. It is true that if a person has a good excuse to offer, and will present such excuse in writing through the proper channel, in many instances the report will be removed; yet it seems almost impossible to go without getting some demerits. I will relate a little circumstance that happened a short time since, so that you may not wonder if the number of my demerits appears large. The facts are, I had written a permit to go skating, which I got signed by the proper officer; when the named time arrived, I went to look for the Officer of the Day in order to report my departure, (all of which is necessary). I found out that he was in the Academic Building, which, by the way, is off cadet limits, except during recitation hours, and seeing another cadet who had been to report his departure on permit, coming from there I thought I would go and report my departure also, thinking then that it would be all right. When I found the Officer of the Day, however, he told me I had no business in there at that hour, and so reported me for entering Academic building without authority. I wrote an explanation for the offense, stating the facts; still the report was recorded against me giving me four (4) demerits." [^16]

As spring dawned upon the Hudson, drills and parades resumed, bringing relief to the monotonous daily routine of the winter months. In a letter to his father on April 7, Willard described the change that had transformed nature in the East: "The Hudson which has been blocked by ice nearly all winter, is again open. Almost countless boats plow the river; large steam tugs, with their long trains of loaded flat boats, sometimes thirty or forty of them in one load, are passing and repassing incessantly. Schooners can be seen at anytime, their large white sails adding much to the beauty of the scene; and occasionally a fine passenger steamer is seen furrowing the waters. Looking up this river a distance of ten miles, Newburg, a city of about 25,000 inhabitants can be seen. On either side of the river are high and rugged cliffs, frowning, as it were, upon the waters; a small island, apparently in the middle of the stream, rises out of the water about four miles distant. Altogether it is far the nicest scene I ever saw, and I believe is acknowledged to be perhaps the finest in the United States for real beauty." [^17]

The termination of his first year at the Military Academy was awaited with joyful anticipation by Willard Young. It marked the end of his plebedom, "and we will be received as a class among the other classes." In recalling the circumstances of his appointment, he wrote his father on May 12, "It will be one year next Wednesday since you first asked me, 'Willie, how would you like to go to West Point?' Though beyond my dreams or hopes, I was ready to do whatever you counselled, and would have responded as quickly if it had been to go to Australia or the Cannibal Islands." He concluded his letter with this sentiment: "It is my constant prayer that what I learn here may serve in aiding me to do God's will and to build up his Kingdom here on the earth. And I think I shall never be sorry that I passed through West Point and received its education." [^18]

As his first year at the academy came to a close, Willard greeted the removal of the cadets from their barracks into camp for two months of "practical military instruction" as a welcome relief. "Our time is pretty well occupied, but after nine months steady and close application to our books, we accept with pleasure the physical exercises." [^19]

Salt Lake City, August 14, 1872

Mr. Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear Son,

I have nothing special to bring to your notice, still I thought a few lines might not prove uninteresting. We were well pleased to hear from Bro. [William C.] Staines of an agreeable visit he had with you, and his report of your progress. I trust your present exercises will prove an enjoyable relief from your close indoor studies.

Peace continues to prevail among the Saints notwithstanding the assiduous efforts of our enemies to disturb it.

Last Friday myself and a small company took a ride over the Utah Southern Railroad a distance of about 23 miles to examine the work through the point of the mountain. The cuts and fills are very heavy. The large fill is about 700 ft. in length with an average depth of about 175 feet. The work is progressing quite rapidly, and it is thought the locomotive will be through within three weeks. Had we not been disappointed with our iron, we would have crowded this work and had it completed long ere this. It appears now, however, as if the iron were coming and we will push on without delay.

We are having remarkably good crops this season and labor is in great demand not only in the agricultural interest but in mining and railroading. Besides the Utah Southern, two other roads—The American Fork Canyon Railroad and the Utah Northern Railroad—are being built here. The former is the property of English capitalists having large mining interests in American Fork. The latter is going ahead with vigor; its connection is made with the Central Pacific Railroad at a point 17 miles west of Ogden, and it is built and carrying passengers and freight some 27 miles from that point towards Cache Valley. It is considered a great success. Both those railroads are narrow gauge, or 3 foot track.

The S.L. City Street Car Railroad is another recent improvement and is very well patronized by our people. The two last-named enterprises are John W. Young's.

Last Monday (3rd inst.) was election day. Elder George Q. Cannon was elected Delegate to Congress, Bro. [William H.] Hooper having requested a release from his labors, which have been very arduous to a person of his temperament.

[George R.] Maxwell is the opposition candidate. The official returns are not all in, but, of course, Bro. Cannon is elected by an overwhelming majority.

Many improvements are being made in this city, and you will observe great changes when you make us a visit, an event which I am sure you will hail with delight as will all your friends here to welcome you.

We are now using gas in the theatre, which is a great improvement. The house when lighted to its full capacity is dazzling. We use the maxim gas manufactured from gasoline, and we hope it may prove a success.

A company has been chartered in this city to manufacture gas from wood and coal, and their machinery and materials for manufacturing are now on the way.

The city authorities intend erecting water works shortly and for this purpose have secured the services of an efficient engineer.

Buildings for stores, hotels, tenements, &c., are springing up all around us. The Fennings building used by ZCMI, with the additions now being made, will show a frontage to Main St. of 107 feet extending back 190 ft. The Walker House built by Walker Bros. for a hotel on the site where John Kay's house formerly stood is a handsome 4-story building of brick having all the modern improvements for the accommodation of guests, which will doubtless bring many more visitors to our city.

My health continues excellent for which I feel very thankful. We remember you constantly with the very best feelings and wishes, and we pray that you may be preserved from every snare and permitted to return home, having accomplished a good work in preparing yourself for a life of usefulness.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated April 14, 1873

One of the highlights of Willard Young's military career occurred toward the end of his second year at West Point when it was announced by the War Department that the corps of cadets would participate in the presidential inauguration ceremony of Ulysses S. Grant in Washington, D. C., on March 4, 1873. "We are all delighted at the thought here, and will look forward to the time with great eagerness," Willard wrote his father. "I am doubly pleased for, in addition to being a nice out and a relief from study, it will afford an opportunity of seeing Washington and other great cities. It will be a gratification, also, to be a witness of so great a day's proceedings. It is believed that the cadets will be invited to attend the grand 'Inauguration Ball,' or, if not, that a ball will be gotten up specially for them. Now all the boys are very fond of dancing, and I among the rest, as you doubtless know, so we regard this as one of the 'big things' of the occasion." [^20]

Willard concluded the announcement of his trip to Washington with the assurance that he had not surrendered to the vices of military life. "It may be gratifying to you to know that as yet, I have given myself up to none of the temptations which surround me. Perhaps I should not say temptations, for thanks to the good training of my parents, swearing, using tobacco, drinking whiskey, and other kindred vices to which I have alluded, never were a temptation to me. In myself I can perceive no change, but am the same grateful and loving son as when I left home."

Three months elapsed before Willard again wrote to his father—a silence that he attributed to his lack of talent as a letter writer, "and so I take but little interest in trying." Nonetheless he held his family in sacred remembrance. "I ever feel grateful towards you, my dear father, for the many great kindnesses and benefits you have heaped upon me, and upon all the children, though it is perhaps impossible for me to appreciate their full worth. How thankful we all ought to be (I really think I am) that we have such a loving and indulgent parent, such a wise instructor, and so worthy an example as you. Every time I look at your picture, which I always keep handy, I seem to be running over with love and gratitude. I daily pray that you may be allowed to remain with us, and that you may have God's Spirit to abide with you in continuing the good work in which you are now busied." [^21]

As Willard approached the completion of his second year at the Military Academy, he wrote his father that with the permission of their parents or guardians, the cadets were allowed a furlough of two months between their sophomore and junior years. "It is customary for all the members of the 'furlough class' to take advantage of this privilege, which is regarded as the great event of the course. I am anxious to make the most of it by visiting home and friends, but must first get your consent. I will not ask this, however, till you understand the circumstances in which I am or will be placed. I shall have sufficient money to get me an outfit and to procure my passage home, but I shall be compelled to encumber your hands with my keeping there, and shall have to draw on your pockets to get me back. I shall contentedly abide by whatever you think best, and I now leave it for you to decide what I shall do." And lest the added economic burden upon his father's pocketbook should give cause to hesitate, Willard added, "should I get a furlough at all, it would cost nearly as much to remain in this country as it would to go home; I infinitely prefer the latter. If you think I ought to come home, please write out and sign an application . . . and send it to me. . . . With much love, I am your ever grateful son." [^22] Brigham Young replied on April 14.

Salt Lake City, April 14, 1873

Mr. Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear Son,

Your interesting letter of the 5th inst. was gladly received. We are always pleased to hear from you, and look forward with pleasure to the time—now rapidly approaching—when we can receive you in person, shake each other's hands, hear each other's voices, and interchange our feelings in a way that cannot be done in writing.

With this you will find a request for your furlough written in the form suggested.

My health is excellent, for which I feel very thankful, and also the health of the family.

I attended every meeting of our late conference and spoke very frequently and without any sensible injury to myself.

Everything is moving along in a prosperous and satisfactory manner, and I do not know a time that the Saints ever had greater reason to be thankful to our Heavenly Father or more need to be humble and faithful than at the present. All the machinations of our enemies, every time, serve but to advance the kingdom, while each effort they make they seem to become weaker.

Our commercial enterprises, such as the Mercantile Institution, Deseret National Bank, railroads &c., besides mining interests in which outsiders are immediately interested all through the Territory, have a powerful effect in heading off those who would introduce strife and discord in our midst, as it is so much to the interest of capitalists wherever we deal to have business undisturbed here.

The missionaries for Arizona are starting out from the various settlements and gathering at Winsor Castle, where they will be organized and sent forward to make settlements among the Moquis Indians, and in time become acquainted with the Apaches, Pimas, Navajos and other Indians; for we believe that if we are prudent and diligent in the conduct of this mission, we can make a favorable impression among them, in accordance with Prest. [Ulysses S.] Grant's peace policy, and induce them to abandon their thieving, murderous habits.

We have favorable reports from some of those Indians. They are anxious to have us come among them. They say they don't want us to provide for them, but they are extremely anxious that we teach them how to labor and provide for themselves. If we have the blessing and approbation of our Heavenly Father, which I think we will have, and the brethren will do right, a good work will be accomplished.

I would like very much, my health permitting, to go and help the brethren found a city somewhere on the Colorado River on the line of the projected Southern Pacific Railroad. Hitherto my immense business has rendered it difficult for me to leave home, but I have so arranged matters now that I will be left more at liberty, which is a great and satisfactory relief to me.

Spring is rather backward here; we have quite cold weather for the time of year.

We are looking for John W. home in a day or two, as he left Philadelphia on the evening of the 11th. Brigham Jr. is with me, assisting me in my private business for a short time; he desires to be affectionately remembered to you. Geo. A. Smith, Daniel H. Wells, George Q. Cannon, Lorenzo Snow, Albert Carrington, Brigham and John W. have been added to my counselors.

Geo. A. Smith succeeds me as T[rustee]-in-Trust and he has twelve assistants, whose names are on the next page.

Accept my warmest feelings of affection and rest assured that you have my constant prayer for your well-being and every success in the prosecution of your studies.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

P.S. This letter was not mailed last night, and it is now the night of the 16th. I went up to our granite quarry today with a party of brethren, and we had a very pleasant visit. We go to "Sandy," a station on the U.S.R.R. opposite Little Cottonwood Canyon, and then by a narrow gauge road, now building, up to the mines in Little Cottonwood. By this means we are enabled to put the granite blocks right on the cars and haul them by rail on to the Temple Block.

John W. has not got in; a storm on the U.P. delayed the train; we look for him tonight.

The names of the asst. trustees elected at conference are John Sharp, Joseph F. Smith, Joseph W. Young, Moses Thatcher, A[mos] M. Musser, E[lijah] F. Sheets, John Van Cott, John L. Smith, J[ames] P. Freeze, Thomas Taylor, F[rederick] A. Mitchell, and

Le Grand Young.

B. Y. (by DMcK) [David McKenzie]

Letter dated August 11, 1874

As the time for his furlough approached, Willard received the anxiously awaited letter from his father containing the necessary document ("to me very dear") for procuring his two-month leave. However, the anticipation of a visit home, after a two-year absence, had a stagnating effect upon his studies. "I have not been doing so well in my studies as I could have wished, but still am progressing fairly. Furlough I think runs in my head a little too much for my own good, but it is the case with all of us. Two years from home in a place which cannot be left and with the knowledge of this fact constantly present is a thing well calculated to make the first privilege fully appreciated. This absence does more for me at least, for it makes me appreciate some of the privileges and blessings enjoyed by those around you." [^23]

As Cadet Young, dressed in his uniform and showing the composure of two years' military discipline, stepped off the train at the Ogden rail terminal on the afternoon of July 1, 1873, he was warmly greeted by his aging father and a concourse of relatives and friends who had journeyed the thirty-five miles to meet him. "Utah will welcome and honor him today," reported the local newspaper, "because he has done honor to himself and them as their representative." Two weeks later eastern papers reported Willard's promotion to the rank of sergeant.

Willard's return to the academy did not warrant a letter from him until November, when he finally wrote to his father: "I trust that my long silence has not led you to believe that I am forgetful of you. I assure you such is not the case, for I think of you daily; indeed I am assured that I never can think of you too much. I esteem it the greatest possible honor to call you father, and the greatest privilege to be directed by your counsel. I am ever conscious of your goodness and kindness, for which I shall never cease to be grateful. I see in every new development the wisdom of your advice." [^24]

Brigham Young's letter of August 11, 1874, notified Willard that his fifteen-year-old brother, Feramorz, would soon add the name of Young to the U.S. Naval Academy.

Salt Lake City, August 11, 1874

Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear son Willard,

Your letters dated June 5th and July 2d were received in due time.

It is gratifying to know you hold so good a standing in your class as that which, in your last, you inform me.

I suppose that now you are regaling yourself in camp life and recruiting your energies for another term of hard study.

Through Aunt Zina I suppose you have before this learned the lamentably sudden death of Brother Thos. Williams. It was so entirely unexpected that it filled every heart with sorrow.

Things move along slowly. The Order is being taken up gradually by the people and as it becomes more and more understood will be appreciated accordingly. It requires some time for the great majority of the people to grasp the many points of advantage to them that are embraced by it, but it is advancing.

Fera has received his papers as candidate for admission to the Naval Academy; I have hopes that he will pass creditably. Bro. [John R.] Park takes a great deal of interest in him, examining him every day, and endeavoring to post him on all necessary points, and he is studying very hard indeed.

If government will release you after you have graduated, it will please me very much to have you here with me.

I am highly gratified at the good spirit which is manifested in your letters, and trust you will continually have the spirit of the Lord to lead and guide you right.

I presume the "ring's" effort at the election on the 3d was the best they could do, but it was insignificancy itself; they unfurled their colors and showed to all how "liberal" minded they could and would be, did they hold the reins of power.

I am blest with very good health, as also is the family,

Peace be with you and God bless you.

Your father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated February 6, 1875

The following letter of Brigham Young, dated February 6, 1875, was written from St. George, Utah, where the President had gone to spend the winter and supervise the construction of the temple. Although Willard's letter of January 23, which preceded this response, has not been found, it is evident from the context of his father's reply that Willard was writing at the mid-point of his final year at the Military Academy and that he had sought counsel from his father regarding the relative merits of the different branches of military service available to him and the effect his choice may have on his forthcoming career. The question was not resolved at this time, nor was it resolved three months later on the eve of Willard's graduation.

St. George, Utah, February 6, 1875

Cadet Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear son Willard,

Your welcome favor of January 23d came to hand by last mail, and was perused with much pleasure.

I congratulate you on the proficiency you report, and most heartily encourage you to strive by every lawful endeavor to realize the hope, which you express, to increase its standard before next June.

I am pleased with the good and cheerful spirit in which you write, and trust that your course, not only now, but ever, may be such as to cause you to preserve yourself in honor and in every good word and work, that you may stand justified before the Lord and all the righteous.

Willard, I have not decided fully, as yet, in relation to your future course; but when I am in Salt Lake City I will try to inform myself as to the best for you, and will then give you my judgment on the matter. At present I prefer the Engineer Corps. I appreciate, and shall keep in view, the several points of advantage and disadvantage presented in your letter relative to the different arms of the service.

I feel thankful in stating that my general health is good. I have deemed it prudent, because of the condition of my speaking organs, to refrain from much public speaking this winter; but the last two Sabbaths I have addressed the Saints in the St. George Tabernacle at considerable length.

I have watched the progress of the temple in this city with much interest the past winter. The weather has been beautiful and the work has been continued almost without interruption. About two hundred and fifty men are engaged on the walls and in quarrying and cutting rock. Under the concentration of this labor, and that of teams, teamsters, and lime burners, the building is growing at the rate of about two and a half feet per week. The walls are fifty-six feet above the grade at the present time, and eighty out of the ninety-three arches in the building have been completed.

I leave here for Salt Lake City on the 10th inst., if all is well, and shall arrive there about the 20th. Bro. George A. Smith will accompany me. I expect to return here in April.

And now, my son, may the blessing, protection and guidance of the Almighty be ever with you, which is the desire and prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated June 4, 1875

Academically, Willard Young stood far above the average in his class at West Point. However, as the day of his graduation drew nigh, his chances of achieving top honors in his class seemed to be slipping away. "I am very sorry to have to tell you," he wrote his father on May 22, "that I have not done so well as I hoped nor confidently expected to do the last few months, and I am afraid it will result in my failing considerably in standing." Since a cadet's standing in his graduating class determined the branch of service he entered upon graduation—commencing with the engineers for those of the highest standing, and ending with the infantry, for those with the lowest—Willard analyzed his prospects: "Up to January I stood 'two,' and had a fair prospect of graduating there; now, however, I fear I cannot come out above five. This will, perhaps, exclude me from the Engineers, so I must think of what will be my next choice. Your wishes will determine me. I will of course apply for the Engineers, if I succeed in getting the recommendation of the Academic Board for that branch of the service. If not, I wish to know if it shall be Artillery, Infantry, or Cavalry, each of these branches being open to me. The Artillery is considered next to the Engineers, but the part of the country where a person wishes to be stationed must be taken into consideration. Four of the Artil. regiments are stationed along the Atlantic coast, from Maine to Florida; the fifth in California. There are more vacancies in some than in others, and therefore, a better opening in some than in others, as the rank would be correspondingly higher. The Infantry, usually the last choice, is scattered throughout the southern and western territories. The Cavalry, mostly in New Mexico, Texas, and the south west, decidedly the worst places to be stationed at. If I enter the Artillery, which is now my choice (the Engineers of course excepted) I will have to go through another year's study at Fortress Monroe, provided I remain in the service more than a couple of years. I hardly know whether to regard this as an advantage or not, as the instruction is only that which an officer would need in actual service. I think I would prefer to spend a year at Columbia College on the study of engineering, mining and civil, as offering the most advantages to me if I am not to remain in the army any considerable length of time. This, however, is merely prospective, as my term of service will be regulated by the time it is thought proper for me to remain. Unless you advise me otherwise, I will apply for an Artil. Reg. stationed east, perhaps the 2nd, stationed at or near Baltimore, this offering the most vacancies and being near Ferry [Feramorz]."

As Willard anticipated his visit home after graduation, regardless of what his future would be after that, he closed his final letter to his father from the Military Academy with these lines: "I will procure me a uniform to take home, that the folks may see their young 'Lieutenant,' and besides, I will have to procure myself an outfit of clothing &c. This will take all the money I have been able to save from our cadet pay, and I will have to call on you for money to take me home. I am not ashamed to ask you for it, for you know how I am situated, yet I would much prefer not to do so if I could help it. I cannot help thinking how much you have done for me and all the children, and how little we have repaid you for all your kindness. I feel I can never repay the great debt I owe you. . . . Your loving son." [^25]

Brigham Young's response came on June 4, just before Willard graduated from the academy.

Salt Lake City, June 4, 1875

Elder Willard Young

West Point, New York

My dear son Willard,

Your very welcome letter of the 22nd ult. came safely to hand on the 31st, and its perusal gave me much gratification.

We rejoice with you at the near prospect of again extending to you a most cordial welcome to, and enjoying your society in, your "mountain home."

As to your class standing, we have no fears but what it will result very satisfactorily to me, to yourself, and to all your relations and friends.

With you, we hope the academic board will see proper to recommend you to the Corps of Engineers, but should that expectation fail, I quite agree with you that so far as I comprehend the matter, the next best position, all things considered, is in the artillery, and they would, I presume, give you your choice as to regiment in that arm of the service.

As to Fortress Monroe and Columbia College, it may be in season to conclude which of the two bids fair to be most advantageous in case you do not succeed in joining the Engineer Corps. But, if it is necessary for you to have my opinion before you leave for home, I think going to Columbia College much preferable of the two.

As to money matters, I trust you have been reasonably economical, as that is wisest, so I will cheerfully see that you are furnished means for returning home, for which you are hereby given my permission to check on the Deseret National Bank in this city for such amount as you may need.

Pres. George A. Smith has had a very severe attack of illness, but his health at present seems to be improving. My health is very good, and the folks are all usually well. I purpose going to Logan on the 5th inst., and expect to return next week.

Utah affairs are very quiet, excellent prospects for good crops of all kinds, and our local enemies rather chop-fallen and going slow. God bless you,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated November 11, 1875

When Willard Young was graduated from West Point on June 16, 1875, he was the 2,553rd cadet to receive a commission since the academy opened in 1802. In his class of forty-three, Willard stood fifth in engineering, fifteenth in law, eighth in geology and mineralogy, sixth in ordnance and gunnery, and second in discipline. He was fourth in over-all standing. His record brought him the highest distinction conferred upon a cadet—an appointment to the Corps of Engineers. Those whose moral sensitivities were disturbed when the son of the polygamous Mormon leader had entered the academy in 1871 were equally disturbed when he graduated in 1875 with academic honors, in the face of a popular conception that the minds of children of plural families were inferior to those of monogamic parentage. [^26]

Following his graduation and a three-month visit with his family in Utah, Willard reported for duty with the engineer battalion at Willet's Point, New York, on October 1, 1875. En route he stopped at Ann Arbor, Michigan, and Troy, New York, where he visited his brothers Alfales and Don Carlos, who were studying in the East.

Upon arriving at Willet's Point, Willard found the post "a nice one" and very conveniently located, a dozen miles from New York City. After one month he evaluated his new assignment for his father. "The duties, as a general thing, are instructive, and therefore pleasant. The greatest fault to be found with them is, that they are too few, but this is a fault that can be more easily overlooked than almost any other. I find I shall have a splendid opportunity to read the coming winter and expect to profit some by it. The post library, though not large, contains not a few books whose perusal will repay the time thus spent. I have also with me almost a complete set of Church works and can inform myself by becoming more familiar with them. I consider myself very lucky in getting into the Engineer Corps, as it is every way better than the line. I have even heard my companions say, and they are men who have been in the service some time, that they would not exchange a position as a 2d Lieutenant in this corps, for that of Captain in the Artillery, which is considered next to this. This is saying a good deal, where men covet rank as they do in the army. This is doubly true for me as I only want the experience and do not expect to remain long in the service." [^27]

Brigham Young answered his son on November 11.

Salt Lake City, November 11, 1875

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

Your very welcome communication of the 3rd inst. has come duly to hand, cheering us with its glad news of your health, progress, and prospects, for all of which we feel very pleased and thankful.

Whilst listening to the perusal of your letter, I was gratified to learn that your quarters are so comfortable and your duties so instructive. I admire your determination to use your leisure hours in studying, especially of our holy religion. I am desirous that you should also give especial attention to engineering, chemistry, minerology, and geology. If there are works on these sciences in the library of your post, I think it would be wise of you to use them to the best advantage, and read up on these branches. Amongst the pleasure of my life at the present time is the thought that so many of my sons are acquiring experimental and practical knowledge that will fit them for lives of great usefulness. And with this thought I associate the hope that by God's mercy that knowledge will be applied in striving to save the souls of men, and building up the kingdom of heaven on the earth. This knowledge and this work will prove your happiness, for every human being will find that his happiness very greatly depends upon the work he does, and the doing of it well. Whoever wastes his life in idleness, either because he need not work in order to live, or because he will not live to work, will be a wretched creature, and at the close of a listless existence, will regret the loss of precious gifts and the neglect of great opportunities. Our daily toil, however humble it may be, is our daily duty, and by doing it well we make it a part of our daily worship. But, whatever be our labor, calling, or profession, we should hold our skill, knowledge, and talents therein, subservient to the accomplishment of the purposes of Jehovah, that our entire lives, day by day, may be made to praise Him, and our individual happiness secured by the consciousness that we are fulfilling the purpose and design of our presence here on the earth.

My health is slowly improving, yet I must continue to take great care of myself. I am still a prisoner, [^28] but do not think I shall long require the watch care of the United States marshal. Possibly you may hear by telegram in the newspapers before this reaches you that some movement has been made for my release. The continued ill health of Chief Justice [J. Alexander] White (who, by the way, is improving) has prevented the matter being brought before him, and it would be worse than useless to present it in any shape before Judge [Jacob S.] Boreman. So far as the action of the authorities at Washington is concerned, I anticipate we shall have to wait some little time before we hear from them.

The missionaries called at the late conference have all left, with a very few exceptions, for their fields of labor. They carry with them the faith of the priesthood and people, that they will be the instruments in the hands of the Lord of doing much good in bringing many of the honest in heart to a knowledge of the principles of eternal salvation. The elders for Australia sailed from San Francisco yesterday, and I learn by telegram from Elder D[aniel] W. Jones that his party would probably reach Sonora about the 15th of this month. Undoubtedly some of the elders will visit you whilst on their travels. Elders James A. and Feramorz Little and Jesse W. Fox Jr. will labor a part of their time in New York City. The family are all well.

You will find it a great advantage through life if you, in connection with your studies, acquire the faculty of imparting the knowledge you possess to others. All true science, which is the true knowledge of God and God's works, is incorporated in the great plan of the redemption and salvation of the human family, and all the rest of the world. And to be enabled to enlighten others with regard to the dealings or the works of our Creator is greatly to be desired by all who seek the welfare of mankind.

May God bless you, may His peace abide with you, and His power sustain you continually, is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letters of February 17, 1876, to April 26, 1876

"I am always very much gratified on receiving a letter from you, for I can always rely on having good instruction and advice imparted," wrote Willard upon receipt of his father's letter of November 11. "It seems that my desires and determination to prepare myself for doing a good work are strengthened by reading your good words. I need a continual stirring up to keep my mind on the great work that is before me, and before all of us, who are interested in the upbuilding of God's Kingdom here on the earth. The influence of my associations and associates is only too strongly felt, and I realize that I am continually being affected by it. Instead of the single thought of serving God, by which my whole conduct, thoughts, words, and deeds, should be governed, I find myself, though never entirely losing sight of this great truth, entering more or less into the worldly feelings and thoughts of my comrades. But, on the other hand, I am brought by my position, which allows me to comprehend the doings and motives of the outside world, to compare the light and knowledge which a fulness of the Gospel affords, with the groveling ignorance, manifested by the world at large, in all that pertains to future welfare and glory; and this comparison gives me greater joy in, and a better appreciation of the privileges and blessings of the Gospel. I hope I may live faithful to my covenants, and so conduct myself as to please you. If I do, my desire to prove a useful instrument in the upbuilding of the kingdom will be realized." [^29]

Willard's tenure of service at Willet's Point lasted from October 1, 1875, to September 3, 1877, during which time he corresponded regularly with his father. Willard's response to three letters written by his father in the early months of 1876 has not been found.

Salt Lake City, February 17, 1876

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

Your very interesting and very welcome letter dated Jan. 6th 1875, but which I presume should be Feb. 6th, 1876, came duly to hand, and I was cheered to hear of your continued good health and prosperity. I concur in your idea that it would be advantageous and desirable for you to occupy quarters where you will be free from the annoyances and interruptions incidental to the presence of others in your room: "talking, smoking, playing cards &c." I am desirous that you should use the golden time now upon your hands to the very best advantage. It may be that you will never have such another opportunity amidst the care and bustle of after life as you now possess. Two things I am very anxious all my sons should be, faithful [illegible] members in His kingdom. Integrity to the truth and ability to do good are qualities which I hope will characterize you all. And I will acknowledge that I have much happiness in the thought of how well my boys are doing at the present time. I shall not enter into any details with regard to family news as Nabbie [Young Clawson] will no doubt be only too pleased to tell you about her marriage and reception, also of Morris's fatherhood, and of the arrival home of Brigham Jun. and John W.

I expect to start for the South very shortly and it is most probable Brigham Jun. and Bro. Wells will accompany me. And whilst there they will possibly visit our new settlements, whilst other brethren will, as soon as spring opens, start on an exploring expedition to learn the advantages of the country between the termini of the various railroads that run into southern Colorado and our settlements in Arizona. Already the railroad lines are rapidly pushing towards that section of country, and I have the idea that there are many desirable valleys for the homes of Latter-day Saints within a radius of 100 miles of the point where Utah, Colorado, New Mexico and Arizona meet. It is quite possible that we shall have this season's immigration settle in this new country and thus extend the borders of Zion and strengthen her stakes.

We have had quite a change in our municipal officers. The election took place on last Monday and as was of course fully expected, resulted in a complete victory for the People's Ticket. Bro. Feramorz Little is now mayor and quite a number of fresh faces adorn the council chamber.

It must be very encouraging and pleasing to you in your thoughts of home, to realize the present activity in the works and feelings of the Saints whilst the progress of the work of God is made manifest in so many quarters. From every point we receive encouraging news from our missionaries out in the field and baptisms are not infrequent. The elders appointed for Australia have arrived and have entered heartily upon their duties and have divided themselves amongst the various colonies. The call for settlers to Arizona has been nobly responded to and most of the families are now far on their way. When we think of the vast amount of preaching our elders are doing far and wide out in the world, the spirit of reformation amongst gathered Israel, the work of the Father commenced amongst the degraded children of Lehi, and the spreading out and strengthening of the settlements of the Saints, we cannot come to any other conclusion than "Zion is growing," nor refrain from praising our God for his manifest and repeated preservation of his people from the evils the enemies of righteousness seek to bring upon them.

My health is good and I am enjoying life, though I shall be glad to rest for a time when I reach St. George as business has been crowding me considerably of late, whilst the legislature has been sitting and we have been getting off the Arizona emigrants.

Are you likely to have a furlough this next summer, or is there any probability of your being stationed anywhere in these mountains?

With love and continued prayers that every blessing may be yours that you can righteously desire.

I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Salt Lake City, March 28, 1876

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

Your welcome and interesting communication of 18th inst. reached me a few days ago. The same mail brought me a letter from Alfales, and I was gratified with the good news of your health and prosperity which both contained. I have just written to Bro. Carrington asking him, if consistent with the welfare of the mission, to release Ernest, so that he can visit Ferry at Annapolis on the closing days of the term the 18th of June and accompany him home, as Ferry is going to pay us a short visit and is anxious to have his brother's company on the homeward trip. I presume you will have the opportunity to see them in New York on 22nd June or thereabouts.

It would very much please me to have you give especial attention to the study of chemistry, more particularly of those branches which can be applied to the business of daily life, so that you can be sufficiently proficient therein that your knowledge will be of advantage to yourself and an aid to the progress of the kingdom of God.

The family are all well, of which fact they, no doubt, kept you well informed. The boys at home are mostly at the same duties and business as when I last wrote. Morris has gone south with Bro. M[ilton] H. Hardy in the interest of the Young Men's Associations. I am thinking of having Mahonri go to my woolen factory and learn the business with a view to his eventually taking charge there if he likes the trade. Heber is working at the Co-op. I expect he will do so permanently. Nelson Empey anticipates going down south with me after conference, as he feels his health failing and he thinks an out would do him good.

ZCMI is now moving into its new building, and a busy scene it presents. It requires quite a force of men and teams to move their extensive stock. We shall open in the new building on Saturday 1st prox. On Friday evening myself and the brethren of the Quorum of the Twelve will go down to the building and dedicate it.

Our new marshal has arrived; from the descriptions of the brethren I should imagine him to be a quiet, everyday person, a kind of third-rate politician. Our new chief justice, Mr. Coughlan, is not yet with us. Some of the members of the ring claim him as their particular friend. When in Congress he never showed any friendship for Utah, and very little can be expected from him. If he will but do right, judge righteously and administer the law with justice and equity, is all we ask.

My health is good. Give my love and best respects to the children and to the brethren as you may from time to time see them, and with continued prayers for your welfare, happiness and prosperity,

I remain, your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Salt Lake City, April 26, 1876

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

Your good letter with its varied items of news of the family and information regarding your progress and prospects reached me yesterday. I am well pleased to hear that you are now in a better position to continue your studies and researches, with regard to which things you know my mind, whilst I have the fullest confidence that you will do your utmost to carry out my wishes, which are all for your benefit, happiness and well-being.

Whenever you see John W., Don Carlos, Nabbie [Young Clawson] or any of the rest of the folks give them my best love.

I had a very fine letter from Arta D. a few days ago; it breathes an excellent spirit. He is now I presume with Bro. [Albert] Carrington, Ernest, and one or two others making a tour of the churches in continental Europe, which should, and I have no doubt will be, a pleasant and profitable experience for both the boys. Lorenzo D. will accompany us to St. George (for which place we start, all being well, on Monday next) before he goes on his mission to Europe, where possibly he will labor first in Great Britain, afterwards in Germany.

I should have mentioned just above that Brigham Jun., who is one of our party for the South, is already on the road. He will preach to the Saints in the settlements on the way until the rest of the party overtake him. Bro. [Daniel H.] Wells, Brigham Jun., and a few trusty brethren will not go direct with me to St. George but will continue their journey to the new settlements in Arizona, when, after visiting and counseling the new settlers, they will join me in our Dixie. So far as we have yet learned the new settlements are prospering. They are located not far from each other and near the point where [the] Wingate and Prescott mail route crosses the river, sometimes called the Sunset Crossing.

We have very cheering news from two of the party who went with Bro. [Daniel W.] Jones—Bros. [Ammon M.] Tenney and [Robert H.] Smith—but who by his direction returned from El Paso up the valley of the Rio Grande Del Norte and who have been preaching to the Pueblo Indians until the mobocratic spirit of the greasers, Spaniards, and others made it desirable that they should change their field of labor for a short time, or until the storm has blown over. Their words, however, had been received with much faith by the Indians. Leaving the valley of the Rio Grande they traveled westward until they reached a point nearly on the Arizona line. Here they tarried and preached to the Zuni Indians who dwell near the headwaters of one of the tributaries of the Little Colorado. They had baptized thirteen of this tribe when last heard from and Bro. Tenney writes that a thousand more were ready for baptism and would enter the waters when the weather had become a little warmer.

My health has been for some days past, and still is, good, and with care I hope to be able to reach St. George without any great inconvenience or injury to my constitution. I shall enjoy a rest in the southern country, if I am permitted to have one, but I anticipate the duties of the temple, the visits of the Lamanites, the necessities of the new settlements, and other responsibilities will pretty fully occupy my time and attention.

With many prayers, and much love,

I remain, your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter of October 19, 1876

Looking back upon his first year at Willet's Point, which he had anticipated as a year of intensive study and preparation, Willard was less than enthusiastic at the prospects for the future. His worst enemy, one that seemed to be eating away at his incentive and "sense of duty," was an oppressive idleness, nurtured by some of his associates—career men, to whom life at West Point had become an ultimate goal rather than the means to an end. "I know my time here cannot be so productive of good as it would elsewhere," he wrote his father. "Did I intend remaining in the Army all my life, I might think differently, and would, perhaps, think better of my present advantages. The greatest mistake is made in sending young officers here as soon as they leave West Point and keeping them here. They are worked out and need rest, it is true, but in coming here, they have too good an opportunity, for it leads to laziness. A year here is sufficient; if then they should be sent out where they would have some responsibility, until habits of life were formed, I know the results would be better. A young officer sent from here last summer, to join the Wheeler Expedition, has just written me from Nevada, that he has learned more of the world and of life in the short time he has been there, than he would have done 'in sixteen years at Willets Point.'" [^30]

When William T. Sherman, commander-in-chief of the U.S. Army, visited Brigham Young in Salt Lake City in October 1876, they discussed Willard's military future. In Brigham Young's letter of October 19 he reviewed these details and offered some carefully worded advice to his son.

Salt Lake City, October 19, 1876

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

Knowing that a few lines from your father would not be unacceptable, I avail myself of this, possibly the last opportunity I may have before going south to spend the winter and attend to the dedication of portions of the temple at St. George.

When in this city a week or so ago, the Secretary of War and Gen. [William T.] Sherman called upon me. I had a very pleasant chat with the general, during which your name was mentioned. I was rather in favor of your going into active service with some one of the U.S. surveys now being prosecuted by the government in the West. But the general assured me that you would be taking a course of study in torpedoes and other branches of military engineering which would be of the greatest use to you, and he thought it would be the very best thing for you to stay for the present at Willet's Point, and as soon as it would be to your advantage he would take great pleasure in assisting you to a good position such as you would desire.

I have lately deeded to a board of trustees, for the purpose of erecting an academy thereon, the block (20x20 rods) immediately north of the Naisbitt place where Thomas Jennings now resides, and shall probably yet further endow the academy which will be known as the "Young Academy of Salt Lake." It will be open to the children of the Latter-day Saints only. In it the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and other works of the Church will be the standard textbooks, and the preceptors will be especially enjoined to instill into the minds of our youth a faith in the religion of their fathers. We have enough and to spare, at present in these mountains, of schools where young infidels are made because the teachers are so tender-footed that they dare not mention the principles of the gospel to their pupils, but have no hesitancy in introducing into the classroom the theories of Huxley, of Darwin, or of Miall and the false political economy which contends against co-operation and the United Order. This course I am resolutely and uncompromisingly opposed to, and I hope to see the day when the doctrines of the gospel will be taught in all our schools, when the revelation of the Lord will be our texts, and our books will be written and manufactured by ourselves and in our own midst. As a beginning in this direction I have endowed the Brigham Young Academy at Provo and [am] now seeking to do the same thing in this city. Believing that my own boys will best accomplish and have regard to my wishes, I have appointed a board of seven trustees, of whom five are my sons, viz., Brigham Jun., John W., Ernest I., Hyrum S., and yourself. The other two members of the board are brothers D[avid] O. Calder and Geo. Reynolds. The deed will require your signature as one of the trustees which I think can be deferred until your return. If this pleases you, and you are willing to act as one of the trustees, so inform us in your next letters so that we can place your name in the deed and have it duly recorded.

It was my intention to have started for St. George on Monday next, but the enemies of the kingdom of God who are always seeking to harrass me, law or no law, are striving to have me committed to prison for contempt of court in not paying the alimony in the Ann Eliza case. The matter will most probably be heard next Tuesday, when, if the judge is corrupt and bitter enough to decide against me, I shall go to prison, without my mind very much changed, if I have to remain there all the rest of my days, for I certainly shall not pay the plaintiff or her lawyers one cent. But in this, as in all other things, I rely upon the protecting hand of our Father in heaven. I shall be guided by His Spirit and He will bring out all things right. [^31]

My health has been good of late and still remains so, as well as that of the family generally. I have lately heard from Alfales, Fera, and Lorenzo D., all of whom were well. The last named had reached England safely when I last heard from him, but had not then been assigned to his field of labor by Bro. Carrington. Arta D. still remains, laboring in the Liverpool Office.

Direct your letters to Salt Lake City and they can then be forwarded to St. George by express.

Since writing the above I have received your letter of 12th inst. and have taken great interest in its contents. I should like you to visit as often as possible, if it could be every Sunday, the Saints at Williamsburg and talk to them and feel therein that you have, at any rate, a small preaching mission to perform. Nor do I think it would be detrimental to you, if in wisdom, you chatted with your comrades with regard to the principles of the gospel and loaned to them the works of the Church. In this way the dullness of the everyday routine of your life will be released by efforts to do good, the monotony of your studies will be broken, and the time will pass much more rapidly. Considerable of the four years of your service has already passed, and if you serve out your time the United States will have no further claim on you, without you volunteer, and I would much rather you remained in time of peace than when trouble might come. Looking at the matter as I do now, I would prefer you to remain in the service with the understanding that on the first favorable opportunity, advantage be taken of Gen. Sherman's offer and you be transferred to some active engineering or topographical expectation, and in the meantime that you prepare yourself by study and by faith to enter the missionary field and to be a profitable laborer in the Master's vineyard after the four years have expired.

With regard to your reflections about getting married and choosing from amongst the daughters of the East, you must be aware of the risk that you run if you take unto yourself a wife who does not believe the gospel, and whom you have no idea will make a good Mormon, one who probably would oppose you in faith and feeling all the days of your life and teach your children to despise the religion of their father. Perhaps in other things she might be as good as many of our western girls, the course of some of whom I cannot commend. Gen. Sherman has some daughters who might not say no to you, were your inclinations to run in that direction. But I have never taken a wife since I received the gospel from amongst any but the people of God. Neither, as yet, have any of my sons. [^32] Nor am I anxious that they should do so. Still further, I have no objections at all to your coming home and taking a wife whenever it pleases you. You have my entire sanction in so doing, and if you wished to take her back and have her stay with you wherever you are stationed, it would be entirely agreeable to my feelings for you to do so.

With many prayers for your happiness, welfare, comfort, and salvation.

I remain, your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated May 23, 1877

Few letters written by Brigham Young to his children came at a more opportune time, or had a more profound effect, than that of October 19, 1876, to Willard. In the face of discouragement Willard had lamented the rudderless course he seemed to be steering at Willet's Point. His father's letter of the 19th gave him an entirely new outlook: "I must say thanks a thousand thanks for your excellent letter. As is always the case it proved interesting beyond comparison. I always have such a 'good' feeling (I cannot better describe it) when I read your words. They seem to do me good every way, physically, mentally, and morally. The effect of the perusal of this last letter was to make me involuntarily exclaim: Thank God for such a father. You have satisfied me every way. I shall enjoy myself a great deal better now, I feel sure, for in trying to carry out your advice in the several directions pointed out, I shall be doing just what I need to better satisfy my own sense of duty. I shall serve out the remainder of my time now with a good heart, since I know it to be your wish." [^33]

Aware that his father had endowed a Church academy at Provo, Utah, and learning of plans to do the same in Salt Lake City, Willard responded to the request that he join with four of his brothers as a trustee of the proposed school. "Your idea of the 'Young Academy of Salt Lake' is a very pleasing one to me. The education of our youth is a thing in which no pains should be spared. How many times have I had occasion to regret the want of proper instructions amongst even the few playmates of my school days at home. Amongst them there are not a few who take a kind of pride in rejecting the religion of their parents, and believing themselves infidels. In these cases, it was not, perhaps, the instructions they got that misled them, so much as the want of proper instructions. Home is the great school where the young should have instilled into them the principles of truth; yet how much could be done by the successful inauguration of an academy such as you project. It is a very high compliment, indeed, you pay me, and one which I appreciate, in numbering me amongst the trustees of such an institution. I give a most hearty consent to have my name appear on the deed as such, and promise to lend myself to the faithful carrying out of your wishes, so far as lies in my power." [^34]

Brigham Young's caution against choosing a wife from among those "who do not believe the Gospel" brought a firm reaction from his son. "Thus far, I have always felt just as you do about the subject of outsiders, and, luckily, have had no inducement to change my mind, thus far; as, amongst our own girls, my experience leads me to believe, I can suit myself just as well as elsewhere. Whenever speaking of the subject, mother has always said, 'Whatever you do, get a good Mormon for a wife,' and I have grown to regard it as a duty to make this the first essential requisite. Even to those who told me, on my leaving home, that they expected me to marry some eastern girl, I always replied, such would not be the case. I have been at home so little of late, that I do not know the girls sufficiently well to properly appreciate all their good qualities; nor have I yet found one to claim my especial affection. For this reason, and more especially as my position and duties, with the uncertainty of my movements, getting quarters &c. would hardly warrant such a step, I think it best to decline (for the present) with thanks, your kind permission for me to 'come home and get a companion.' I have no fear that I shall find somebody to suit me (and whom I will suit) as soon as I see my way clear." [^35]

In December 1876, having learned that his aging father had been very ill, and hoping that a few lines might prove some comfort, Willard addressed a letter to him on Christmas day: "I know the deep interest you feel for your children's welfare, and of course it is natural we should feel some sympathy for you in return. For myself I have always felt grateful for having been blest with a father, who always inspired me with perfect confidence, who always felt so jealous a care for my wellbeing, and who always set so worthy an example for me to follow. . . .

"Since leaving home I have felt a desire to worthily represent you and our people. Wherein I have failed it has been my own fault, I know. I am told, how truly I know not, that I have succeeded in inspiring at least some few at home with confidence in me, and I hope it is so. If I can be the means of doing good in establishing God's Kingdom on the Earth, and can succeed in doing all that is expected of me, I shall feel happy indeed. . . .

"One thing I very much lack, that would prove of greatest service to me in life—it is the gift or faculty of communicating my thoughts and ideas to others. You have noticed this, and have advised me to acquire it by practice. I have not succeeded very well as yet. Your instructions for me to talk to the Saints at our Williamsburg meetings, whenever opportunity offers, I feel, is calculated to give me confidence in myself, and the experience I need. Thus far I have not been called upon, except to dismiss the meeting, since receiving your letter; before that, it was thought wisdom not to call upon me. I do not know how I will do when I am called upon. That indiscribable feeling which nearly all new beginners have, tells me I certainly do need experience. As with every thing else it is necessary, I suppose, to learn to preach. . . ."

Willard wrote further that his duties at Willet's Point "are still very light, so that I have plenty of time on my hands to study, or read, or waste—and I am afraid I do waste a great deal too much of it." He closed his letter with a report of his visit on Thanksgiving Day to his brothers Don Carlos and Feramorz, who were studying at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York, at the time. [^36]

Salt Lake City, May 23, 1877

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

My time since my departure from St. George has been so fully occupied that not until now have I been able to reply to your welcome letter of April 29th. Of the circumstances that attended our return journey to Salt Lake City, and the work we performed on the way, you have no doubt been advised by members of the family, so I shall not here enter into details. Since my return the duties of my calling have kept me actively engaged. What with the councils of the priesthood, the meetings of the city council and of the board of directors of ZCMI, of the Deseret Bank, of the Street Railroad Co., &c. &c., I find my time most completely engaged. But I am happy to say that my health is excellent, and my feelings as calm and pleasant as at any period of my life. I look back with great satisfaction at my labors during the past six months and feel much joy therein, and the assurance that the Lord has accepted our offering of the House built to His name adds to my happiness and inspires me to fresh efforts. Since my return home I have spoken frequently and at considerable length, and I have but to a very slight degree felt any inconvenience therefrom to my stomach or speaking organs. Already we have held local conferences at Salt Lake and Logan cities, and shall during the next two weeks do the same at Ogden and Brigham cities. In our visits to the different parts of these valleys we shall more fully organize the priesthood and organize stakes of Zion with a president, high council &c. &c. wherever desirable. This will be the work of the First Presidency and Twelve during the present summer, and by the time every portion of this mountain region in which the Saints dwell is organized, we shall probably find that we have about twenty-one stakes of Zion. To visit these stakes, hold local conferences once in about every three months to strengthen, direct, and lead the Saints in the paths of holiness will be the work of the Twelve Apostles with the assistance of the First Presidency as far as they can. You may inquire, why organize so many stakes of Zion? We will answer, to more completely carry out the purposes of Jehovah, to give greater compactness to the labors of the priesthood, to unite the Saints, to care for the scattering sheep of Israel in these mountains who acknowledge no particular fold, to be in a position to understand the standing of every one calling himself a Latter-day Saint, and to consolidate the interests, feelings, and lives of the members of the Church. These are some of the reasons why we now more fully than heretofore organize the holy priesthood after the pattern given us of our Father in heaven.

As you may suppose, these labors, combined with the energy now shown by the Saints in raising temples to the name of the Most High, have aroused the ire of the evil one and incensed the anger of his agents here on the earth. The fountain of lies has apparently burst forth with tenfold vigor to overwhelm the people of God. But our trust is in Him who controlleth all things and turneth the people as the rivers are turned. Already there seems to have arisen a conviction with many that the slanderous reports spread about us are not to be relied on, and that some sinister motive prompts their dissemination. The troubles in the South having been plastered over for a little while, those who live on the misery of their fellow men find their occupation gone in that direction, and are very willing to help on a contractors war against Utah, which the ring in this city is only too anxious to inaugurate. We have, however, today the same assurance as of old that the Lord will make the wrath of men to praise Him, and the rest of it He will restrain.

Of the family I may say all are well with the exception of Brigham Jun., whose health, ever since we left St. George, has been very poor. He was so enfeebled that we had to leave him at Parowan, in the care of Bro. [George Q.] Cannon, who remained to nurse him, and by very slow stages they reached this city, and after a few days' rest he continued his journey with me to his home at Logan, where he now is slowly, but we hope, surely improving. John W. is with me attending to the duties of his calling; Don Carlos and Fera will not return home during the present vacation but will devote their unemployed time to the study of music. Mahonri and Oscar are still at the woolen mills. Heber is more immediately helping me round the premises. Ernest and Alonzo are at ZCMI. Morris will shortly start on his mission to the States. Alfales is home again, having completed his law course, whilst we expect Arta D. home with Bro. [Albert] Carrington in a very few weeks. Lorenzo will remain in England another year. Walter Beatie will soon start on his mission, and may possibly call on you on his way.

Praying the Lord to bless you, my dear son, with every needed blessing and good He has to bestow on His faithful children,

I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter of July 28, 1877

In answer to his father's letter of May 23, Willard wrote, "I am, as you know, always interested in what you have to say of the progress of the Latter-day work, and in the way of encouragement and advice. If I do not keep all your counsels it is through weakness on my part, and not for lack of faith in your ability and right to direct me." [^37]

Since Willard's pay during the summer of 1877 was dependent upon an allocation of funds from Congress that was not forthcoming until fall, and he was not desirous of taking a loss by selling his pay accounts prematurely at a discount, he closed his letter of June 4 with a request to borrow $500. His letter arrived in Salt Lake City just as his father was leaving for southern Utah. When the President heard that the U.S. Government couldn't pay his son, he jokingly remarked to his secretary, George Reynolds, that Willard had better tell the commanding officer at the post that he would resign and save the expense of keeping him. Brigham Young then advised Reynolds to answer Willard's letter. Not sensing in the written reply the jest with which his father spoke, Willard carefully weighed the counsel that he discontinue his military career: "I need not tell you I am ready to do just what you wish me to do in the matter. . . . To resign . . . would be to abandon a very good position, a profession, in fact, for which I have been specially educated. It is not simply leaving the army, but the very best position in the army—the Engineer Corps. I have salary sufficient to keep me comfortably, besides pleasant, congenial work, and a social position and consideration that I can hardly expect to enjoy in civil life. . . . I feel desirous of taking that course which will allow me to do the most good, and it certainly seems to me now that I will do this by going home. I cannot deny that much might be done in my present position, especially in making friends, and removing prejudice, and goodness knows there is plenty of it that ought to be removed. It is certainly wonderful that even amongst intelligent and cultivated people so much ignorance, I might almost say bigotry, exists in regard to our people and their professions. In spite of this, however, a better field seems open to me at home. I find my greatest argument, perhaps, is my own feelings, for it is certainly pleasing to think of being associated with people whose sympathies are with yours, and whose object and aim in life are yours. I cannot outgrow the love of home and home associations, and especially if I am to be continually reminded that there is no sympathy for me in the world, and I am so reminded very frequently. My associations and intercourse here sadly lack that feeling of confidence, of congeniality, and love, that is so marked at home. I almost feel a barrier that is hard to describe, a kind of ostracism in my associations here, that is entirely wanting at home. It is true I have a great many acquaintances here, whom I call friends, but they are not friends in whom I could trust, as I could those who are numbered with the Latter-day Saints. I cannot deny that I am anxious to get home as soon as possible. I am willing, though, to do just what you think is for the best. If you think it wisdom for me to serve the four years out, and then resign, as was your wish, all right. I had fully made up my mind to do this, before Bro. Reynolds wrote. His letter, I think, will be my best excuse, if excuse is necessary for again referring to this subject." [^38]

Three days after Willard wrote these lines, the battalion of engineers at Willet's Point, along with other federal troops from the forts in New York harbor, was called to restore order in the wake of railroad strikes that had erupted in the East in the summer of 1877. Willard's unit was sent first to Baltimore, Maryland. Their orders were to relieve the Sixth Regiment of Maryland militia, which was confined in the Baltimore armory, where the men had taken refuge after having been stoned and fired upon by a mob, and in turn had fired upon rioters, killing several. When the federal troops arrived in Baltimore, the situation was volatile. "The mob followed us on our way to the armory, and a few stones were thrown at us, one of our men being knocked down. The command was halted, and this was enough; for, thinking we were going to shoot, they very soon cleared out. We arrived at the armory without further incident." From Baltimore, Willard's unit was transferred to Philadelphia. "How long we will remain here I do not know. Much of the trouble is over, and our presence will not be necessary much longer, I think. Unless some new outbreak occurs, I shall expect to be back at Willet's Point within a week." [^39]

Neither an invitation to Willard earlier in the year to join his father at the dedication of the St. George Temple, nor talk of his resignation from the army, materialized in a trip home for Willard Young prior to August 29, 1877. Consequently, he did not see his father again, for on that date the President died. The following letter dated, July 28, 1877, was the last written by Brigham Young to his son Willard.

Salt Lake City, July 28, 1877

Elder Willard Young

Willet's Point, New York

My dear Son,

Your letter of the 18th inst. was somewhat delayed in its transit, owing, I presume, to the troubles with the railroad strikes; but it was none the less welcome on its arrival.

My reason for saying what I did to Bro. [George] Reynolds was that I thought if I had to support you, I might as well have the benefit of your talents. But if the government intends to pay you, after taking all things into consideration, I would rather you do not resign until the four years are up. We shall see what Congress will do when it meets, and until then will not make any move in the matter. But if Congress refuses to make the necessary appropriation, I shall be much inclined to say to you: tender your resignation. In the meantime, learn all you can of that which will be the most useful to you, whether you resign now or complete the term of your four years' service. If circumstances should transpire that you should think it best to tender your resignation, I do not wish you to do anything until you have communicated with Genl. Sherman, laid the facts before him, and asked his counsel in the matter.

On the 16th inst. I wrote to Carlos and Fera (I have since received Carlos's favor of 19th) and therein told them to let you see what I had written. Since that date little has occurred of exciting interest in our midst. It has been said, "happy are the people who have no history." History, as usually written, is principally filled with the wars, the troubles, and misfortunes of mankind, and so perhaps it is well that nothing of special moment has occurred within our borders during the last few days, as it tacitly proclaims that peace, quietude, and the blessings of God prevail. However, it is the Lord alone that we have to thank for this pleasant condition of matters in these valleys.

The enemies of virtue and righteousness are striving earnestly to have it different. They have lately trumped up charges against Bros. R[obert] T. Burton and Dr. [Jeter] Clinton for murder, on account of their being present at the time of the suppression of the Morrisite [^40] outbreak by the order and direction of the chief justice of this territory.

We also learn that 23 indictments were found last night by the grand jury. Of course we have not yet learned the names of the unfortunate objects of so much undesired attention. The charge against Dr. Clinton is understood to be that whilst professional attending Jno. [John] Banks, after he was wounded, the Dr. poisoned him. With such outrageous charges as these they seek to aggravate us to some word or act out of which they could make capital to our disadvantage.

We had a very happy time on the Twenty-fourth. Several thousand Sunday School children gathered in the large tabernacle, which had been newly decorated, and very sweetly sang a number of new pieces—the productions of our local composers. I talked for some time to the children, giving them a slight synopsis of our history and the reasons why they were here. Large celebrations were also held in Ogden, Logan, and other places.

All is well with myself and the family. Brigham Jr. is now in the city paying a visit. He is much better.

Brigham and Jno. W. join me in love to yourself, Don Carlos, and Fera.

God bless and preserve you and peace be with you,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Mahonri M. Young to Brigham Young, 16 December 1876.
[^2] Deseret News, 20 (8 June 1871):220.
[^3] Willard Young, address at the semicentennial celebration of Brigham Young University, October 15, 1925, The Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, 17 (January 1926):11. See also Leonard Arrington, "Willard Young: The Prophet's Son at West Point," Dialogue 4 (Winter, 1969):39.
[^4] Willard Young, p. 13.
[^5] Chicago Evening Post, as cited in Deseret News 20 (14 June 1871):234.
[^6] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 3 June 1871.
[^7] George Q. Cannon had been editor and publisher of the Deseret News since 1867.
[^8] The "ring" mentioned here was the term applied by Mormons to some federal appointees, ex-officers of the California volunteers who had remained in Utah, lawyers, government employees, merchants, and government contractors, who sought to incite conflict between Mormons and the United States. Some of those who were particularly offensive to the Mormon community at this time were James B. McKean, U.S. judge; R. N. Baskin, U.S. district attorney; O. J. Hollister, U.S. revenue collector; J. P. Taggart, U.S. assessor; and Dennis J. Toohy, editor of the Corinne Reporter.
[^9] The Utah Southern Railroad was a southern extension of the Utah Central line that linked Salt Lake City with the transcontinental line at Ogden. The Utah Southern was commenced May 1, 1871, and the first track was laid in June.
[^10] A Methodist camp meeting, the first of its kind held in Utah Territory, was opened in Salt Lake City on June 10, 1871. Directed by the Reverends Inskip, Boole, Macdonald, and Searles, meetings were held in a large tent every evening for eight days. Brigham Young advised the Latter-day Saints, particularly the young people who had never witnessed such a meeting, to attend. See Journal History, 8-11 June 1871.
[^11] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 11 June 1871.
[^12] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 19 June 1871.
[^13] Preparations for the Independence Day celebration in Salt Lake City in July 1871 took on a volatile atmosphere when the non-Mormon residents of the city announced their determination "to maintain their independence of priestly dictation" by celebrating the day separate from the Mormon community. As the Latter-day Saints proceeded with plans for the day, Daniel H. Wells, commander of the Utah militia, issued orders to the martial brass bands, one company of artillery with ordnance to fire salutes, a company of cavalry, and three companies of infantry to render such service during the day as assigned by the committee of arrangements. In response to this action, George S. Black, acting governor of the Territory, forbade "all persons except United States troops" from participating in "any military drill, muster, or parade of any kind," and directed General De Trobriand at Fort Douglas, east of the city, to enforce his order with the United States troops. As more temperate counsel prevailed, the companies of militia marched, but without arms, the artillery fired salutes, the bands played, and the U.S. troops were present, but only as spectators and the day passed without violence. Brigham H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 5:357-60.
[^14] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 9 December 1871. Holograph, Brigham Young University.
[^15] One episode in the long Mormon-gentile conflict in Utah that brought charges of ecclesiastical domination on one hand and carpetbaggery on the other was the accusation of murder made against Brigham Young in 1871 during the term of James B. McKean, who had been appointed chief justice of Utah's Supreme Court in July 1870. The charge against Brigham Young was made by U.S. Acting District Attorney R. N. Baskin, on the strength of a confession by the notorious William Hickman, who had admitted numerous killings and sought to implicate others, including Brigham Young. However flimsy the evidence, there were those in Utah at the time who were eager to grasp at an opportunity to involve the Mormon Church leader in crime. The accusation against Brigham Young never came to trial due to the decision of the United States Supreme Court in the Englebrecht case, which overturned and invalidated the proceedings of the federal courts in Utah for a period of nearly two years prior to December 1871. See B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 5:399-417; also Thomas G. Alexander, "Federal Authority Versus Polygamic Theocracy," Dialogue I (Autumn 1966): 85-100.
[^16] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 9 March 1872.
[^17] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 7 April 1872.
[^18] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 12 May 1872.
[^19] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 23 June 1872.
[^20] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 17 January 1873.
[^21] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 5 April 1873.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 21 May 1873.
[^24] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 16 November 1873.
[^25] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 22 May 1875.
[^26] On June 28, 1875, the Chicago Times commented on Willard Young's graduation: "A son of Brigham Young has graduated from the military academy at West Point, standing third in his class. It has been said that polygamy results in the impairment of the mental faculties of the offspring, but this does not seem to prove the theory." Cited in Journal History, 2 July 1875.
[^27] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 3 November 1875.
[^28] Brigham Young's "imprisonment" was an incident in the divorce case then being litigated between the President and Ann Eliza Young. In 1873 Ann Eliza Webb Dee Young, a plural wife of Brigham Young—married April 6, 1868—had brought a suit for divorce against him. Evidence indicates that the case was instigated and prosecuted more in a spirit of extortion and persecution than to satisfy justice. When the case came before Judge James McKean on February 25, 1875, Brigham Young was ordered to pay the plaintiff $3,000 to defray legal expenses and $500 per month alimony, the legal fee to be paid within ten days and the alimony within twenty. Upon refusing to pay the amounts directed, Brigham Young was cited in contempt of court, fined $25, and imprisoned for twenty-four hours. Judge McKean was subsequently deposed from office for fanatical and extreme conduct, and the case of Young vs. Young was reviewed in November 1875 before Judge David B. Lowe, McKean's successor as chief justice. After hearing the case, Judge Lowe ruled that alimony could not be awarded unless a valid marriage existed, noting that plural marriages were not regarded as valid by the laws of the land. Soon after this, Judge Lowe resigned and was succeeded by J. Alexander White; but before White arrived in Utah, Judge Jacob Boreman reversed the Lowe decision and ordered Brigham Young imprisoned until the sum of $9,500 was paid. Since the court did not specify confinement in a jail, Brigham Young was placed under the custody of a U.S. marshal in his own home. On November 12, 1875, on a writ of habeas corpus, Judge White voided the action of Judge Boreman and Brigham Young was freed. However, since White had not been confirmed by the U.S. Senate, his appointment was voided after three months in Utah. His successor, Michael Schaeffer, reviewed the matter of alimony, which had accumulated to $18,000 by that time, and reduced it to $3,600 pendente lite (while the litigation continued). This amount was paid by Brigham Young in July 1876, in the face of an order for attachment of his property. The divorce case was finally tried in April 1877, when it was decreed that the polygamous marriage between the parties was null and void under the law of the land, and all orders of alimony not already paid were revoked. Brigham H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 5:442-54. Also, Thomas G. Alexander, "Federal Authority Versus Polygamic Theocracy," Dialogue I (Autumn 1966): 85-100.
[^29] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 8 December 1875.
[^30] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 29 October 1876.
[^31] That Brigham Young had already pursued a less rigid course in this matter is suggested by Brigham Young, Jr.'s diary entry of March 12, 1875: "Found my father in excellent spirits confident in God and willing to submit to his providences. He paid the 3000 $ to Anne Eliza's lawyers. And assures me that he will pay the $9500. alimony if necessary without any fuss. He says the Lord has given me all I have, if He permits this why should I complain, it will come back again four fold, and disgrace them."
[^32] On April 16, 1884, six years after his father's death, Alfales Young married an Episcopalian girl, Ada Cottle, in Salt Lake City.
[^33] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 29 October 1876.
[^34] Ibid.
[^35] Ibid.
[^36] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 25 December 1876.
[^37] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 4 June 1877.
[^38] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 18 July 1877.
[^39] Willard Young to Brigham Young, 29 July 1877.
[^40] In 1862 the Morrisites, comprising some 600 persons under the leadership of a Welshman, Joseph Morris, and two aides, Richard Cook and John Banks, had founded a church and established a colony at Kington Fort, near the mouth of Weber Canyon in Weber County, Utah. Practicing joint ownership of property, and expecting an imminent return of Christ, members of the sect were repeatedly disappointed when several announcements of Christ's coming failed to materialize. As disillusioned members sought to withdraw from the colony and insisted upon taking their property with them, they were imprisoned. Subsequently, Morrisite leaders were summoned to appear in court, together with their prisoners, to show cause for their actions. However, the summons was rejected and the officiating marshal was ridiculed and informed that any further resort to legal process would be met with armed force. A short time later, a posse led by Robert T. Burton was dispatched to arrest Morris, Cook, and Banks. Upon reaching the fort on June 13 Burton's troop met defiance, and a three-day armed conflict ensued, which resulted in the death of several persons, including Joseph Morris and John Banks. The Morrisite affair was revived during the Mormon-gentile conflict of 1876 when Robert Burton and Dr. Jeter Clinton (who had attended the wounded John Banks before he died) were charged with murder—Burton for killing a woman in the fort, and Clinton for "poisoning" Banks. Burton was subsequently acquitted, and Clinton's case was dismissed for lack of evidence. Brigham H. Roberts, op. cit., 5:39-59.
