Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Mahonri Moriancumer Young

1852-1884

Mahonri Moriancumer Young, the only son of Margaret M. Alley and Brigham Young, was born in Salt Lake City, December 19, 1852. Named after a Book of Mormon personality, "Hon" Young was an avid sportsman who enjoyed the outdoors and was a master of rod and gun. Educated in Salt Lake City, Mahonri worked for a time at ZCMI, and prior to his father's death, he was appointed manager of the Deseret Woolen Mill at the mouth of Parley's Canyon in Salt Lake Valley. The mill was later deeded to him as part of the settlement of his father's estate. A letter written by Mahonri to his father from the mill on December 16, 1876, reveals a thorough understanding of the wool business by its twenty-four-year-old manager. It also gives this brief glimpse of his personality: "When I go into town, I do so with a horse and buggy. Said horse has to be tended to; I have to do it. I am able to do it, but not disposed to, if I can get out of it. You have two men in the barn who have ample time to put out or hitch up my horse when I want it done, I don't care to smell like a horse when I go to the Co-op or any other place to attend to your business. If I was a stranger attending to this business, my horse could be tended to, but because I am one of the President's boys I can tend to him myself. Other men who have charge of other parts of your business have only to go to the barn and ask for the horse and buggy. It is got out at once. Why can I not be respected as much as they? . . . Ever praying for your health and welfare and that of the saints, I am your loving son." [^1]

Having suffered from inflammatory rheumatism since he was seven, Mahonri never left the state of Utah, which no doubt explains the absence of correspondence from his father. On October 22, 1876, he was sealed to Agnes Mackintosh in the Salt Lake Temple, and they were the parents of three sons, one of whom was the world-famous sculptor Mahonri Mackintosh Young. In addition to managing the Deseret Woolen Mill with woefully insufficient capital, Mahonri did some farming. He was a member of the Salt Lake Yacht Club. His death resulting from his rheumatic condition occurred in Salt Lake City on April 20, 1884, at age thirty-two.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] J. Cecil Alter, Early Utah Journalism (Salt Lake City, 1938), p. 278.
