Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Brigham Morris Young

1854-1931

On November 6, 1875, Brigham Young called his twenty-one-year-old son Brigham Morris to his room in the Lion House and appointed him and two others to continue the work of organizing "improvement associations" among the young men of the Church in the absence of Junius Wells, who had previously held that responsibility but had been called on a mission. "I want this work to continue and grow and not die out," the President told his son, adding, "I am going to appoint John Henry Smith, Milton H. Hardy, and you to take up and continue this labor. I want you boys to go and travel through this Territory in every settlement and organize these associations." [^1] Within a year Morris Young and Milton Hardy had visited more than a hundred settlements and organized ninety-one Young Men's Improvement Associations. Their labors marked the effectual beginning of the YMMIA in the Church.

Born on January 18, 1854, Brigham Morris Young was the thirty-fifth child of Brigham Young and the only child of Margaret Pierce Young. The youth was educated at his father's private school east of the Eagle Gate and at the University of Deseret. Out of deference to his mother's wish that he remain at home, Morris did not continue his education or training at institutions of higher learning outside of Utah, although his father had provided his sons with the opportunity to do so, and some of them were so engaged. During his teen-age years Morris drove a horse-drawn streetcar in Salt Lake City between Wasatch Springs and the Utah Central Railroad depot on First South Street. After this, he devoted practically all of his life to Church service, as a missionary and employee in the Salt Lake Temple.

Morris completed his first of three missions during 1873-74 in Hawaii. On March 29, 1875, three months after his return, he married Celestia Armedia Snow, a daughter of Lorenzo Snow. Writing two days before the wedding, the bride's parents explained to Brigham Young that circumstances would not permit them to attend the ceremony. "I hope you will excuse us," Lorenzo urged, and added, "As Armedia is almost a stranger to you allow us to say what our modesty would withhold if we were present, viz., Armedia has always been a good, obedient, industrious and affectionate daughter, and has had as good an education as our schools could afford, and we hope and trust that she will prove a true 'help meet' to her husband and that this union may prove a happy one which has our sanction and blessing." [^2] That these sentiments were realized is evident from the ten children that blessed this union and the notice of a golden wedding commemoration held in the Lion House on March 28, 1925, in honor of Morris and Celestia Young.

While traveling through Utah in the interest of the Mutual Improvement Associations in 1876, Morris was called on another proselyting mission for the Church, this time to the Central and Eastern states. Leaving his wife in Brigham City, he labored successively in Nebraska, Iowa, Illinois, Pennsylvania, and Washington, D.C. In company with his cousin Eli Pierce, on August 30, 1877, Morris had stopped for dinner in Mosquito Creek, Nebraska, when he received news of the death of his father. "I had just got some chicken and potatoes on my plate, when Sister Powers arrived in a buggy with the sad news of my dear Father's death. I was very much surprised and seem[ed] as though I could not relize it. I felt very bad and could not eat any dinner." He and his companion then walked seven miles to Council Bluffs, where he telegraphed his brother John W. asking "if it would be expedient for Eli and I to return home." The answer came the following day. Morris and his three brothers, Don Carlos, Willard, and Feramorz, who were engaged in education, military, and missionary assignments in the East, were advised to remain and continue their labors. Although the news of his father's death brought him deep sorrow, Morris noted, "still I realize it is all right, and say, not my will but thine be done Oh, God." [^3]

Traveling through Illinois as he continued on his mission, Morris stopped in Nauvoo where he located his father's old home ("the house looks prity delapidated"), took a drink of water from the temple well, and visited Emma Smith, who at seventy-three appeared to be "failing very fast." In New York a few weeks later he had a joyous reunion with his brothers Feramorz and Don Carlos, who were studying at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy. As Morris took leave from his brothers, Don Carlos assisted him by paying his fare to New York City. After continuing his missionary labors in Pennsylvania and Washington, D.C., Morris returned home in the summer of 1878.

Five years later, in April 1883, Morris was called on a second mission to Hawaii, accompanied by his wife and two children. While there he labored on the island of Kauai and assisted in building a new meetinghouse at Laie, the dedication of which was attended by the Hawaiian king, David Kalakauna, in October 1883.

After returning from Hawaii in October 1884, Morris started a confectionery in Brigham City; in 1890 he moved to Logan, where he labored at odd jobs while a daughter attended Brigham Young College. Having received an aggregate of $18,000 in property, stocks, and bonds as his share of his father's estate in 1878, Morris had hoped by careful management to multiply these assets for the support of his family and "the building up of the Kingdom of God." However, the economic depression of the early 1890s reduced his property and left him on the brink of poverty. Upon the completion of the Salt Lake Temple in 1893, he was offered full-time work in the temple by Lorenzo Snow at a salary of $60 a month, a position that he held for the remaining thirty-eight years of his life.

Morris was well known as an entertainer and humorist and was often called to perform at stake and ward social functions, where he frequently posed as "Madam Pattirini," a great female opera singer. An extant invitation lists B. M. Young as manager of "a Grand Character and Dress Ball" held in the large room of the Brigham City Woolen Factory in 1889. On one occasion Morris and a friend, dressed in colorful costumes, called at the office of his father-in-law, President Lorenzo Snow, and as one spoke "Chinese" and the other "interpreted," introduced themselves to the secretary, George F. Gibbs, as visiting Chinese dignitaries. After being ushered into the Church leader's office and conversing for some time, the two visitors disclosed their real identity to a very surprised President. Not wishing to be alone in the joke, President Snow sent the "foreign emissaries" to call upon his counselor, Joseph F. Smith.

At the age of seventy-seven, Brigham Morris Young died in a Salt Lake City hospital on February 23, 1931, a week following an emergency operation for a ruptured appendix.

Letter dated July 24, 1873

Having been called to labor in the Hawaiian Mission (then known as the Sandwich Islands), Brigham Morris Young left Salt Lake City on May 20, 1873, and arrived at his destination on June 3. Whatever the Pioneer Day celebration may have been that year on July 24, Brigham Young spent part of the day writing the following letter to his son at Laie, Oahu.

Salt Lake City, July 24, 1873

Brigham Morris Young

Laie, Oahu, Sandwich Islands

My dear Son,

Your very welcome letter to me of the 6th inst., also one to your mother which I read, both with great pleasure, reached here on the 22nd inst.

Bro. Geo. P. Nebeker got in the day following. He delivered a letter to your mother which you sent, and informed us that the parcels you wrote about were with Bro. [William] King and would not be in before the 25th. Bro. King was traveling with a freight train.

We were all exceedingly well pleased with the spirit of your letters.

Your mother is in good health and spirits and the folks feel first rate. Willard is making a good visit and is enjoying it hugely.

My health is good for which I feel very thankful. My business keeps me constantly and actively engaged, and I am pleased to be able to attend to it. On the 22nd I attended a railroad mass meeting at Lehi, for we are expecting iron soon to run to Provo and wish the Utah Co. folks to help build the road. Tomorrow morning I start for Tooele to attend 2 days meeting there. Those 2 days meetings are held quite frequently since conference and I have attended a number of them, and they are calculated to do considerable good.

Samuel P. Richards called lately and reported himself on hand to go to the Islands when required. We told him to get ready, and it is probable he may join you before long, and perhaps others of the young brethren who may feel disposed to go.

Your labors to acquire the native language will doubtless be a task at first but diligence and perseverance will give you the victory. You have everything to encourage you, for heaven and good men are on your side, and you know the saying, "heaven and one good man is a large majority." You have just started out and your future is in a great measure depending upon your course now. Be diligent and prayerful. It is your privilege to know for yourself God lives and that He is doing a work in these last days and we are His honored ministers. Live for this knowledge and you will receive it. Remember your prayers and be fervent in spirit. Shun the very appearance of evil, and in all your intercourse with [others] preserve an upright decorum and in preaching to the people or conversing in private be cool, and keep command of yourself. Don't get flurried; trust in God and words will come to you, and you will know just what to say. Your calling is to be a teacher to the world. There is no honor or dignity in the power of man to bestow that can begin to compare with this in importance or greatness. It is a high and a holy calling and if you honor it, you will enjoy constant peace and win the respect of all good men wherever your lot is cast, and that is the path we hope and pray you will always walk in.

Give my best respects to Prest. [Frederick A. H. F.] Mitchell and family, Sis. [Mildred E.] Randall, Bro. [Richard J.] Taylor and all the brethren. Write often when you have the time, and remember we will watch your course, and that you have our faith and prayers, that you may be enabled to do a good work and return with clean hands and a pure heart.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated October 23, 1873

The cultural shock produced by a confrontation with strange customs and language in Hawaii had a definite impact upon Morris Young. Speaking at his first conference in the Hawaiian Mission in October 1873, four months after his arrival there, he had not learned enough of the language to communicate without a translator. Writing to his son later that month, Brigham Young gave Morris advice to meet the problem of strange customs and a strange tongue.

Salt Lake City, October 23, 1873

Elder B. Morris Young

Honolulu, Hawaiian Islands

My dear Son,

As some of the missionaries are about starting for the islands, I embrace the opportunity of writing you a few lines which one of the brethren will bear to you. You will all doubtless be very glad to see the new arrivals. Your very interesting letter of Sept. 5 was read with great pleasure, as it indicates that you have taken right hold of your mission, and that is what we are anxious you should do, as therein is your peace and happiness and welfare, and we pray that your mind may continue to be led in that channel.

Traveling among the natives and mingling with their society is a better way to acquire the language than attending school. Besides, you learn the manners and customs of the people and become personally acquainted with them. The immoral habits of many of the natives will doubtless impress you very unfavorably, still you must bear in mind that their practices are apt to be as they are traditionated, just as the rest of mankind are in theirs, and we have to deal with people as they are, and by giving them the gospel and showing them a good example, strive to make them better.

Bro. [Richard J.] Taylor's health appeared very much reduced when he returned home, and his shipwreck gave him quite a shake in addition to his former sickness. We are glad that he returned when he did, and we hope that he will soon recover his wonted health and strength.

Another conference has passed and the Saints had an excellent time. The work is onward, growing, increasing, and expanding, notwithstanding the malice and hatred of our enemies who appear to be using every means in their power to destroy it. But they meet with very little success indeed, and Zion grows stronger year by year, while in the governments of the earth there is an increasing distrust more and more manifest as their corruptions are brought to the surface and exposed. The hand of our Heavenly Father is outstretched and He guides and directs everything according to His good pleasure and He will give His Saints the victory when they are prepared to receive and wear it.

We are sending quite a number of missionaries to England this season, the most of whom started on the 20th inst. Bro. [Albert] Carrington is released to return home and Joseph F. Smith will take his place after the adjournment of the legislature. Business has been rather dull here for some time past, although our improvements continue. By the end of this month or early in the next we expect to have the southern railroad running to Provo. The northern road is rapidly approaching Franklin, and they are connecting that road direct to Ogden. Our street railroad is nearly completed to the bath house, and is running to the east bench on 1st South St. The temple is progressing finely, as we are now getting rock from the quarry, the entire distance, by rail, and a large force is engaged quarrying, cutting, and setting the rock. The theatre has been nicely refitted since you left, and looks very much improved. Bros. [Hiram B.] Clawson, [John T.] Caine, and [Thomas] Williams are managing it.

On the 11th inst. I started to attend two days meeting at Provo with Bro. George A. [Smith] and some of the Twelve, and we remained over to dedicate the new County Court House there on the 14th inst. During our visit I contracted rather a severe cold which brought on a chill followed by fever from which I have been confined to my room for several days. I feel thankful to say I am recovering, however, and hope to be around again soon. If all is well I hope to be able to start south soon, and I have always found my health improved in southern Utah during the winter.

Remember, I do not wish you to lack for clothing or any other necessary. If there is anything you need, consult with Bro. [Frederick] Mitchell, and he will either arrange it, or you can draw on me for such things as you shall require.

The health of the family is generally good. The brethren will give you general local news.

I am happy to be able to say my health is so far restored that I am able to be around again much as usual, although the weather at present is rather cold and unfavorable for outdoor business and travel.

Let us hear from you frequently, and bear in mind that we are watching your course and are deeply interested in your success, for you are now laying a foundation that will determine your career.

May peace be with you, and the spirit and power of your mission continually abide with you is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

P.S. Remember me kindly to Bro. Mitchell and family, and Sister [Mildred E.] Randall, and all the brethren on the mission. Enclosed you will find twenty-five dollars which I send to relieve you of any immediate want.

B. Y.

Letter dated September 7, 1874

One of the difficulties confronting Morris Young upon his arrival in Hawaii was the problem of learning the language. At least four letters of his father contained counsel and encouragement on the topic, which reveals the presence of the problem; but in the absence of Morris's own correspondence from Hawaii, the full extent of his plight is not known. After a year on the islands Morris received a letter from his father on May 5, 1874, advising him, "if you cannot with reasonable ease and facility learn the language of the S.I. [Sandwich Island] natives, you are at liberty to consult with Bro. [Frederick A. F.] Mitchell, and regulate the length of your mission on the Islands as you and he may deem wise." That Morris never completely mastered the language is noted in the remarks opposite his name in the list of Hawaiian missionaries in the manuscript history of the mission. This should not be interpreted to mean, however, that he did not develop some facility with the language. Letters received by him containing Hawaiian phrases, and his father's words of congratulation in the following letter, dated September 7, 1874, suggest that Morris had some success with the language.

Salt Lake City, September 7, 1874

Elder Morris Young

Hawaiian Islands

Dear Morris,

Your kind letters of June 11th and Aug. 6th were received about a month from date and it is with much pleasure that I learn of your success in instructing the natives in the principles of the gospel. Your difficulty in learning the language will disappear, I hope, by the study which I know full well you will give it. Never allow your courage to fail you; man's greatest works have been done by men of patience, perseverance, and a determined will which would acknowledge no defeat, rather than by those gifted with a natural ability which made success easy but who lacked the tenaciousness of purpose. Then, my boy, never say fail, but work on in the way you have started and your reward is certain.

The United Order is moving along nicely and wherever the people have entered into it, [it] has given entire satisfaction. In St. George and many other places it is in practical running order and the harvest is being got in under the direction of the board; all accounts from there show the advantage of united labor. The sawmills and almost all the great interests are in the Order and all work well.

The crops are very large at St. George, especially the fruit crop. The work on the temple at St. George progresses very well indeed and men are being found to go down and work through the coming winter.

The harvest is bountiful all over Utah and is nearly gathered in.

Fera started with Bro. [William C.] Staines about the 6th of last month for New York where he will be for about two weeks before going over to Annapolis to enter the Naval Academy.

I have every hope that he will pass the examination creditably; he has studied very hard and Bro. [John R.] Park informs me that he is very well prepared, and has great confidence in him. It will undoubtedly seem strange to him to be, for the first time he ever left home, placed among entire strangers with not a familiar face to look to or a tried friend to whom to turn for advice in the hour of need, but it will make a man of him; it will develop his latent powers, and teach him to put his trust in our Father in heaven.

Times are dull and business is pretty slow but our co-op trade I think is recovering slowly, but gradually. It is an "ill wind that blows nobody good" and by this scarcity of money we hope to starve some of these adventurers out; the devil cannot work without money, whereas the Lord can. We lived here about twenty years without hardly a dollar circulating among us, and we not only lived but improved and grew rich.

Very much obliged for the epistle enclosed in your last. Bro. Alma Smith has put it in English for me.

By Bro. Alma Smith I send you some fifty ($50.00) dollars in gold which you can dispose of for clothes and other necessities.

Either form of bestowing the Holy Ghost is correct, but I use the form "receive ye the Holy Ghost."

Your mother's health is as good as usual, I believe, as is all the folks. My health continues good.

Peace be with you.

Your loving father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated October 6, 1874

Brigham Morris Young was appointed counselor to President Frederick Mitchell of the Hawaiian Mission in December 1873 and spent most of his time working on the islands of Oahu and Hawaii. Prior to his departure for home in December 1874, he received this final letter from his father. The document is important because it contains a short postscript in Brigham Young's own hand, one of the last extant examples of the President's handwriting. The brief request suggests that in his later years Brigham was still eager to learn and that his interests were varied and detailed.

Salt Lake City, October 6, 1874

Elder Morris Young

Hawaiian Islands

My dear Son Morris,

It is some considerable time since I wrote you last, but the delay was not occasioned through my forgetting you but through neglect.

It is the first day of our semiannual October conference and there are large numbers of the country people in to attend the meetings. I was there this morning which is about the first time I have been out to attend any meeting or look after any business for nearly three weeks; my health has been very bad for that length of time, but is now improving and with care in not taking cold I think I will be around as usual in a few days.

Your mother's health is good, as is that of all the folks.

Fera passed his examination at the Naval Academy, Annapolis, on the 24th Sept.

You left here a year ago last spring and you have been gone nearly a year and a half which is a good long mission in a strange land with a language to learn; so, I would like for you to come home with Bro. [Frederick] Mitchell.

It will please your mother and me very much to have you here again.

Get everything settled up in first-class order before you leave.

By this mail I have written to Bro. Mitchell telling him I wanted you to come home along with him and also to Bro. [Alma L.] Smith asking for your release.

I hope that your health is good and wish you a pleasant and safe journey home.

God bless you.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

P.S. Bring me all the specemens you can from the water and the Iland.

B.Y.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Arta De Christa Young to Brigham Young, 18 May 1875.
[^2] Arta Young to Brigham Young, 6 June 1875.
[^3] Arta Young to Brigham Young, 12 October 1875.
