Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Arta De Christa Young

1855-1916

Named for a "handsome Indian" his mother had seen in a dream, Arta De Christa Young was born in Salt Lake City on April 16, 1855. He was the third son of Brigham Young and Lucy Ann Decker. Educated in the family school and the University of Deseret, Arta became a proficient accountant and bookkeeper. He spent two years in England, from 1875-77, as a missionary, laboring part of the time in the mission office where he kept the books.

After returning to Utah he was engaged in farming, and later assisted his brother Heber with the ZCMI Co-op store in Soda Springs, Idaho, for a short time. Anxious to excel in business, Arta did not, however, accept the offer of his father, who had agreed to finance further education and preparation of his sons in the East. Arta thereby may have planted the seeds of financial failure: he had a strong desire to excel as a businessman but did not have the training and wisdom to successfully manage his affairs. He sold valuable Salt Lake City property to invest in Utah and Idaho mining ventures and was engaged in a horse-raising enterprise, all of which terminated in financial loss. Finally settling in Ogden, Utah, he was an accountant and bookkeeper for the Bear River Irrigation and Water Works and the Ogden Water Works Company for many years. He married Susan Snow, a daughter of Erastus Snow; to them were born five children. Arta De Christa died in Ogden after a long illness on April 7, 1916.

Letter dated April 24, 1876

At the April conference in 1875, Arta De Christa Young was called to serve as a missionary to England. En route he visited his brothers Willard and Feramorz at the military and naval academies. "I found Willard enjoying good health and looking anxiously for his examination to come to a close, so that he can visit the folks in Salt Lake. Fera is looking remarkably well and I think he will come out all right. One of the officers told me that he was doing very well and would come out all O.K." [^1]

Arta was welcomed to England on May 29 by his brother Ernest, who had already been there a year. After a few days with his brother in Liverpool, Arta was assigned to his place of labor in Nottingham, arriving on June 6. That evening he gave his first speech to the local Saints. "I bore my testimony, but it did not take me as long as George Francis Train gave Grant to tell all he knew, but just about half the time. I am in hopes before I am released from this mission to be able to get up and express what I feel, and I believe that God will help me, if I am humble and seek his Spirit." [^2]

During his first year in England Arta traveled extensively, proselyting in the shires of Nottingham, Leicester, Derby, and Stafford. He wrote to his father in October 1875 that he and his companion had baptized sixteen persons and hoped to add many more before spring. Explaining his method of proselyting, he continued: "I am doing all I can to forward the work and I can truly say that I have been highly blessed of the Lord in my labors. Sometimes brother Bryan and I go on a preaching tour together, and sometimes I go alone. I find it much pleasanter when I have someone to travel with, for then a person don't get so lonesome. But I find one thing when I go alone. It is better for me, because the responsibility then rests entirely upon me and I can't shirk one bit. I have been out alone since the 7th and have held meetings in Langley, Eastwood, Pinxton, Sutton and would have held one in Somercotes, but owing to circumstances I did not. I have been greatly blessed in all my labors thus far and have lacked for nothing. The Saints treat me very kindly wherever I go, and altho' the fare that I have to put up with sometimes is not what I have been used to, yet I receive it with a thankful heart and bless those who provide it. . . . Outdoor preaching is about over and we will now have to preach in the houses. I am kind of glad of it for one thing and sorry for another, glad that we don't have to stand on the streets anymore but can have houses to preach in, and sorry that we will have so few strangers to talk to. As for myself I would much sooner talk to strangers than I would to the Saints, but it is seldom you can get a stranger into the house." [^3]

In April 1876 Arta and Ernest Young accompanied the mission president, Albert Carrington, and others on a visit to branches of the Church in Scandinavia and the continent, returning to England on June 5.

The following letter of Brigham Young, dated April 24, 1876, was waiting for Arta when he returned to England.

Salt Lake City, April 24, 1876

Elder Arta D. Young

England

My dear Son,

I was much gratified with the perusal of your frank, affectionate, and good-spirited letter, which reached me a few days ago. I have no doubt but that your trip amongst the continental missions will do you a great amount of benefit as you can learn many valuable lessons from travel and contact with mankind that you can never reach through books. This experience should also strengthen your testimony of the great work God is performing in this generation amongst the children of men, and enable you all the more wisely to teach the principles of eternal life and to give timely counsel and advice to the Saints amongst whom you labor.

Before leaving the subject of your letter I want to give just one word of caution with regard to your style of composition. I notice you are inclined to use unnecessary repetitions in your statements which neither give strength nor beauty to your sentences. For instance you say "gradually, every day" when referring to the strengthening of your leg, either of which conveys your idea correctly and with sufficient plainness and force. Too great minuteness often weakens rather than strengthens a writer's style.

There are some kinds of experience which a person having passed through once in this life, never desires a repetition. Of this kind was the explosion of the powder magazines on Arsenal Hill on 5th inst. The terrific reports following each other in rapid succession, the trembling of the ground, the crashing of windows and doors, the volleys of rocks and boulders falling all around, the frightened teams rushing in all directions, went to make up a tableau and excite feelings that it would be difficult for anyone to realize or sense who was not present to witness it for himself. No one can calculate the damage done, as nearly every house in the city received more or less injury. I am a sufferer to a considerable extent. The Empire Hill, being so near, was injured very extensively. To show you the force of the concussion of the air at that time I may mention that some pieces of glass forced out of a shattered window were hurled a considerable distance through the mill and imbedded a half an inch deep in the solid red pine joists. The mill house nearby will have to be pulled down, it is so shattered and shaken. In the Gardo House a great many windows are broken. [^4]

Your brother Lorenzo D. has been called on a mission to Europe, but before starting he will accompany me to St. George, for which place we propose to start, all being well, on 1st May. Brigham Jun. started this morning and will preach at the settlements along the road until my party overtakes him.

We had the Emperor of Brazil here yesterday. He would accept of no attentions from the city council, but preferred to travel in every respect as a private gentleman, paying his own bills, and going where he pleased, and doing what he chose. He left by the regular afternoon train on his way westward.

The family are all well, and the boys are occupied much the same as when I last wrote to you. Mahonri is now engaged at the Deseret Mills as I want him to learn the manufacture of wool in all its branches so that he can eventually take charge of some of my factory business. The letters I receive from Willard and the rest of your brothers who are away from Utah are uniformly good. There is not one of them but is doing his utmost to improve himself in the sphere of usefulness which he has chosen. The reflection is very gratifying to me that every one of my sons is doing so well.

Praying the Lord to comfort and bless you,

I remain, your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letters dated July 17, 1876, and February 15, 1877

Upon the release of Ernest Young, who had been mission secretary, to return home in June 1876, Arta De Christa was appointed to take his place, a responsibility he held during the remainder of his mission. In addition to his clerical assignment, he often traveled with the mission president, visiting branches of the Church throughout England. On May 30, 1877, two years and a day after his arrival in England, he started his journey home, in company with President Albert Carrington.

The two letters of Brigham Young that follow were received by Arta while he was engaged as mission secretary during the last year of his mission.

Salt Lake City, July 17, 1876

Elder Arta D. Young

Liverpool, England

My dear Son,

Your letter written immediately after your return to Liverpool from the continent reached me a few days ago. I am pleased that you have taken hold of your new duties with so much zeal and willingness and hope the experience that you will gain in the Liverpool Office will be of lasting benefit to you. I earnestly hope that while you diligently attend to your labors therein you will also not forget your calling as a preacher of righteousness, and that whenever opportunity presents itself, or you can make the opportunity, you will raise your voice in the streets and in the halls of the towns and cities of England in advocacy of the principles of eternal truth. You did so well last year whilst laboring in the Nottingham Conference in outdoor and other preaching that I hope you will not slacken your labors in this direction whilst in Liverpool. There is another thing that I wish to impress on your memory. It is to be very careful that you choose your associates from among those who love to keep God's commands. You are young and the ways of the world may have many allurements. Many a young man has fall[en] from a virtuous life through a desire to simply see and become acquainted with the sins of the world. But having once become familiar with the ways of the sinner it has too often proved that the meshes of sin were too strong to allow of its victim's escape. Do not on any pretense or excuse allow yourself to be persuaded to visit the dens of iniquity—gambling houses, drinking places, and other traps for the unwary—which so greatly abound in Liverpool. I hope also that you will avoid all those habits so prevalent in Christian countries such as smoking, chewing, &c, which the Lord has declared, and our experience has proved, is not good for men to indulge in. You are now building up your character and the foundation which you lay whilst on this, your first mission, will have much to do with the superstructure raised in after years. I have much confidence that you will take a wise and exemplary course, and you ever have my faith with constant prayers to our Heavenly Father in your behalf. Brigham W. Carrington, from his lengthy experience in Europe, should be a great help and a strength to you in fulfilling the purposes of your mission. If you find him such, and his influence salutary, I shall be pleased to learn that you are mutual friends. But if his course is one that you know I should not approve of, if he visits disreputable places, if he keeps bad company, if he drinks strong drink, or if he leads a life that the principles and preaching of the gospel do not warrant, I do not wish you to associate with him in any way, nor go where he goes, nor choose your companions from his circle of acquaintances. Treat him with kindness, present to him a good example, but do not permit him to lead you one step from the path of right and duty.

I shall not attempt to give you the general news, as I have written at considerable length to Bro. [Albert] Carrington regarding our trip to St. George and other matters of interest, and you will doubtless have an opportunity of perusing it.

Ernest, Carlos, and Ferry are now at home, all in good health and in splendid spirits. Carlos and Ferry will return after their vacations, respectively to Troy and Annapolis, to resume their studies, at which both of them are making commendable progress. Lorenzo D. is now in Sanpete, and will start on his mission as soon after his return from there as he can find some friend who is going eastward who will accompany him. The other boys are variously engaged in the same occupations as when I last wrote to you. Your mother and the family are well, whilst my general health is also good, but I have been suffering considerably from rheumatism in my feet since my return home.

May the blessing of heaven rest abundantly upon you is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

St. George, Utah, February 15, 1877

Arta D. Young

Liverpool, England

My dear Son,

Your acceptable letter of Jan. 19th has been duly received and its contents carefully noted. This is the first letter we have received from you since yours dated November 13th. I take pleasure in receiving letters from my absent children and more particularly from those who are out in the missionary field as bearers of the message of life and salvation. I am very anxious that my children deport themselves as becometh members of the Church and Kingdom of God. The responsibility resting upon us is very great, called upon as we are to assist in bringing about that happy state of things when the will of our Father shall be done on earth as it is in heaven. The duty to keep the commandments of God rests upon us as upon no other people upon the face of the earth. The sure word of divine instruction by revelation from the heavens has been imparted to us and there is no refuge, no safety, nor power, nor glory of celestial life for us, but in keeping those commandments which have been given to us. To obtain the full benefit of that infinite atonement made by our Lord and Savior is within our reach—is ours—fully and completely, but only so, on condition of our faithfulness in observing our covenants and obligations to keep the divine commandments given to us. My dear son, I realize you are young in years, but this has been the tenor of the instruction of your life. And in this you have been greatly blessed of the Lord, over and above those to whom you are called to administer on your present mission, born, as they are, outside of the covenant and surrounded by the darkening mists of sectarian traditions and unbelief. You, in common with the thousands of the sons of Zion, are born heir to the holy priesthood, having the inherent right to administer in the things of God, than which there is no higher calling on earth or in heaven. These privileges and powers are great, and surely should stimulate the noblest effort within us to rise up with humility, and in trust in God, but with unswerving firmness, to bear our respective part in the great work. Personal habits, in opposition to the spirit and tenor of the instructions you have received, must be persistently striven against until overcome. Smoking, and everything of the kind, you should not indulge in a particle. Your age, experience, position, and responsibility demand an abandonment of such practices.

We are very thankful for the information relative to the general conditions of affairs in the British Mission, monetary and otherwise.

In the matter of the Book of Mormon, we are having prepared the text for a new edition, but if Brother Orson Pratt has not about got this ready, we shall have some printed from the stereotype plates now in Salt Lake City and will forward some to the Liverpool office.

It is represented that Bro. Francois Pahud, who has been presiding elder of the Geneva Branch for a number of years, is a worthy man, and now quite in years, and is very desirous to come to Utah. If this is as represented, we would like to have him sent the ensuing season. His address is a Apples, Canton de Vaud, Switzerland. This matter you will of course submit to Bro. [Albert] Carrington, to whom, and those of his family with him, and Bro. [Henry W.] Naisbitt, you will present my kindest regards. Peace and God's blessing be with you—is the desire of your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] For both sides of this incident consult the Deseret News and Salt Lake Tribune, 9-11 March 1886.
[^2] Joseph Don Carlos Young, Diary, 23 April 1895, 11 and 13 December 1895.
[^3] See footnote No. 28 under Willard Young.
[^4] Don Carlos Young to Brigham Young, 20 December 1876.
