Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Lorenzo Dow Young

1856-1905

Lorenzo Dow Young, second son of Emmeline Free and Brigham Young, was born in Salt Lake City, September 22, 1856. He was educated in the family school and the University of Deseret. Prior to leaving for England as a missionary in 1876, he was employed at ZCMI. Between the time of his return from England in 1878 and his death twenty-eight years later, Lorenzo was employed with several Salt Lake City firms, including the Caine and Hooper Insurance Company and Smith and Free, Mining and Stock Brokers. He was secretary of the Eutonia Mining Company and for a time was travel agent for the Salt Lake Hardware Company. Separated from his first wife, Eleanor Crouch, by whom he had one daughter, Lorenzo married Dora Williams on September 2, 1896. He had no other children. Lorenzo Dow Young died of pneumonia in Salt Lake City on May 18, 1905, at age forty-nine.

Letter dated October 21, 1876

When twenty-year-old Lorenzo Dow Young arrived in England on September 9, 1876, he was the eight son of Brigham Young to enter that land as a missionary. Upon docking at Liverpool, he was greeted by his brother Arta, who had preceded him to England in a like capacity fifteen months earlier. Two months later, having been appointed a traveling elder in the Leeds Conference, Lorenzo was called to speak at the semiannual London conference. In his few remarks to the assembled Saints he lamented his inability as a public speaker and expressed regret that in his youth he had not more readily embraced the opportunities that would have prepared him for that moment. In the two years of his mission, all of which time he labored as a traveling elder, Lorenzo had numerous opportunities to improve his oratorical skill.

The first letter sent by Brigham Young to Lorenzo in England was addressed to him jointly with his brother Arta, dated October 21, 1876.

Salt Lake City, October 21, 1876

Elders Arta D. and Lorenzo D. Young

Liverpool, England

My dear Sons,

A few days ago I received two letters from Lorenzo D., one dated Queenstown giving me an account of a rather unpleasant voyage across the Atlantic, the second informing me of his safe arrival in Liverpool. I was happy to hear that he was himself in good health, and that he found Arta enjoying the same blessing and diligently attending to his duties in the office at 42 Islington. Since Lorenzo left here, nothing of especial importance has occurred to any of the members of the family. All are feeling well, and with the exception of the impotent efforts of our enemies to harass and annoy me, all is peace and general content. Nor have we any idea that they will be more successful in the future than they have in the past. The God in whom we have trusted still lives, and if we rely upon His arm we shall find that it is not shortened nor His ear heavy to hear the supplications of His faithful people. It was my intention to have left for St. George next Monday, but the attorneys and the judges having fixed things so that I am to be brought up to again show cause next Tuesday why I should not be committed for contempt in the Ann Eliza case, my journey is now indefinitely postponed. Her lawyers doubtless fancy that to put an end to this constant annoyance I shall finally give way and pay them the coveted alimony pendente lite. But they have mistaken their man. Without the Lord moves upon me far differently to what he has yet done, I will spend the remainder of my days in prison before I will pay them one cent, [^1] though I trust that the days I shall spend in prison in such a frivolous case as this of Ann Eliza Webb at the hands of a mob court will be very few, if any. The lawyers and judges well know that under the law to which she has appealed she cannot be recognized as my wife, and if she is not my wife under the law of 1862, how can she be granted a divorce, or what claim has she upon me for alimony pendente lite? It is an example of the old saying "that you'll be damned if you do and you'll be damned if you don't." One day a man is threatened with fine and imprisonment for entering into what they term an illegal marriage, and the next day it is adjudged that he pay alimony to the woman who the day before, it was claimed, was no wife at all. Consistency is said to be a jewel, but it is certainly a treasure not possessed by the aiders and abettors of the anti-Mormon crusade. Still they find it hard work to kick against the pricks, and though they throw overboard truth, justice, law, and reason, they yet find their bark makes slow progress towards the haven where every Mormon will be robbed of his rights, despoiled of his property, deprived of his liberty, and his substance given to the spoiler to riot in, and his family turned over to the embraces of the corrupt. Zion still prospers, the kingdom of heaven still increases upon the earth, and as a proof that we are not dead, we shortly intend by the help of God to commence two more temples to His name, one in Manti, Sanpete Co., and the other in Logan, and all being well, we hope to finish them in three years. Notwithstanding the increase of the spirit of Babylon in the hearts of some who claim to be Latter-day Saints, yet there is many a man and many a woman who has never bowed the knee to Baal, or fainted in the service of their God.

These will do the work of the Father, and His work now commenced will never die; its progress will never end. Let me entreat of you, my sons, to so live in prayerful humility, yet with zealous courage that you will always be ready to fight valiantly for the faith delivered to the Saints, and so live that your father and all good men will rejoice in your course and the heavens delight to honor you. I have no greater joy connected with my family than to realize that my sons are seeking to serve God, are striving to keep His commandments, are endeavoring to overcome the weaknesses of the flesh and are toiling to improve themselves in everything commendable and worthy of the acceptation of those who aspire to eternal lives in the kingdom of the Eternal Father. To aid you in walking in this path you have my constant prayers and continued faith that you may ever be guided by the light of God's Spirit and preserved in His all powerful hand.

Ruth [Young] is going with me to spend the winter south as is also Mira. Susan (Arta's wife) will spend the winter in Salt Lake City.

May the Lord bless you, prosper you, guide you, inspire you, and bring you home in peace and safety when your missions are accomplished is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated May 15, 1877

"Your most appreciative letter of October 21st directed to Arta and myself, came to hand this morning," Lorenzo wrote his father on November 14. "I have perused its contents carefully, and repeatedly, and with my earnest endeavors intend to improve, and be benefited by the good counsel which it contains." Upon arriving in England, Lorenzo had found the mission president, Albert Carrington, intent upon assigning him to Germany, "but I told him what you said about my labouring close by so as to be with Art what time he was here, so I was then sent to the Leeds Conference." Lorenzo found Leeds a very "dark, smoky, and dreary place." Writing his letter about noon on November 14, he found the atmosphere so dismal he could scarcely see to write.

During their months together in England Lorenzo and Arta found much satisfaction in their association. Occasionally they were invited to attend conferences together. In November 1876 they were permitted to spend a week together visiting the sights of London prior to the semiannual conference there. "Arta has improved very much and I enjoy being in his company," Lorenzo wrote to his father, "for he is so willing to give me items concerning missionary labours which he has gained by experience. It did seem very strange to me at first to go out among the Saints, and eat and talk, and enquire into family affairs, and as yet it is very difficult, but I am becoming more used to it." [^2]

In January 1877 Lorenzo was transferred from Leeds to become a traveling elder in London. While there he received the two following letters from his father.

Salt Lake City, May 15, 1877

Elder Lorenzo D. Young

England

My dear Son,

Since my return from the south, I have been gladdened by the receipt of two of your very interesting and welcome communications. They did not reach me until a few days ago, having been directed to St. George, which place, however, they did not reach until after my departure thence. I am very much pleased to learn from your letters that you are so actively engaged in the fulfillment of the purposes of your mission, and traveling so extensively throughout the district to which you have been assigned. I sincerely trust that the experiences you now gain and the spiritual power you now obtain may remain with you to cast a pleasing shadow over the whole of the course of your future life not to be forgotten or cast aside, but to be cherished and developed through all your later years until you attain in faith and good works to the fulness of the stature of a man in Christ Jesus.

Myself and the family generally, with the exception of Brigham Jun., are well. John W. has been rather unwell but is now greatly improved and is here with me attending to the duties pertaining to his calling. Willard still remains at Willet's Point doing routine duty. Carlos and Fera are at Troy. Instead of returning home during the summer vacation, the two latter will probably spend their time improving themselves in the art of music. Mahonri and Oscar are at the woolen mills. Alfales has just returned from Ann Arbor, hearty in health and brimful of spirits. He has already been received a member of the Salt Lake bar. Heber and Ernest are more immediately helping me, the first in outdoor labors, the latter in the office. Alonzo still remains in ZCMI boot department. Your sister Ruth was with us through the winter in the south and very much enjoyed her visits there, especially her labors in the temple, but of all this she has doubtless before this informed you.

After leaving St. George, myself and party came up through the settlements by way of Iron County and Beaver to Cove Creek, and there we struck off for Richfield in Sevier Co., and thence to Manti, holding meetings by the way. As you well have seen by the papers, we dedicated the site for the temple at Manti and the labor of excavating the foundation has been commenced and is being prosecuted vigorously. From Manti we came directly home.

Brothers [John] Taylor, [Orson] Pratt, Lorenzo and Erastus Snow, with other brethren, went on their return by way of Kanab, the Sevier and Sanpete valleys, holding meetings at every settlement. They organized stakes of Zion at Kanab and Panguitch and selected a president and high council for these stakes. Your brother, Brigham Jun., had a very severe cold and fever before leaving St. George. He traveled with us as far as Parowan, but he was so enfeebled by disease when he reached there that he had to stop. Brother George Q. Cannon remained with him. They reached the city on Saturday evening, 5th inst. Brigham has suffered exceedingly in his lungs and for the want of sleep. He is now improving rapidly.

The First Presidency and Twelve intend to leave this city on Wednesday next, the 16th, for Logan for the purpose of selecting and dedicating a site for the temple to be built there, and we shall hold meetings there on the succeeding Saturday, Sunday, and Monday.

My own health is excellent. I have not for years endured the labor of speaking at conference and public meetings as well as I have done during the last conference and of late. The pain which I have so frequently suffered from, in my stomach, after speaking to large congregations has troubled me but very little of late. For this I have felt exceedingly thankful.

Our enemies here are not idle; they are doing everything in their power to give us trouble. But their acts should only have the effect to stir the Saints up to greater diligence in keeping the commandments of God.

Since the completion of the temple at St. George, the spirit to look after the dead and to officiate for them, and also to attend to the necessary ordinances for the living, has taken possession of the faithful members of the Church all through these valleys. The Saints probably have never felt such interest in these subjects since the organization of the Church as they do at the present. This will be attended with good results, and as the work of building temples progresses, this spirit will be felt with greater power through all the branches of the Church.

John W. joins me in love and with constant prayers for every blessing to attend you that it is your privilege to enjoy,

I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated June 15, 1877

Acknowledging receipt of his father's "very interesting and welcome" letter of May 15, Lorenzo remarked, "your letters are always repeatedly read, for in them I find spiritual strength, encourageing words, and parental love, which spurs me on to more dilligence in executing my duties, and administering the word of the Lord to those with whom I am called to associate." Noting that he had just returned from Liverpool, where he had bid farewell to his brother Arta, who was returning home, and had met the new mission president, Joseph F. Smith, along with other newly arrived missionaries, Lorenzo raised the question of an assignment in Switzerland, a topic that had been previously considered in correspondence with his father. Lorenzo's motive in making the request reveals a strong desire for personal improvement. "I should have liked very much to have traveled there with Bro. Webber. He being a well educated man. In his company I could have obtained a great deal of important knowledge, and many gentele habits, and ways, that I do not find among the Saints in this country. Since I left home, I have had more of a desire and love for learning than ever before in my life. I try to study in my field of labour, but my associates are those who have but little if any taste for knowledge, and instead of learning from them I am drawn back into the same old groove. I then have to throw away my ambition, (to an extent) or feel dissatisfied with the company of my unlearned brethren—never submitting to the latter; but by living humble and prayerful, I am the recipient of many of God's blessings, for which I feel very greatful." [^3]

Learning that his father had sent instructions encouraging the missionaries to extend their labors into new areas in which the gospel had never been preached in an effort to inject new life into the proselyting work in England, Lorenzo wrote that he and his companion, A. O. Smoot, Jr., were leaving soon for the Isle of Wight.

Lorenzo closed what was probably the last letter his father received from him with these words: "My eyes are now growing weary and I will draw to a close, praying the Lord bless you with long life and every desire of your heart, with kindest love to yourself and family, I am your affectionate son." [^4]

Within two months Brigham Young was dead. And although the mission president, Joseph F. Smith, and Orson Pratt returned to Utah upon receiving news of the President's death, Lorenzo remained in England until the termination of his mission on June 29, 1878.

Salt Lake City, June 15, 1877

Elder Lorenzo D. Young

London, England

My dear Son,

Your very welcome letter containing the description of the London Conference meetings, and your labors amongst the Saints in the district in which you travel, reached me safely a few days ago. I am much pleased that you take so great an interest in the duties to which you have been called. It is the noblest, happiest life that a man can lead to be a minister of salvation to the people of the nations, who now sit in the shadow of the darkness of unbelief and ignorance.

Never neglect an opportunity to do good, to enlighten the ignorant, or strengthen the weak. Raise your voice wherever possible in defence of the truth in the meeting houses and homes of the Saints, in the streets of the cities, or in the fields, so that when you return home you may be satisfied with your labors and realize that you have not been an unprofitable servant to our Heavenly Master. If, when declaring the word of truth, you are attacked by the wicked, do not condescend to argue with them, much less to retaliate. Do not attempt to "repay them in their own coin," to use an old English adage; such is below the dignity of your calling. Recrimination proves no truth; it enlightens no man's mind, but it is one of the weapons used by the adversary to produce hatred and malice in the hearts of mankind, and should never be indulged in by a Latter-day Saint. When you may be assailed, heed it not, bear your testimony to the great work the Lord is doing on the earth, proclaim the truth in meekness, and if they will not listen, leave them to their own folly. We are not called to cavil with the world. Some of my brethren have felt as though I ought to answer all the falsehoods that have been put in circulation during the last few months against the Latter-day Saints, and which have swept over this nation like a flood. I have said to them, "Brethren, I have lived on this earth longer than most of you, and have perhaps a little more experience. When you get to be as old as I am you will learn to trust in God. This is His work, and He will take care of it. If He does not, we cannot." And in this faith I am already fully justified, as our enemies have gone to such lengths that their stories are desecrated [discredited], they have missed the mark they shot at, and have not accomplished the end for which they set out. Without our help God has made them the instruments of manifesting their own folly and wickedness. So will it always be if we put our trust in Him. In the scriptures it is said, "perfect love casteth out all fear," and so does perfect faith.

Since my last letter to you, dated May 15th, but very little has occurred of especial interest connected with the family. Brigham Jun. has continued to slowly, yet steadily, recover, and is now in moderate good health. John W. is in California for a few days on railroad business. Nelson Empey, Walter Beatie, and Alma B. Dunford expect to start on their missions to England early next month. We have released James Harris from going on a mission; he did not have the spirit of the appointment and we deemed it best to have him remain at the theatre. My own health is good. It has not been quite so robust during the past week or two, as I overtaxed myself in traveling, talking, and laboring in the organization of the various stakes of Zion, which is now claiming the principal attention of the First Presidency and Twelve. Next Saturday and Sunday we go to Davis County, next to Tooele, then to Juab and Sanpete.

You are at liberty to draw from Bro. Joseph F. Smith such sums as you need from time to time to buy your clothes and purchase other actual necessities. Be prudent and economical with this means. We will advise Bro. Smith of this permission in our next letter to him, and when we learn the amount you have drawn we will remit the same to Bro. [William C.] Staines at New York to be placed to the credit of the Liverpool Office.

Since writing the above, I have had a call from a gentleman, named Ferguson, of London, who tells me he was in the neighborhood of the Sadlers Wells Theatre on the evening of the London Conference. He says that the crowd that surrounded the doors was a rabble of the lowest order, still he does not think there would have been any disturbance if the proprietor had permitted the evening's meeting to proceed.

May God bless you, my son, with every gift and grace necessary to make you an instrument of great good in His hands, and, when you have finished your mission, bring you in peace, safety and purity to your home and friends in Zion, is the prayer of

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Feramorz L. Young, Diary, 13-26 January 1872.
[^2] Don Carlos Young's copy of the Weisbach text, with his name and the date October 4, 1878, written in the front, is located in the Reception Hall bookcase in the Beehive House in Salt Lake City.
[^3] Another witness of the burial of Feramorz Young was Frederick Ober of the Washington Museum of Natural History, later the Smithsonian Institute, who had been sent by Charles Hallock, editor of Forest and Stream, to explore the Caribbean area. In an article titled "Adios" in the March 16, 1882, issue of Forest and Stream, Ober noted, after describing his travels in Mexico, that much of Mexico and Cuba were disease-ridden. He added, "We were saddened and reminded that the climate of Mexico had some bad spots in it, by the death of one of our number, only one day out of Havana. We buried him next day at sea, almost within sight of the Florida coast, right abreast of Indian River, this young man, a son of Brigham Young; a right good young man, and whom we regretted should die such an untimely death."
[^4] Deseret News, 23 (September 28, 1874): 556.
