Brigham Young, Dean C. Jessee, Letters of Brigham Young to His Sons ( 1974)

Feramorz Little Young

1858-1881

The third of October 1881 was a day of mourning in Salt Lake City. That day word came that Elder Orson Pratt, an apostle who was one of the Church's most erudite defenders, had died; William Pullen, a worker on the Salt Lake Temple, had fallen to his death from the walls of that unfinished edifice; and a telegram was received from Elder Moses Thatcher in New York City containing news that his missionary companion, Feramorz L. Young, the twenty-three-year-old son of Brigham Young, had died of typhoid fever while returning home from Mexico and had been buried at sea.

Feramorz Little Young was born September 16, 1858, in Salt Lake City, the youngest son of Brigham and Lucy Ann Decker Young. He was educated in his father's private school, and in his early teens was employed as a clerk at ZCMI. A diary covering two months of his thirteenth year reveals an articulate young man, well-schooled for his age in the art of writing and grammar. It also reveals something of his drive and determination. After being laid off from his work at ZCMI due to "dullness of business" in January 1872, Fera wrote that it was the "most miserable day I have had for a long time—out of employment and not knowing what to do. I feel lazy and would do most anything." Two days later he felt "yet uncomfortable owing to my distaste for 'loafing.'" By the time he enrolled in school with a private tutor, Ida Cook, on January 22, 1872, he had resolved to prepare himself for an appointment to the U.S. Naval Academy. And, although as school progressed he "nearly lost spirit, it being very dull," he was determined to continue—"that I may be prepared for the school." [^1]

In 1874 Feramorz was appointed to the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland, but a growing awareness that his naval experience would not lead to the goal he had set in life led him to resign after two years. He then entered upon a course of civil engineering at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York, graduating in 1879 in the same class with his brother Don Carlos. Among his associates, Fera was highly respected for his scholastic ability, and he was elected a member of the Pi Eta Scientific Society. Two incidents during his course of study at RPI are indicative of his ability. In 1878 he was enrolled with Carlos in an engineering class taught by J. A. L. Waddell, who later became a world-renowned bridge builder and engineer. The text for the class was Weisbach's Theoretical Mechanics with an Introduction to the Calculus. [^2] One day Professor Waddell assigned a lesson from the text but stated that a particular problem therein was in error, and he gave the students a corrected version of the problem. As Fera studied in his room that evening he suddenly remarked to Don Carlos that Weisbach was right after all, and that the professor had erred in his correction of the text. Fera explained his rationale to Don Carlos, and again later that evening to his professor—neither of whom seemed to grasp his point. However, the next day, when Fera reviewed the problem at length before the class, all became convinced that "Young, Jr.," as Feramorz was known at the school, was right. On another occasion, toward the end of his senior year, he worked all one night and assisted a classmate in completing his thesis, after efforts of friends had failed to solve the problem: calculating the safety factor of a large steel bridge over the Mohawk River. Fera's own graduating thesis was a structural review and analysis of the Erie Canal Aqueduct spanning the Genesee River at Rochester, New York.

In addition to his scholastic attainments, Feramorz Young excelled in several sports at RPI, including football, baseball, gymnastics, and rowing. At the meeting of the RPI Athletic Association at Rensselaer Park on May 29, 1879, he participated in two of the twelve athletic events, the running broad jump and the five-hundred-yard dash.

After returning home from the East, Feramorz was employed briefly on the Utah Southern Railroad and the Salt Lake and Jordan Canal. He also became a partner in the jewelry firm of J. D. Swaner and Company.

Feramorz was called on a mission to Mexico with his friend, Moses Thatcher of the Council of the Twelve, in November 1880. Traveling by way of Omaha, Chicago, and New Orleans, they arrived in Mexico City on December 5. In addition to proselyting, Fera helped with the publication of Church pamphlets and articles in the Spanish language. He attended the first LDS conference in the Republic of Mexico held on the 17,000-foot slopes of Mt. Popocatepetl, fifty miles southeast of Mexico City. During the time he was in Mexico sixty persons were baptized in that land.

Ill with what was believed to be malarial fever, Feramorz left Mexico with Moses Thatcher, en route for New York City, in August 1881. As his condition worsened, the ship's doctor diagnosed his illness as typhoid fever but did not regard his case as terminal. However, on September 27, one hundred miles out of Havana, Cuba, Feramorz Young died. Warm weather at that latitude, with insufficient ice on board the ship and no means of embalming, compelled his being buried at sea. At 1:50 P.M. on September 28, the engines of the steamer Knickerbocker were stopped as passengers and crew solemnly listened to Elder Thatcher eulogize his fallen companion. The flag-draped body was then consigned to the ocean twenty miles off the coast of Florida at latitude 279' and longitude 7947'. [^3] Family and friends of Feramorz Young paid their final respects to him in a special memorial service in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on October 5, 1881, immediately following the funeral of Orson Pratt.

Letter dated October 15, 1874

On September 24, 1874, Brigham Young received a short but welcome telegram from the Church emigration agent in New York City, William C. Staines: "Your son Feramorz passed the examination at the Naval Academy today; he will enter the school tomorrow. He feels well." [^4] Feramorz had just turned sixteen [^5] eight days before completing the entrance test to the academy. He had been attending school in Salt Lake City when he received his appointment from the Utah delegate to Congress, George Q. Cannon.

Brigham Young's letter of October 15 was his first to Feramorz after the boy's official acceptance to the Naval Academy.

Salt Lake City, October 15, 1874

My dear son Feramorz,

Your very welcome letter of the 3d inst. came safely to hand, and we were all much gratified to learn of your continued good health, and of the flattering success thus far attending you.

I send you thanks for the detail of your studies, the employments of the several hours of the day, and your description of the buildings, their surroundings and location, and should judge you will be able to occupy your academic time very pleasantly and usefully.

In your associations with your classmates and members of other classes it may be well to mention, though you are already aware of it, that wisdom dictates a kind, courteous, forbearing and gentlemanly course under all circumstances, and a careful obedience to all the rules of the academy and the requirements of its officers. This mention is not penned as an item that will be new to you, or one that has not had the consideration expected from one of your years, but because youth is liable to be impulsive, and in haste commit acts or make expressions tending to regret.

Your parents and all your relatives and friends have full confidence that your course at the Naval Academy will be characterized by the same gentlemanly, studious, obedient, and upright conduct that marked your walk at home, and anticipate, from time to time, corresponding reports from those under whose charge and direction you now are.

In regard to attending Church services on the Sabbath, or at other times, you have my permission, and that of your mother, to use your own choice in the matter, so far as the regulations of the academy will admit of your so doing. At the same time, whenever your choice or the regulations cause your attendance, your own judgment will dictate care to derive such benefit as may be possible to one as yet but little acquainted with the various and conflicting religious views entertained in the world, while you are at all times diligent and careful to hold fast to the belief in and practice of the doctrines of the gospel as revealed to us by the ancient prophets, Jesus and the apostles, also by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

During a sudden change in the weather in the forepart of September, I took a severe cold, and at times have been and still am somewhat troubled with rheumatism. At present I feel pretty comfortable as to any pain, but I feel weary and a desire for rest.

I was unable to address the people during our last conference, though my anxiety to meet with them was so great that I ventured to be carefully conveyed in my carriage to the temple block and assisted to my seat in the new tabernacle, the first day in the morning, and the other four days to the afternoon meetings. The weather was very pleasant all the time during our conference. A large number were present from the different settlements, and an excellent spirit was enjoyed by both speakers and hearers.

Business affairs seem to be improving, but the plottings of a few evil disposed persons prevent as rapid an improvement in that direction as might otherwise transpire.

Operations in the United Order [^6] are steadily progressing, and the people are increasing in their understanding of its proper workings and the great benefits to be derived therefrom when conducted in fairness and wisdom.

Please correspond freely, and as frequently as convenient, with your brother Willard at West Point, informing each other of your latest news from home, and such other items as may be interesting or beneficial.

We always remember you in our prayers, and feel assured you will be preserved from harm and evil, and I feel to bless you in the name of the Lord.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter dated September 20, 1875

Feramorz waited a few days before responding to his father's letter of October 15. "I thought it would please you more, and be more beneficial to me to tend to my studies," he reasoned in explaining the delay.

In the face of a severe case of homesickness and the rigid discipline of military life, the encouragement of his father and friends at home was about all that motivated Feramorz to remain after his initial introduction to the Naval Academy. "I am glad to hear that all have great confidence in me, and I shall strive not to destroy that confidence. It shall always be my aim to honor the position which I now occupy both for my people's and my own sake." [^7] However, the emotional strain of his new environment had a drastic effect upon his scholastic performance, and threatened his continuance at the academy: "Mother, you must encourage me all you can," the sixteen-year-old pled in a letter home, "for I am afraid it is going to be very difficult for me to stay here. I have studied all the time during the day except at drills, and have arisen a number of times at 4 or 5 oclock in the morning [the cadets were required to arise at 6:15 a.m.], but still I was found unsatisfactory in Algebra this week. It may be that I can make it up during the rest of the month. I try to anyway. I will have to stay one year if I am not able to keep up. It would be an awful trial for me to go home after having been expelled from this place." [^8]

One feature of life at the Naval Academy that was particularly bothersome to Feramorz was the attendance at a sectarian church service required of all cadets each Sunday, unless exempted by their parents. Having received tacit approval from his parents to miss the service, Fera wrote for a formal statement of release only to find that his father was away. He then suggested that Albert Carrington, the president's secretary, send a statement in his father's absence. "Please get it some way as [I] am in perfect misery while at church," he urged. In an effort to relieve his homesickness, Fera concluded his letter with a final plea: "Tell me all the news at home—every little thing. This place is completely devoid of everything except mental and physical work." [^9]

Compared with those first trying weeks, the following four months of cadet life drastically changed Fera's outlook. "I have seen times when I have felt rather homesick, though I am not troubled with that ailing much now," he wrote his father in January 1875. "I hope that in case I ever write home again about being homesick, you will take no notice of it whatever. I shall try to overcome my feelings in case I ever should feel homesick again. . . . Father . . . while I was homesick, of course I did not have a very good opinion of the Academy, but now that I am over that, I have changed my mind. I think now that one who gets through this place will have one of the best of educations. And I think, one is a perfect gentleman. The rules here are very strick concerning the use of tobacco, intoxicating liquors, &c. Only last week two cadets of my class were expelled from the Academy for drinking. The use of profane language is not allowed here. I don't mean to say that because the rules prohibit the use of these different things, they are not used." [^10]

As Fera's outlook improved, so did his scholastic standing. "You must not think that I am at the foot of my class if I do not stand a star," [^11] he wrote at the end of his first year at the academy. At that time he stood 23rd out of a class of 53. In order of merit he was 23rd in mathematics, 21st in English, 27th in history, 26th in French, and he had 42 demerits. In his second year he stood 15th overall, out of a class of 43. In individual subjects he was 8th in mathematics, 30th in chemistry and physics, 14th in history and rhetoric, 26th in French, 2nd in drawing, [^12] and had 72 demerits.

Salt Lake City, September 20, 1875

Elder F. L. Young

Annapolis, Maryland

My dear Son,

It gives me great pleasure to hear of the prosperity and faithfulness of my sons, so many of whom are now in different parts of the country studying to make themselves efficient in the various branches of business or professions they have chosen.

In your last letter you mention having drawn $50.00 of Elder W[illiam] C. Staines in New York, but you do not tell me if you have received the $100.00 I sent you from here by express on 3rd August. Please tell me in your next if you received it safe.

There is no news of stirring interest in our mountain home; peace prevails notwithstanding the malice of our enemies. The brethren are busy in their harvest fields and workshops, and trade is improving in the city. ZCMI is doing a large and increasing business, and the walls of its new building are rapidly nearing completion.

With regard to your brothers, Willard left here on Monday to assume his duties at the station in the State of New York to which he has been assigned. Alfales is doing excellently at Ann Arbor and is progressing rapidly in his studies and growing in the faith and power of the gospel. Don Carlos has entered the engineers school at Troy, New York, whilst Lorenzo and Alonzo are here pursuing their studies at the University in this city very diligently.

I rejoice whenever I hear that my sons are taking hold of the principles of eternal truth and are applying them to their lives. The strength of Zion is in the virtue of her sons and daughters; her foundations are laid in the practical observance by her children of the principles of faith, humility, truth, justice and love. Each of us, my son, must cultivate these principles. It is the duty of every Latter-day Saint, young or old, to serve the Lord. None of us are excused from this duty as, also, none of us are shut out from the attainment of the blessings of eternal life. Never in all your associations forget that you are a Latter-day Saint, nor omit your prayers evening and morning, nor fail to lean upon the Lord, nor to put your trust in Him. Never be ashamed to do what is right, nor to acknowledge your faith, nor to resist temptation, no matter by whom and in what manner presented, so shall you enjoy the blessing of heaven, and increase in faith, knowledge, and power with the Lord.

I want my sons to realize, and would be glad if all the world could understand, that no matter whether a man is a lawyer, a doctor, a mechanic, or indeed be he engaged in any occupation whatever, that thorough honesty and integrity will always lead to success, influence, and respect. If a young man wishes to prosper in his profession, this is the only sure road to progress; on the other hand, if he allows himself to be led from the direct path of honesty, either through the desire to make money fast, or as appears to be the idea with some members of the legal profession, that in the advocacy of a cause or the defense of a client everything is proper that the law does not condemn. If he permits this feeling to guide him he will be looked upon with jealousy and distrust by those who are acquainted with his course, not to say anything about the sinfulness of being dishonest. There is no doubt but that Benjamin Franklin's motto is a true one that "honesty is the best policy." I wish to impress this truth firmly on your mind that you will not forget it through all the intercourse and associations of your life.

My health continues excellent with the exception of occasional attacks of rheumatism. Your mother and the rest of the family are well. We remember you constantly with much love and best wishes, and we pray that you may be preserved from every snare and be permitted to return home, having accomplished a good work in preparing yourself for a life of truth and usefulness.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letters dated October 16 and November 24, 1875

Unlike the writings of some of his brothers, one characteristic of Feramorz Young's letters to his father was their brevity. Three short paragraphs constitute his answer to his father's letter of September 20.

In reflecting upon his first year at the Naval Academy, Fera admitted that he had not made a very good beginning to his career but explained that he had worked as hard as he could and had managed to keep a satisfactory grade. Part of his letter contained a special request: "Father, a cadet of the 2d Class wished me to ask you if you would be willing to let him have your autograph. He, or rather a friend of his has a collection of autographs and wished to obtain yours. I thought that I could do no more than make the request. If you would not like to let anyone have your autograph on account of not knowing the character of the same, I can say that I have been in the same crew with him all of the past year and have found nothing in him but that which characterizes a gentleman." [^13]

In letters of October 16 and November 24, Brigham Young made no reference to this request.

Salt Lake City, October 16, 1875

Elder F. L. Young

Annapolis, Maryland

My dear Son,

Your very welcome letter of the 2nd reached me on the 11th inst. I am glad to hear therefrom of your good health and general prosperity.

If you find the regulations are such that they will not let you have the $100.00 I sent you in August you can hand the enclosed order to the paymaster for him to return the money to me, and you can draw $50.00 from Bro. [William C.] Staines, which, with the previous $50.00 drawn of him by you, I will make right with him.

We have had a long and very delightful conference. The spirit of instruction and counsel was copiously poured out upon the elders who spoke and a rich outflow of the Spirit of God was felt by every true Latter-day Saint present. About one hundred and fifty elders were called on various missions, many of them to the Eastern and Southern States and Canada, quite a few to the Lamanites, and others to England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Australia, and New Zealand. Amongst those called with whom you are acquainted are Elders F[eramorz] Little, Theo[dore] McKean, Mark Croxall, James Sharp, Geo. Teasdale, Charles S. Burton, Douglas Swan and Isaac Groo. During the conference the new tabernacle was dedicated, the prayer being offered by Elder John Taylor.

I am very pleased to think that my sons who are now away from home are doing so well. I hear often from Willard, Alfales, and Don Carlos, all of whom are striving to make the most of their opportunities that they may grow to be useful men in our Father's kingdom. I also receive encouraging reports from Ernest and Arta in England; the former is engaged in the Liverpool Office, whilst the latter is laboring as a missionary in the midland counties. I am told he is very faithful and becoming quite bold in bearing his testimony to the restoration of the gospel in its fulness and powers in these days.

I wish to say to you, you must not try to answer all the letters you receive. Let your friends write to you as often as they please, but do not attempt to reply to them all. Let your studies be your first consideration, and then, if you have time to answer a letter occasionally, do so.

I am still a little troubled with rheumatism; otherwise my health is good. The weather is beautiful; we are enjoying all the pleasures of a delightful Indian summer. The family and your friends are in good health.

Before closing let me exhort you, my son, to live your religion day by day, be faithful, honest, and true to all your duties and in all your associations, and ever keep your trust bright in the Lord your God.

Your mother is well and received a letter from you a day or two ago.

With love, and ever praying for your welfare and happiness, I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Salt Lake City, November 24, 1875

Elder F. L. Young,

Annapolis, Maryland

My dear Son,

Brother George Q. Cannon who will leave tomorrow morning for Washington will bring one hundred dollars ($100) cy. [currency] which I have handed him to convey to you. With this remittance I associate the hope that you will use it judiciously and economically, which indeed, I have no doubt but that you will do. Be prudent in all things, adopt the plan of keeping a strict account of all your expenses; by this you will not only understand what becomes of your money, but it will also induce business habits and method and correctness in financial dealings in after life. I am very much pleased to learn through your letter to your mother that you are progressing so satisfactorily in your studies and are improving your standing in the various classes. You will find that much of the happiness of this life consists in having something worthy to do and in doing it well. It has been wisely said that "that which is worth doing is worth doing well." If a man have to drive the plow let him do it well; if only to cut bolts, make good ones; if to blow the bellows, keep the iron hot. It is our attention to our daily duties that makes us men, and if we devote our lives to the service of heaven, our faithfulness therein will eventually fit us with our Heavenly Father in eternity to dwell. Aspire to acquire knowledge that you may be able to do more good and also to progress in your sphere of life; but remember that you will win only by trust in the Lord, by present contentment and by doing faithfully that which you have in hand. This I have confidence you will do. No one advances who imagines himself too good or too big for present duties. Such a one is apt to sink into a smaller and a smaller place. In the long run, and for the most part, men are found in the places they have fitted themselves to fill. It is one of the most cherished hopes of my life to see my sons by faithfulness, diligence, and devotion to God and their duties, fit themselves to be able ministers of salvation to the children of men. This should be the great object of our lives.

We have had a very unfortunate fire in this city this week, at which the machine shop of Bros. Davis, Howe & Co. was destroyed. The loss of the building, a frame structure, would be but an inconsiderable matter if no other damage had been done. But the injury to the machinery and the burning of patterns and tools have run up the total damage to twenty-three or four thousand dollars. There is a great feeling of sympathy expressed by the brethren and many will extend a helping hand to assist the firm to erect another building, their business having become a very important branch of home industry which we can ill spare. I think of giving $1000 myself to help them to make a fresh start.

I have no doubt but that you heard the tidings of my release from my unjust imprisonment with intense satisfaction. You will also be greatly gratified to learn that my health is very rapidly improving. Yesterday was a lovely day after a long continued spell of wet weather, and I availed myself of the opportunity of taking the first carriage ride since my release. Today it would seem as though another storm was nearing us. Nearly six inches of rain has already fallen here this month which is something out of the ordinary course of the weather.

The family are all well. Hyrum is still working on the railroad; he anticipates being called on a mission before very long. Mahonri and Lorenzo are at work at the ZCMI whilst Alonzo still continues his studies at the university. And we all, father, mother, brothers, sisters, friends, and brethren in the office, all join in love to you, and in prayers for your welfare.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letters dated February 15 and March 14, 1876

On January 20, 1876, mid-way through Fera's second year at the Naval Academy, his older brother, Brigham Young, Jr., paid him a visit. Brigham's diary account of that meeting is instructive in its portrayal of the daily routine at the academy and also the congenial relationship that existed between these brothers: "Put up at the Maryland Hotel. Walked over to cadets quarters, asked for information at Admiral Ro[d]ger's office; directed to main building. Sent in my card. Ferry came in a few minutes. I huged and kissed him. I could scarcely keep from sheding tears to see him so far from home among strangers. He has grown taller and heavier and is in excellent health. Says he is unsatisfactory in chemistry and philosophy, well advanced in mathamatics. . . . Visited the colleges and grounds. Examined the Engineer department where many beautiful models were exhibeted. Saw the cadets march out of quarters in squads and run to the music of brass band, all keeping step which looked fine. It was Ferry's day on shipboard, where I saw them going through their practice. Others were out with guns in the field. Others were going the system of signaling. This lasted from 4 til 5 p.m., when Ferry joined [me]. We repaired to his room by permission of [the] officer, where we chatted until twenty five minutes past seven, when I bade him good bye at the gate. His labors are: not allowed to rise until 6.15 a.m., clean his room, make the bed. 6.45 inspecting officer of rooms comes round. Breakfast at 7 oclock. Studies begin at 8, continue until 1 oclock. Dinner. Studies again from 2 to 4 p.m. Drill from 4 to 5 p.m. Studies from 7.30 to 9.30 p.m., then bed. Not allowed to study out of hours. Saturdays from 8 to 12 oclock, rest of the day allowed to go into the town, but prohibited from entering a hotel, store, or tobacconists. The cadets are not allowed to smoke as formerly which has caused much disatisfaction among those accustomed to it. We talked of home and parents. . . . He has made voyages and always on sailing vessel where midshipmen have to clime the ropes and do seamen's duty. He also has foil practice and first class are permitted target practice, broad sword, and boxing. Fine laboratory, a marine department, and I saw an engine which was constructed by the cadets. They are taught to take the engines apart and put them together again." [^14]

Just before writing the following letter, Brigham Young had received a progress report from the academy containing the news that the use of tobacco among the cadets at the Naval Academy had been entirely suppressed, a subject of comment in the President's letter.

Salt Lake City, February 15, 1876

Elder F. L. Young

Annapolis, Maryland

My dear Son,

I was very much gratified yesterday, when, on the receipt of the usual monthly report for January I found you were gaining so admirably in your standing in your class. I noticed that out of six studies reported, in five you were in the upper half of the class. I can assure you that the constant good news I receive from and of yourself and my other boys out in the world is very gratifying, and I feel thankful at all times that my sons are doing so well, and that I have so little cause for complaint at the course taken by any of them.

We have had two very interesting incidents occurring in the family within the past few days. On Sunday evening Morris had a daughter born to him, of which he is proportionately elated, and today Nabbie was married to Bro. Spencer Clawson. The newly married couple will start tomorrow for the East, where Spencer will have to go to attend to the spring purchases of ZCMI.

Accompanying the usual monthly report was "a report on the use of tobacco by the cadets of the Naval Academy," from which I am much pleased to learn that the officers of the academy have decided to entirely suppress the use of tobacco amongst the cadets. The ideas expressed in the report entirely coincide with my views that you have so often heard me explain, that tobacco, whether used in smoking or chewing, is an unmitigated evil to young men, injuring their health, impairing their mental powers and unfitting them for their daily duties and studies. But I am gratified to know that you do not indulge in these pernicious habits, smoking or chewing. Some young men seem to entertain the idea that to smoke, to chew, or to use profane language makes them appear more manly. Never was a greater fallacy. [Real] manhood is manifested in serving God and keeping his commandments. The highest type of mankind is shown in such worthies as Enoch, Abraham, Joseph, Nephi, Alma, Joseph Smith, and others. If boys wish to be thought manly, let them copy the best men and their virtues, not inferior and vicious men and their follies and vices.

Brigham Jun. and John W. are now both with me, and I am thankful to say we are all in good health as is also your mother and the rest of her family. I propose, should nothing intervene to prevent me, to start for St. George within ten days. Bro. [Daniel H.] Wells, Brigham Jun., and other brethren will accompany me. If I find the temple there sufficiently near completion, I shall dedicate the lower portion and commence attending to some of the ordinances of the house of the Lord therein.

The brethren called for Arizona have almost all gone, and those from the north are passing through this city every day. The companies generally have first class fitouts and appear to be just the kind of men to build up a new country. It is possible that Bro. Wells and Brigham Jun. will visit the new settlements before they return north.

You will see by the peculiarities of this letter that we have a "type-writer" [^15] in use in this office. By skill and practice some of the clerks expect to be able to write before long with this machine twice as quickly as they can with a pen. Besides this it has the advantage of great plainness, and no one will be able to find fault with the obscurity of the handwriting.

With much love, and with constant prayers for your progress, preservation and happiness,

I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Salt Lake City, March 14, 1876

Elder F. L. Young

Annapolis, Maryland

My dear Son,

I have received two letters from you within the last few days, which I shall not attempt to answer now, but will simply say that you may expect to see your brother John W. in a few days, and he will tell you all the news. He will also bring you a little money from me, and your trunk. I am quite willing you and your companions should buy the boat, you paying your share of it. Take good care of the boat, and learn to handle it properly and to row. It is good healthful exercise.

Myself and the family are all well. May God continue to bless you always.

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

Letter of August 23, 1877

By the beginning of Feramorz Young's third year at Annapolis, a career in the U.S. Navy did not hold the promise for his future that it had held two years previous. He sought earnestly for permission from his father to resign, that he might pursue a more practical course in life. Writing on November 5, he weighed the matter for his father: "When I came here it was for the purpose of gaining knowledge, which knowledge was not only to be a benefit to myself but to my people as well. For two years have I studied hard, hoping to get this education, pursuing branches of importance not only to one profession, but to all—as Mathematics, English . . . and so on, and on this account have scarcely looked into the future. Now, having entered upon a second two years course, I find my studies to be those pertaining to one particular profession and to no other—that is, to a naval officer. I know that you do not wish me to follow the Navy, neither do I wish to. In order to graduate, I will have to spend four more years, and then two of service before I can leave honorably after graduating. Not only will this be six years of my life lost, but I will have been pursuing a life to which my whole mind will have to be attached and thereby cause me to forget what knowledge I have gained of other affairs, besides my being under the control of the United States government. In fact, when I will have left the Navy six years from now I will be totally unfit for anything else. And again, during four years of the six, I will be roaming from one country to another away from the influence of home, friends, and my religion, in which case one is very apt to forget his position. Or, to the point, I think that I can fit myself for a better and more beneficial life, to myself, to you, and to our people, elsewhere than here."

Upon discussing his feelings with Admiral Rodgers, superintendent of the academy, Fera was told that he could resign "and do so honorably," but that the matter lay entirely with himself and his father. In concluding his letter, Fera left the final decision as to his career at the academy with his father. "Please consider the above and think what your advice to me would be. If it be favorable then I request to resign; if not, then I am willing to remain here and do the best I can. In making your decision do not consider my feelings but your own alone. I desire to act as you wish and in no other way." [^16]

Recalling the night he had received his father's permission to accept an appointment to the Naval Academy, Feramorz noted that the subject of his becoming a civil engineer had been discussed and that George A. Smith, who had been present on the occasion, had observed that the best civil engineers had been trained at the Naval Academy. "That was a mistake, as none are educated here," Fera concluded. [^17] And now, fully realizing his mistake and believing himself better qualified for the profession of a civil engineer than any other (which coincided with his father's first counsel), Fera requested that he be permitted to join his brother Don Carlos, who was then studying at one of the nation's top engineering schools, the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute at Troy, New York.

On December 1 Feramorz received his father's "most welcome" letter giving him permission to resign from the Naval Academy. "Today I took your letter to Adm. Rodgers," he wrote on December 2, "and told him what my plans were and why I wished to resign. I said that I did not think I would like a naval life, and if I did, I said that my associations being what they were, I wished to pass my life with my people. I asked him if he did not think that I could acquire knowledge that would be far more beneficial to me outside the Navy elsewhere than here. He confessed he did, but thought the name this place would give me would be a great thing in my favor. He spoke freely with me and I tried to with him. He concluded by saying that you were my best adviser and my best course is to act as you said. His opinion of the school at Troy was very high, and seemed to think that I had made a good choice of schools. Admiral Rodgers had assured me before that there could be nothing dishonorable in my resigning inasmuch as I was not leaving on account of some scrape or of having become deficient, which he felt sure I was not doing. After a short talk I wrote out my resignation which he approved and forwarded to the Secretary of the Navy. He told me to tell you that he had recommended me to the Secretary as one having a high standing in my class, and good conduct. He further said that he would answer your letter and I presume at the same time will tell you his feelings. My resignation will most probably be accepted by next Saturday and then I shall go direct to Troy." [^18]

The next letter Feramorz sent his father was sent from 176 Congress Street, Troy, New York, where he had joined his brother Don Carlos and William Sharp as a student at RPI. Fera explained that he had talked with Professor Adams about enrolling. "At first I did not intend to enter till the beginning of the summer session, the first of February. In this way I would save the tuition of one term. But Prof. Adams thought that it would be better for me to enter now, and then I would get the review of all this term's studies and would be better prepared to pass my examinations. And besides, he would allow me to be examined with the class by which I would only be examined on a very small part of each branch, whereas, if I wait till next term, I cannot be examined with the class, but will be examined alone on every subject of each branch. If I enter now, they will require me to pass no examination till next term. You no doubt will see the advantage in all these privileges, and rather than risk not passing some of my examinations, I think it better to enter this term. However, I am writing this letter to you to ask your consent to do this. If I do not receive an answer before January the second I shall enter anyway." [^19] Interpreting his father's subsequent silence on the subject as at least tacit approval, Fera enrolled at the January term, 1876.

As the 1876-77 school year drew to a close at RPI, Feramorz and Don Carlos were advised by their father to stay in the East and study music instead of returning home during the summer recess. Brigham Young suggested that his sons study organ and piano at the Boston Conservatory, and he named Buck, Morgan, and Eichberg as among the leading teachers. In June 1877 Fera and Carlos went to Brooklyn, New York, where Dudley Buck, who had consented to instruct Carlos, was spending several weeks of the summer. While there, Feramorz studied piano from a teacher described as "very good, but being only sixteen years old he could not give . . . the discipline Professor Buck could." [^20]

Shortly after their arrival in Brooklyn, Feramorz and Don Carlos visited a neighboring branch of the Church, where they were called upon to speak to a congregation of some thirty Saints. "It was the first time I ever addressed any kind of an audience," Fera informed his father. "I sometimes used to try to speak in school, but I generally cried before I got through my little piece. However, this time I succeeded differently. I spoke I thought with a great deal of freedom, and did not feel scared in the least. But after I had spoken, what Carl said was about fifteen minutes, I became very dizzy and, had I not sat down, I would have fallen. I think Carlos must have been mistaken as to the time for it did not seem longer than three minutes to me." [^21]

Because they remained in the East during the summer of 1877, Feramorz and Don Carlos did not see their father again. Brigham Young died on August 29 that year. The following letter, dictated to his secretary, George Reynolds, and dated August 23—one week before his death—was the last sent by President Young to one of his children.

Salt Lake City, August 23, 1877

Elder F. L. Young

Annapolis, Maryland

My dear son Fera,

A day or two ago I received your letter acknowledging the receipt of mine of July 17th. As ever I was glad to hear from you. I trust, when next you write, you will feel more encouraged; possibly, the warm weather having moderated, you will feel more of your natural vigor and energy and the prospect will appear brighter before you. Nothing worthy of obtaining is ever engaged by us without perseverance. "There is no excellency without labor." You must, therefore, strive on. The experience you gain will be invaluable. Experience is a good schoolmaster though the "school fees are somewhat heavy."

You must permit me, my dear son, in the love that I bear for you and your brothers and sisters, to say that I do not esteem the perusal of novels a wise means of increasing your desire to read. I should be very foolish if because I had a poor appetite I took to making my meals of poisonous herbs or berries because they tasted sweet or were otherwise palatable. It would be better for my appetite to remain poor than that I should destroy my vitality. Novel reading appears to me to be very much the same as swallowing poisonous herbs; it is a remedy that is worse than the complaint. I certainly wish you loved reading. I hope that taste will yet be developed in you, but developed by all means with good, healthy, mental food. Read all good books you can obtain, the revelations of God, the writings of His servants, descriptions of His works, as seen in the animal, vegetable and mineral kingdoms; peruse the lives of the good and great of various ages and nationalities; make yourself acquainted with art, science and manufacture, and before long you will find an interest growing in these things that it will be no longer any trouble to read, but you will read eagerly and whilst so doing you will be fitting yourself for future usefulness.

Some excuse novel reading on the grounds that it gives them insight into the ways of the world, its life and society, others on the ground that they thus become acquainted with the best authors, their various styles and peculiar beauties. To the first plea I would say that the views of life given in most works of fiction are greatly strained or entirely false, and every elder in the Church of Jesus Christ who performs his duty will have enough experience in the vicissitudes of real life to satisfy him by the time he grows old. To the second excuse I would answer that the Bible and many works of history &c. contain as good, graceful, grand, unadulterated English as any romance that was ever written. Avoid works of fiction; they engender mental carelessness and give a slipshod character to the workings of the mind. To strengthen the mind, increase its perceptions, develop its powers, we should read the true and the wise. The perusal of the rest is worse than time wasted, it is time abused. Sell your Dickens' works and get Stephens' & Catherwoods' Travels in Central America, or Josephus's or Mosheim's History. The Bible is a very interesting book when read as history, especially to those who believe the truths that it teaches.

We have not heard from Willard since he was in Philadelphia at the time of the great labor strikes, but have no doubt that he safely returned to the routine of his garrison life at Willet's Point. The accounts we have received of the scenes and circumstances which attended those few dark days in July have very vividly impressed us with a realizing sense of the near approach of the breakup of our present form of government. We take no joy in the misery of our fellowmen. We understand too well what the near future will bring upon the unrepentant. There may be people who talk about an impending bloody revolution in this country with a gusto that smacks of fond anticipation. We are not amongst them. We would rather that the evil should be averted by the people turning from their wickedness and living unto God. The revolution foreshadowed should be averted by all the effort the people could exert against plague or famine, for it means a common ruin for workingman and capitalist, which will be irretrievable if the people permit it. In fact, it means the fall of Babylon, or as much thereof as spreads over this fair land of Joseph. It can only be prevented by a complete change in the hearts and lives of the people and an obedience to the plan of salvation, revealed by God in this generation. But we fear it is too late, the masses have gone too far, the body politic too corrupt, the tree is too rotten, it is fit only for the burning.

Give my love to Willard and Don Carlos, tell them I am well, as are the rest of the family. All is peace, the Lord's hand is over us and we are safe if we keep the commandments.

May the Lord bless you, my son. I remain,

Your affectionate father,

Brigham Young

G.R. [George Reynolds]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Feramorz L. Young, Diary, 13-26 January 1872.
[^2] Don Carlos Young's copy of the Weisbach text, with his name and the date October 4, 1878, written in the front, is located in the Reception Hall bookcase in the Beehive House in Salt Lake City.
[^3] Another witness of the burial of Feramorz Young was Frederick Ober of the Washington Museum of Natural History, later the Smithsonian Institute, who had been sent by Charles Hallock, editor of Forest and Stream, to explore the Caribbean area. In an article titled "Adios" in the March 16, 1882, issue of Forest and Stream, Ober noted, after describing his travels in Mexico, that much of Mexico and Cuba were disease-ridden. He added, "We were saddened and reminded that the climate of Mexico had some bad spots in it, by the death of one of our number, only one day out of Havana. We buried him next day at sea, almost within sight of the Florida coast, right abreast of Indian River, this young man, a son of Brigham Young; a right good young man, and whom we regretted should die such an untimely death."
[^4] Deseret News, 23 (September 28, 1874): 556.
[^5] Since the Navy, following the British precedent, preferred young midshipmen, sixteen was not an unusually young age for those entering the Naval Academy. Several of Fera's classmates were fourteen.
[^6] The United Order established during the winter of 1873-74 was the Latter-day Saint answer to the national economic panic of 1873 and the depression that followed. The Orders that developed in Utah during the next decade were characterized by varying degrees of community cooperation. These ranged from complete consecration of private property and labor, such as practiced in Orderville, Utah, to community ownership and operation of cooperative enterprises, as practiced in larger cities of the Territory. See Leonard J. Arrington, Great Basin Kingdom, chapter 11.
[^7] Feramorz L. Young to Brigham Young, 24 October 1874.
[^8] Feramorz to Lucy Decker Young, 7 November 1874.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Feramorz to Brigham Young, 10 January 1875.
[^11] Feramorz to Brigham Young, 24 October 1874.
[^12] Fera's ability in drawing is reflected in a Deseret Agricultural and Manufacturing Society Diploma awarded to Feramorz L. Young for the "best line shaded drawing of machinery" at the annual fair held in Salt Lake City, October 4, 1879. The document is in the Church Archives.
[^13] Feramorz L. Young to Brigham Young, 2 October 1875.
[^14] Brigham Young Jr., Diary, 20 January 1876.
[^15] The letter written with the new "type-writer" appears to be double spaced in all-capital, gothic face about the size of elite typewriter type.
[^16] Feramorz Young to Brigham Young, 5 November 1876.
[^17] Ibid.
[^18] Feramorz Young to Brigham Young, 2 December 1876.
[^19] Feramorz Young to Brigham Young, 11 December 1876.
[^20] Joseph Don Carlos Young to Brigham Young, 19 July 1877.
[^21] Feramorz to Brigham Young, 21 June 1877.
