Do you live in an area where the trees change color to get ready for the winter? These four friends do. Noah B., Dylan L., Patrick M., and Ben M. all live on Prince Edward Island off the east coast of Canada. Like the trees, these boys are getting ready for a new season of life. They are all turning 12 within a year of each other, and that means saying good-bye to Primary and hello to Young Men. Here’s what they had to say about growing up and moving on.

When Noah moved here, his new friends helped him adjust to life on the island. Now, as the oldest in the group, he’s helping them get used to life in Young Men. “I was worried about being accepted and getting to know the others,” Noah said about starting Young Men. “Going to the activities really helped.” Noah’s favorite Primary song is about the army of Helaman, and that’s how he sees the priesthood quorum—as being together, united.

His advice? “Be yourself.”

For Patrick, getting the priesthood is not about turning a certain age. It’s about being worthy and prepared. “You don’t get the priesthood just because you’re 12,” Patrick said. “You have to be prepared.”

Dylan understands how important preparation is. He tries to get to church 15 minutes early to spiritually prepare to pass the sacrament. “I’ve passed the sacrament three or four times, and each time the Spirit touches my heart. I don’t think I’ll ever get used to it,” he said.

Ben said that passing the sacrament reminds him of the Last Supper: “Jesus was standing there. We’re standing where Jesus was, and He wants us to be there.”

Ben is working on earning his Faith in God Award and is looking forward to doing baptisms for the dead for the first time. “I haven’t been inside the temple yet, but other people always give testimonies about how warm and good they feel after they go,” Ben said.

Noah went on his first visit to the temple recently. He said that the young men in his quorum treated him like family. “You might feel nervous, but there will be people there to help you,” he said. “You will feel welcome.”
