The spelling of the source document (including inconsistent and unusual spelling, capitalisation, hyphenation, (deliberate) misspellings, phonetically written speech, etc.) have been retained, also in proper and geographical names and in literature references, except as mentioned below. The spelling (including the use of accents and other diacriticals) of non-English words has not been corrected, and missing words have not been inserted, except as mentioned below. Tabulated data and the results of calculations (even when they obviously contain errors) have been transcribed as printed, except as listed under Changes.

Depending on the hard- and software used to read this text, and their settings, not all elements may display as intended. Due to very limited font support, the deserét characters (page 420) have been inserted as illustrations rather than Unicode glyphs. Some of the larger elements (such as tables and illustrations) may be best viewed in a wide window or on a wide screen.

Page 356, Captain Suter: probably John Augustus Sutter Sr.

Page 362, “We say from the Saxon ...: there is no closing quote mark in the source document.

Page 413, “his brother Pacumeni was appointed by his successor”: probably an error for “... as his successor”.

Page 525: Closing quote mark inserted after ... rendered valueless there in a few days.

Page 561 ff. (Index): some entries are not in alphabetical order; this has not been corrected.

Page 568, “Mormon, Book of,” 367, note: the book has no footnote on page 367.

Changes:

Footnotes, illustrations, tables, etc. have been moved out of text paragraphs. Some of the larger tables have been re-arranged for better readability.

Some minor obvious typographical and punctuation errors have been corrected silently. Some minor inconsistencies in the lay-out of the tables have been standardised silently.

Where relevant, page headers in the source document have been moved to where they appear to fit best and are given there in dotted boxes. Where they announce separate subjects, such headers have been split.

Some ditto marks („) and abbreviations (do.) have been replaced with the dittoed text.

Deseret and Deserét have been standardised to Deserét.

Text in a double-bordered box was not present in the text as such, but has been transcribed from the illustration for clarity’s and legibility’s sake.

Page xv: Illustration numbers have been added to the List of Illustrations.

Page 215, Footnote 219: “Chestand” changed to “Ehestand”.

Page 228: “ζψον φιλοκοσμον” changed to “ζωον φιλοκοσμον”.

Page 253: הכבז changed to הננו.

Page 368, Footnote 204: “Kisheumen” changed to “Kishkumen”; “Femnarihah” changed to “Zemnarihah”.

Page 391: “VI.” (second occurrence) changed to “VII.”.

Page 430, Footnote 221: “cinque femmes où d’avantage” changed to “cinque femmes ou d’avantage”.

Page 458: “anti-Columbian immigration” changed to “ante-Columbian immigration”.

Page 484: “at our instance” changed to “at our insistence”

Page 486: “mummified us as in the Eastern prairies” changed to “mummified as in the Eastern prairies”.

Page 514, table row Grass in considerable quantity of good character: “12·19” changed to “121·9”.

Index: some spelling and hyphenation have been adjusted to conform to those used in the text.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CITY OF THE SAINTS, AND ACROSS THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS TO CALIFORNIA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE
