Gordon B. Hinckley, Be Thou an Example ( 1981)

20

"WE THANK THEE, O GOD, FOR A PROPHET"

We often sing in our meetings a marvelous hymn, a hymn we have sung for more than a century: "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." It is distinctive with us. As a people we sing some hymns that have come from other churches, and others sing some of ours. But only we can properly sing "We thank thee, O God, for a prophet to guide us in these latter days."

The hymn was written more than a century ago by a man of humble circumstances who lived in Sheffield, England. He worked in the steel mills and was discharged because he joined the Mormon Church. But there burned in his heart a great and fervent testimony; and out of an overflowing spirit of gratitude, he penned these marvelous lines. They have become a grateful expression of appreciation for millions over the earth. I myself have heard them sung in twenty-one different languages as a reverent prayer of thanksgiving for divine revelation.

How thankful we ought to be, how thankful we are, for a prophet to counsel us in words of divine wisdom as we walk our paths in these complex and difficult times. The solid assurance we carry in our hearts, the conviction that God will make his will known to his children through his recognized servant, is the real basis of our faith and activity. We either have a prophet or we have nothing; and having a prophet, we have everything.

Could any people have a greater blessing than to have standing at their head one who receives and teaches the will of God concerning them? We need not look far in the world to know that "the wisdom of their wise men" has perished, and that "the understanding of their prudent men" has come to naught. (Isaiah 29:14.) That wisdom for which the world should seek is the wisdom which comes from God. The only understanding that will save the world is divine understanding.

"Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets." (Amos 3:7.)

It was so in the days of Amos and in all the years when holy men of God spoke as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. (See 2 Peter 1: 21.) Those ancient prophets warned not only of things to come, but, more importantly, they became the revealers of truth to people. It was they who pointed the way men should live if they were to be happy and find peace in their lives.

I know a man who, as a Christian, trying one church after another, could find none that taught of a prophet. Only among the Jewish people did he find reverent mention of the prophets, and so he accepted and embraced the Jewish religion.

In the summer of 1964, he went to New York City and visited the World's Fair. He entered the Mormon Pavilion and saw pictures of the prophets of the Old Testament. His heart warmed within him as he heard the missionaries speak with appreciation of these great men of ages past through whom Jehovah revealed his will. Then, as he progressed through the pavilion, he heard of modern prophets—of Joseph Smith, who was called a prophet, a seer, and a revelator. Something stirred within him. His spirit responded to the testimony of the missionaries. He was baptized. He served a mission in South America, where he had many converts. He returned home and has since become the means of bringing his family and others into the Church. It is heartwarming to hear him testify that Joseph Smith was indeed a prophet of God and that all who succeeded him have been legal successors in this high and sacred calling.

Could anyone willing to read without bias the story of Joseph Smith doubt that he was a great foreteller of events to come? Nearly thirty years before a shot was fired, he foretold the tragic American Civil War and stated that following that, war would be poured out upon all nations. You and I of this generation are witnesses to the fulfillment of those remarkable words.

He foretold that this people, then living in Illinois, would be driven out, would suffer much affliction, and would become a great and mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. The Church today, headquartered in Salt Lake City, is evidence of the fulfillment of those marvelous words of prophecy.

It has been so with his successors. On a cold winter day in 1849, when our forebears were hungry and living on sego roots and thistle tops, while gold was being found in California, Brigham Young stood in the old bowery on what is now Temple Square and spoke prophetic words to those who felt they might leave the hardships of life in the valley of the Great Salt Lake to go to greener pastures in California. Among other things, he said:

"We have been kicked out of the frying pan into the fire, out of the fire into the middle of the floor, and here we are and here we will stay. . . .

"We shall build a city and a temple to the Most High God in this place. We will extend our settlements to the east and the west, to the north and south, and we will build towns and cities by the hundreds, and thousands of saints will gather in from the nations of the earth.

"This will become the great highway of nations. Kings and emperors and the noble and the wise of the earth will visit us here. . . . "

How could anyone witness the hundreds of thousands, yes, the millions, who come each year to visit us, and have any doubt that Brigham Young spoke as a prophet? Over the years there has been a veritable parade of notables who have found their way to the office of the First Presidency, there to meet particularly the man whom we sustain as the president of the Church and as the prophet of our day. They include leaders in the governments of the earth, in business and commerce, in education, in the professions. These are among "the noble and the wise of the earth" of whom Brigham Young spoke when we were an outcast people, isolated in a mountain wilderness.

I am profoundly grateful not only for Joseph Smith as the prophet who served as an instrument in the hands of the Almighty in restoring this work, but also for all of those who have followed him. A study of their lives will reveal the manner in which the Lord has chosen them, has refined them, and has molded them to his eternal purposes. Joseph Smith declared on one occasion: "I am like a huge, rough stone rolling down from a high mountain . . . with all hell knocking off a corner here and a corner there, and thus I will become a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty."

He was hated and persecuted. He was driven and imprisoned. He was abused and beaten. And as you read his history, you see the evolution of which he spoke. There developed a power in his life. There came a refinement. There grew a love for others which even overcame his own love for life. The corners of that rough stone were knocked off, and he became a polished shaft in the hand of the Almighty.

It has been so with those who have succeeded him. Through long years of dedicated service, they have been refined and winnowed and chastened and molded for the purposes of the Almighty. Could anyone doubt this after reading of the lives of such men as Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff, Joseph F. Smith, and Spencer W. Kimball? The Lord subdued their hearts and refined their natures to prepare them for the great and sacred responsibility later thrust upon them.

As one to whom the Spirit has borne witness, I testify of their prophetic calling, and add my voice to the voices of our people over the earth, "We thank thee, O God, for a prophet to guide us in these latter days." I am grateful. I am satisfied that the peace and the progress and the prosperity of this people lie in doing the will of the Lord as that will is articulated by him who presides over this church. If we fail to observe his counsel, we repudiate his sacred calling. If we abide his counsel, we shall be blessed of God.

We ever pray for thee, our Prophet dear, That God will give to thee comfort and cheer; As the advancing years furrow thy brow, Still may the light within shine bright as now. —Hymns, 1948, no. 386

God lives and is a revealer of eternal truth. Jesus Christ is our Savior and stands at the head of his church. We have a prophet upon the earth, a seer and a revelator to teach us. God give us the faith and the discipline within ourselves to follow that teaching.
