CHAPTER I.

Lorenzo Snow's Birth and Parentage.—Parents settled in Ohio.—Hardships and Privations.—Their Hospitality.—Lorenzo's early Characteristics.—Fondness for Books.—Military Aims.—Change in Pursuits.—Starts for Oberlin College.—Falls in Company with David W. Patten.—Conversation.—In College.—Eliza Embraces the Gospel.—Moves to Kirtland.—How she obtained a House and Lot.—Lorenzo in College.—Investigates.—Is disgusted.—Writes to Eliza.—Her Invitation.—He accepts and comes to Kirtland.—Studies Hebrew.—Is Baptized.—How he receives the Holy Ghost.

CHAPTER II.

A Blessing Meeting.—Lorenzo's Opinion of the Patriarch.—The Patriarch's Marvelous Prediction.—Lorenzo is Puzzled.—Explained to him by Revelation.—Lorenzo in Kirtland.—Fast-day Meetings.—Outpouring of the Spirit.—Gifts Manifested.—Lorenzo's First Speech from the Pulpit.—Description of the Temple.—Fast Meetings.—A Striking Incident.—Effect of the Meetings on Lorenzo's Mind.—Wants to Preach.—Is Ordained an Elder.

CHAPTER III.

My Brother started on Mission.—Without Purse or Scrip.—Hard work to Beg.—Affectionate Aunt.—First Meeting in Medina County, Ohio.—Baptisms.—Preaches in Court House.—Ludicrous Anecdote.—Visits Relatives.—Preaches to Schoolmates.—Baptizes some of them.

CHAPTER IV.

A change—Great Apostacy.—Disaffection creeps into every Quorum.—Pride and speculation.—Apostates claim the Temple.—Warren Parrish a ringleader.—A fearful, terrible scene in the Temple.—The scene described.—What occurred the next Day.—Very interesting Court scene.—John Boynton portrayed.—Joseph and Sidney flee for their lives.—Father Smith served with State's Warrant.—How he escaped.—Luke Johnson befriends him.—Luke's death.

CHAPTER V.

Leave Kirtland.—Grand Entertainment.—A noble Woman.—Lorenzo drives one Team.—He is very Sick.—Arrive in Far West, Missouri.—Elder Rigdon's Kindness.—Dr. Avord's Meanness.—His Nurse, Nightwatcher and Doctor.—An Incident.—Arrive in Adam-ondi-Ahman.—Lorenzo takes his Gun and goes out to Hunt.—A new Train of Reflections.—Hunting for Sport.—The old Settlers.—Their Antagonism.—Preparation for Defense.—False Alarm explained.

CHAPTER VI.

Wants to go on Mission.—Elder Butterfield wishes to accompany him.—They go.—Arrive in Far West on the second day.—Father Smith blesses Lorenzo.—Blindness of Thomas B. Marsh.—Leave Far West.—Meet a camp of Brethren at the Missouri River.—Construct a craft.—Started in snow storm down the river.—Perilous times.—Narrow escapes.—A savage band.—Make their escape.—Find camping place in peace.—Leave the boat and travel on foot.—Get lodging at the house of a Mobocrat.—Mobocratic narrative.—A Campbellite Preacher's Politeness.—Courtesy of a Methodist Preacher.—A crowded house.—A Donation just in time.—Saved from a Mob by his pocket Bible.—Other Mobocrats foiled.

CHAPTER VII.

Leaves Kentucky.—Travels on foot five hundred miles.—Reaches his friends in Ohio.—Through fatigue and exposure, is very sick.—Receives kind attention.—Traveled and preached.—Taught school.—Great effort, and great success.—A thrilling narrative.—Arrives in Nauvoo.—The Father and Family in LaHarpe.

CHAPTER VIII.

In Di-Ahman.—Our father's purchases.—Friendliness of the "old settlers."—A spirit of hostility prevalent.—Millers would not grind our wheat.—Grating corn for our bread.—How we cooked the grated meal.—A strange move; the old settlers abscond.—Their reports in the surrounding country.—The Military quells the uprising.—A horse mill in operation.—Mobs arouse with increased force.—Government sends Militia.—They are set to guard the Saints, who are ordered to leave the county within ten days.—The halfway house.—Food frozen.—How we ate supper.—Sleepless and jolly.—Arrive in Far West.—Seven miles out.—Move to Illinois.—To Warren County.—To LaHarpe.—To Nauvoo.

CHAPTER IX.

Called on mission to England.—Extraordinary communication.—Calls on families of the Twelve.—In Ohio.—Borrows money.—On board a sailing vessel.—In Liverpool.—Writes to his aunt.—Why he is there.—How he came there.—Crossing the ocean.—Terrific storms.—An ocean storm scene.—The calm.—Gratitude.—Arrives in Liverpool.—Manchester.—Birmingham.

CHAPTER X.

Writes from Birmingham.—Church numbers Sixteen.—Conference in London.—Lorenzo appointed to preside over the London Conference.—Confirmed in Manchester.—Nine of the Twelve present.—Established a Branch in Wolverhampton.—Ordained William Henshaw.—Sent him to Wales.—William Henshaw did a good work, but "died as a fool dieth."—An encounter with Evil Spirits.—Lorenzo gets the Victory.—An Apostacy succeeds.—April 6th, Conference in Manchester.—Nine of the Twelve present.—Branches represented.—Officers set apart.—A cake for the Twelve.—The cake distributed.—A joyful time.—Orson Hyde speaks.—Joseph Fielding speaks—P. P. Pratt composes verses.—Brigham Young and William Miller sing.—President B. Young dismisses.—Poem addressed to L. Snow.

CHAPTER XI.

Brother Snow writes to Elder Pratt.—Baptisms.—A hint to the wise.—Caution and instruction.—Writes to the Star.—Increase in the Church in London.—Good word for Bedford.—Baptisms.—To Elder Pratt.—Sad news.—Sister Morgan's Death.—Her faithfulness and benevolence.—Her triumphant departure.—Her Husband is comforted.—Conference.—Lorenzo informs how subscriptions are obtained.—Singing in Tongues.—L. appointed First Counselor.—P. P. Pratt speaks.—Stanza.—Queen Victoria.—Presentation of the Book of Mormon to Her Majesty and the Prince Consort.

CHAPTER XII.

Brother Snow's Mission terminates.—Reports four hundred Members in the London Conference.—Is appointed to take charge of two hundred and fifty Saints en route to Nauvoo.—Embarks on the "Swanton."—The Steward's sickness.—Grows worse and worse.—Is given up, and nearly dead.—Sister Martin insists with the Captain.—Is repulsed, and again asks that Elder Snow may administer to the Steward.—She obtains consent.—The man is healed.—Baptisms in New Orleans.—The Company reaches Nauvoo.—Great Reception.—Waving of Handkerchiefs.—The Prophet present.—Reminiscences.—My joy in meeting Lorenzo.—How we associated.—Appeal to my Husband.—Their Interview.—The Result.

CHAPTER XIII.

Plural Marriage.—It tries the Prophet.—God commands, and he must obey.—Interview on the bank of the river.—The Prophet's words.—Gives Lorenzo a precious promise.—Lorenzo and myself visit our Parents, and return.—Lorenzo goes to Ohio.—Where he finds me on his return.—Close of 1843.—A social gathering.—Extract from Lorenzo's speech.—He organizes a company.—The General's compliment.—Lorenzo's experience in an unfortunate school.—Makes a success.—Mobbing at Lima.

CHAPTER XIV.

The Prophet instructs the Twelve.—They appoint a Delegation to seek a location for the Saints.—Lorenzo notified to be in readiness.—Change intervenes.—An unprecedented apostacy.—Joseph Smith's correspondence.—Calls for an expression from candidates for the Presidency.—Copy of Appeal.—Disgusted with their responses.—Offers himself as candidate.—Elders electioneer.—How Lorenzo succeeds.—Terrible news.—Assassination.—Mournful Elegy.—Meeting mobocrats.

CHAPTER XV.

Lorenzo a Bachelor.—The Prophet instructs him.—He changes tactics.—Marries.—Wives and Endowments.—In the Temple.—Wrath of our Enemies.—Expulsion of the Saints.—Cross the Mississippi River.—Intensely cold.—Snow storm.—Outfit.—Camp organized.—Moves forward.—Song No. 1.—Song No. 2.

CHAPTER XVI.

Garden Grove.—Pisgah.—Severe sickness.—Death of Elder Huntington.—Lorenzo called to preside.—Condition of the Saints.—A dilemma.—Lorenzo's policy.—How he succeeded.—A ludicrous and enjoyable entertainment.—Births.—Death.—Life incidents.—President Young's call.—Appointments.—Another wife.—Arrives in the Valley.—Ordained into the Quorum of the Twelve.—Builds a log house.

CHAPTER XVII.

The first celebration.—Lorenzo chairman of committee.—Description of Escort.—Moves from Bowery to President Young's.—Receives the Presidency.—Returns to Bowery.—Singing by the way.—Cheers.—Hymn.—Prayer.—Declaration of Independence read.—Speech by Silver Greys.—Ode sung by Silver Greys.—Shout of hosanna.—March to the dinner tables.—A rich feast.—Thousands of the Saints partake.—Gentiles en route to California, partake.—Scores of Indians partake.—Grandeur in Simplicity.—Gratitude to God.

CHAPTER XVIII.

The Brethren covenant to help the poor out from Nauvoo.—Lorenzo called to obtain means.—The poverty and liberality of the Saints.—One offers his only cow.—Anecdote of Captain Brown.—Called on a mission to Italy.—Increase of family.—Weight of responsibility.—No time for preparation.—Company organized.—Letter to his Sister.—The Journey.—Wonderful manifestations of the hand of God.—Nauvoo.—Carthage.—Arrival in Liverpool.—Meets the brethren.

CHAPTER XIX.

The Editor's reflections.—The responsibility of Lorenzo's Mission.—His trust in God.—His knowledge that God had called him.—Commendable characteristics.—How they are strengthened.—He writes to F. D. Richards.—Describes Genoa.—Armed men.—Priests.—Meets an acquaintance.—Curious interview.—Reflections.—Sympathy for the people.—Door opening for the Gospel in Piedmont.—Encouraging prospects.

CHAPTER XX.

Writes to President Young.—The Waldenses.—Incidents.—Calls Elder Stenhouse.—Cathedral of St. Lorenzo.—Sends two Elders to Piedmont.—Describes the Country.—Published "The Voice of Joseph."—Miraculous healing.—Sends for Elder Woodard.—Organization of the Church.—Prayer.—Officers chosen.—Mount Brigham.—Rock of Prophecy.—Testimony of an Englishman.—Invited by a Priest.—First Baptism.—Difficulties to meet.—LaTour.—The presence of the Elders only tolerated.—Can lift up his head and rejoice in spite of difficulties.

CHAPTER XXI.

Joseph Smith.—His anxiety on the subject of religion.—Secret vocal prayer.—A brilliant light envelops him.—Two personages appear.—The Lord speaks to Joseph.—Instructs him.—He has another vision.—Is shown where records are deposited.—Obtains and translates them.—Testimonies of the Witnesses.—Baptisms.—Church organized.—Temple built.—Gifts manifested.—Saints leave Kirtland.—Scenes in Jackson County.—Extreme Suffering.—Expulsion.—Memorial to Congress.

CHAPTER XXII.

Why the Saints are persecuted.—Persecutions in different ages of the World.—How Jethro came to Moses.—The Saints locate in Illinois.—A short season of peace.—Hostilities resumed.—Perfidy of the Governor of the State.—Assassination.—The Prophet's testimony that his work was finished.—The Saints are driven.—Their journey.—War with the remainder.—Extracts from Epistle.—Peace.—Perpetual Fund.—Labors of the Elders.—Publications.—The work of twenty years.—The power of truth.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Explanatory note.—Lorenzo writes to Elder Hyde.—Brightness of natural scenery.—Spiritual darkness.—A courageous minister.—Inscription attached to his portrait.—Hymn.—Drudgery.—Expression of gratitude.—A dream.—First Native ordained to preach.—Ordains Elders Woodard and Stenhouse to the High Priesthood.—The former to preside in Italy, the latter in Switzerland.—A Magnificent view.—Reflections.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Note by Editor.—Elder Woodard writes.—More Baptisms in Italy.—A singular scene.—A successful experiment.—Ten baptized.—Expressions from converts.—The Millennial Star speaks.—Encouraging reports.—Letter from Elder Woodard.—Extract from Elder Stenhouse's letter.—Opposition re-acts.—Good results.

CHAPTER XXV.

Onward.—No bounds to Brother Snow's mission.—He looks towards India and shapes his plans.—Writes to F. D. Richards.—Expresses his views.—Brother Woodard writes from Italy.—Brother Stenhouse from Switzerland.—Lorenzo visits Wales.—Untimely plaudit.—A Bedlamite night encounter.—Ultimate fate of the hotel and its Landlord.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Address to the Saints.—Responsibility of those holding the Priesthood.—Eternal prospects.—The best policy in governing.—Priesthood to be honored.—By benefiting others we benefit ourselves.—Must pass through suffering.—Must be pure and humble.—Need patience.—Estimation of F. D. Richards.—His wise policy.—Progress of the mission.—Expression of gratitude.—The Editor speaks.—Lorenzo's courage and faithfulness.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Editor's reflections.—Lorenzo writes to President Richards.—Completed Translation of the Book of Mormon.—Visits Paris.—Pleasure of meeting Saints.—Condition of the people.—Goes to Geneva.—Degradation of woman.—Meets Elder Stenhouse.—Interesting meetings.—At Lausanne—Professor Reta—Benefit of Elder Taylor's French publications.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Editor's note.—Lorenzo writes.—Leaves Geneva.—Over the hills.—Over the Alps.—A heavy snow storm.—Only two passengers in the coach.—Ten horses barely sufficient.—"Houses of Recovery" erected by the government for lost travelers.—Reaches Turin.—Meets Elders Woodard and Toronto.—Interesting "re-union."—Visions.—Healings.—Condition of Italy.—Brother Woodard's course commendable.—The Waldenses.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Editor's Remarks.—Lorenzo writes from Malta.—Naples.—Across the Mediterranean.—Detention.—Disappointed.—Makes virtue of necessity.—Samuel succeeds his brother.—Lorenzo explains cause of detention.—Revised edition of the "Voice of Joseph."—Prospects in Malta.—Michael and Lucifer represented.—In Gibraltar.—Good news from India.—Extracts.—Elder Willis writes.—One hundred and eighty-nine members.—Ordained two Elders.—More Baptisms.

CHAPTER XXX.

Closing the Mission.—Elder Jabez Woodard writes.—Leaves Malta.—Elder Obray succeeds him.—A vision related.—Commendatory of Elder Malan.—Extract from Elder Obray's letter.—From Western Hindostan.—Opposition.—What a soldier dared.—The result.—Military oppose Missionaries.—A Branch organized in Poonah.—The "Voice of Joseph," by Elder Lorenzo Snow.—"The Only Way to be Saved" republished.—A remarkable vision.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Close of Mission.—Bids adieu to the Saints and scenes of his labors.—Poem, in which martial and ecclesiastical labors and honors are contrasted.—Lorenzo returns home.—Chosen Member of Legislature.—President of Council.—Reflections.—Joy and sorrow.—Vision.—A covenant.—Charlotte's death.—Singular manifestation.—A little prattler.—Quandary.—Solution.—Social party.—Storm.—Drenched.—Lorenzo decides to build.—A struggle.—Proves a success.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Discourse by Elder L. Snow, delivered in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City.—Blessings proportioned to faith and diligence.—Plainness of the Gospel.—Naaman, the Assyrian.—How the Gospel found us.—The same as that of New Testament.—Power of the Gospel.—Testimony of the Elders.—What Philanthropists tried to do, the Lord has done.—Joseph Smith.—His mission.—Obedience brings knowledge.—Elders honest and brave as the ancients.—Knowledge not confined to our leaders.—Falsehood refuted.—The dishonest will apostatize.—Persecution promised.—The honest will receive the truth.—The Latter-day work will triumph.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Polysophical Association.—Lorenzo no one-idea man.—Character of the Association.—Called to write.—Responded.—Speeches from ten to fifteen minutes.—Time fully occupied.—How it was accomplished.—Everything high-toned.—The effect captivating.—Anxiety to become members.—Note by the Editor.—Nationality.—Where is the place of my nativity?—Where is my home?—Not in any European country.—Not even in America.—Not on earth.—Here I am a stranger.—My home, my nationality in the courts of immortality.—Address to parents.—Our mutual aim.—Responsibilities.—Necessity of cultivating children.—What they should be prepared for.—What they are to become.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

How Lorenzo spent the interval.—His next mission.—Difficulties to be overcome.—Lays out a city.—Description of the premises.—Builds a house.—President Young visits him.—Introduces a precedent.—Description of it.—Succeeded by railroads.—Gift of the Gospel.—The Patriarch's promise.—A sick man.—Faith in Lorenzo's administration.—A handkerchief is sent.—He blesses and dedicates it.—Is taken to the patient.—Placed upon him.—He recovers.—A letter.—In memoriam.—To Elder Porter Squires.—Expressions of gratitude.—Good wishes and blessings.

CHAPTER XXXV.

Necessity of recreation.—Lorenzo anticipates the need of the people.—Provides a miniature theatre.—How it was managed.—Moves to a new building.—A windstorm.—House blown down.—Everything destroyed.—Discouragement.—President J. Young speaks prophetically.—His prophecy fulfilled.—The Dramatic Association organized.—Lorenzo presides over it.—Bishop McQuarrie speaks.—Relates an incident.—The Social Hall erected.—Its uses.—Concerning circulating medium.—Checks as good as gold.—Within reach of all.—Assessment.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Mission to the Sandwich Islands.—Elders called home.—Walter M. Gibson.—Goes to the Sandwich Islands.—His perfidy.—Lorenzo, with other Elders, sent to investigate.—Take Stage.—Arrive at a mining town.—Incident.—New driver.—Favorable impressions.—Sings melodiously.—Swears blasphemously.—Drives furiously.—Perilous predicament.—Other perils.—Arrive at San Francisco.—At Brother Eveleth's.—Take steamer.—Arrive near the landing at Lahaina.—Boat upset.—Lorenzo and the Captain drowned.—Both restored to life.—Rejoicing and thanksgiving.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

Mission to the Sandwich Islands concluded.—Journey to Lanai.—Mr. Gibson.—Pagan superstitions.—Adopted by Miss Gibson.—Mr. Gibson reverenced by the natives.—His impudence.—Elder J. F. Smith's reply.—Elder Snow's prophecy.—Gibson cut off from Church.—Prophecy fulfilled.—Sermon on the ship.—An earthquake.—Return home.—Interview with President Young.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Lorenzo's gigantic movement.—In accordance with President Young's suggestion.—A social monument.—To be perpetuated.—Letter to Bishop Lunt.—Mercantile and Manufacturing Association.—Effort requisite.—First, Merchandise.—Second, Tannery.—Third, Woolen Factory.—Fourth, Dairy.—Fifth, a Horn Stock Herd.—Agricultural Department.—Hat Factory.—Between thirty and forty industrial branches.—Furnish employment for all.—Form of checks.—Labor received for capital stock.—Organization of the Association.—Directors.—Council.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

All was flourishing.—Attaining to independence.—Factory burned.—Sent a chill to Lorenzo's heart.—Instead of discouragement it was proof of the strength of their compact.—Everywhere manifest, even in the Children.—Union could not be broken.—Impregnability of their Order.—Deseret News speaks.—Commendatory.—Sympathy.—Calamity is proof of the strength of the Co-operative system.—Determination to rebuild.

CHAPTER XL.

Dedication day.—Fourth of July.—Gratitude and thanksgiving.—More than two thousand had suffered loss.—In six months the Factory is rebuilt.—Great rejoicing.—Dedicatory prayer.—Address.—Speeches.—Brigham City M. and M. Association.—A raid.—Railroad contract.—How a village sprang up.—An onslaught.—Confusion ensues.—The Grand Jury issues indictments.—Men drove to jail in a herd.—Great excitement.—Superintendent Dunn speaks.—John Merrill in custody.—Handcuffed.—Chained in jail.—Telegrams from the United States President.—How the Judge received them.—More about Merrill.—Left unguarded and unacquitted.—About the mill.—Dishonesty of Jurors.—Financial loss.

CHAPTER XLI.

To President F. D. Richards.—Burning of the woolen factory.—In thirty minutes all consumed.—Forebodings that the people would be discouraged.—Fears unfounded.—What was done within six months.—The people superior to the loss.—A raid follows the fire.—An unlawful tax follows the raid.—Statement of losses.—Business curtailed.—Checks canceled.—Eleven industrial departments in operation.—The mercantile flourishing.—Confidence preserved.

CHAPTER XLII.

Remarks by the Editor.—Lorenzo writes to George Q. Cannon.—Makes suggestions concerning the illegal assessment.—Letter two.—What Lawyer Sutherland says.—Letter three.—A description of Scrip.—How used.—Affidavits.—Correspondence.—Joseph F. Smith writes.—Lorenzo responds.

CHAPTER XLIII.

Stake Conference in Brigham City.—President B. Young expected.—Preparations made.—Flags hoisted.—Conference in Bowery.—Box Elder Stake re-organized.—Lorenzo calls the officers of the United Order together.—Nominate officers.—All are accepted.—O. G. Snow to preside.—President Young's fatherly counsel and blessing.

CHAPTER XLIV.

Oliver G. Snow speaks.—His maiden speech.—Performs a good deed.—Called to go to assist the emigration.—Encounter with Indians.—Mission to England.—Visits New York.—Arrives in Liverpool.—Goes to Manchester.—An incident relative to the death of Dickens.—Oliver attends a sectarian lecture.—Is challenged.—Attempts to respond.—Is repulsed.—The priest is disgraced and forsaken.—A visit to Scotland.—Descriptions.—Return to England.—Incomprehensible dialect.—Released.—Home again.—Ordained member of High Council.—Marries.—Mission to the States.—Visits Oberlin.—Ludicrous incident.—Visits his grandmother.—Preaches her funeral sermon.—At home appointed President of Box Elder Stake.

CHAPTER XLV.

Discourse by Elder Lorenzo Snow, delivered in the Tabernacle, Salt Lake City, January 14, 1872.—Progression.—The Fatherhood of God.—The perfect man.—The gifts of the Spirit.—His testimony.

CHAPTER XLVI.

Lorenzo's birthday.—A surprise.—His escort.—Enthusiastically greeted.—Address.—He responds.—Singing "Grandfather's Clock."—A hair picture presented.—Recitation by the children.—Autograph album presented.—Tables loaded with luxuries.—Dinner.—Singing.—Lorenzo makes a speech.—Parting Hymn.—Dismissal.

CHAPTER XLVII.

George F. Gibbs.—His parents receive the Gospel.—His early youth.—Employed in a printing establishment.—How he stood with his associates.—Had to fight his way to maintain his integrity.—Honored the Word of Wisdom.—Drew a prize.—Was highly honored.—Chosen for out-door preaching.—Compliments his mother.—Leaves home for Liverpool.—Clerk and book-keeper in Liverpool Office.—Emigrates to America.—In President B. Young's Office.—Goes to Liverpool Office.—Works there three years.—Home again.—Anecdote.—Masters Phonography.—Has been and now is Church Reporter.

CHAPTER XLVIII.

M. D. Rosenbaum leaves his native country.—In San Francisco.—Goes to Carson.—A voice speaks to him.—Goes to Salt Lake.—At Elder Neibaur's.—Baptized.—Called on mission to Germany.—In Berlin.—Attends meeting.—Is arrested.—Tried and sentenced.—Banished.—Returns home.—F. H. Snow appointed to a mission.—Reflections.—Strangers marvel.—What an affrighted Catholic said.—The captain of the steamer replies.—An incident.—Tired and hungry.—Why he goes to bed supperless.—A retort.—What a priest did.—The Channel Islands.—Released and returns home.—Expression of gratitude.

CHAPTER XLIX.

Discourse by Elder Lorenzo Snow, delivered in a meeting of the St. George Stake of Zion, in the Temple, April 5th, 1877; reported by George F. Gibbs.—Necessity for effort.—What the Lord said to Oliver Cowdery.—Regulation of temporal affairs.—Consecration and stewardship.—Preparation for building in Jackson County.—The United Order.—Plural marriage.—Responsibility of Presidents.—How confidence is created.—The necessity of its cultivation.—Desires for the future.

CHAPTER L.

Elijah Box says his parents embraced the Gospel in England.—Came to Nauvoo.—Elijah born in a turbulent time.—Moves to St. Louis.—To the Bluffs.—To the Valley.—Storm described.—Moves to Brigham City.—Struggle for an education.—How it is obtained.—Called on mission.—A great contrast in Liverpool.—Visits relatives.—In London meets with the Palestine tourists.—How poor Saints manage their Sunday clothing.—An incident.—Closes mission.—In charge of a company of Saints, leaves England.—Reflections.—Reaches home.—Engaged in teaching.—Presides over Improvement Associations.—Counselor to Stake President.

CHAPTER LI.

George Dunford.—When in his teens wants to earn living.—Decides on going to sea.—Leaves home without a shilling.—Applies to the Admiral of the British Navy.—Sent to Rio Janeiro.—Officiates as steward for the officers.—The brig Curlew ordered to England.—How he saved his means.—Returns home with plenty of money.—Meets with an Elder.—Convinced of the truth of the Gospel, and is baptized.—Ordained Elder, presides over two branches.—Emigrates to America.—Presides over the St. Louis branch.—In mercantile business.—Goes to California, St. Louis, and settles in Salt Lake City.—Appointed Bishop of Malad Valley, including six settlements.—After nearly three years, is released.—Expression of fatherly feeling.

CHAPTER LII.

From the Deseret News.—A re-union.—A dinner.—Speeches.—Songs.—Expressions of love and union.—Judge Burt reads a lengthy presentation address.—The editor comments.—The address.—Presents gold watch and chain to Lorenzo.—A testimonial of love, respect and confidence.

CHAPTER LIII.

Chester Loveland a modern Ajax.—Drives the Sheriff and his posse.—Holds a mobocratic jury.—Brings them to terms.—Captain in "Nauvoo Legion."—Comes to Utah.—Goes to Carson.—A scene of suffering.—Commissioned Probate Judge.—Is left to preside.—Mission to the States.—John A. McAllister called on mission to Europe.—Interesting time on the steamer.—Why the "Mormons" were driven from Nauvoo.—Is sent to the Orkney Islands.—Stops at his uncle's in Glasgow.—Missionary labors.—In Dundee and Newcastle-on-Tyne.—Visits London.—Returns home.—Is elected County Recorder.

CHAPTER LIV.

Discourse by Apostle Lorenzo Snow at the General Conference, Salt Lake City, April 7, 1882, Reported by George F. Gibbs.—Reference to Moses and ancient Israel.—Distrusting results the effect of ignorance.—Latter-day Saints have more faith.—No such thing as standing still.—Move on, trusting in God, the watchword.—Persecutions of the Latter-day Saints.—Move on and work on.—If we do our part, God will do His.—How the Lord overruled in our coming to the mountains.—Plural marriage.—Good resulting from the Edmunds bill.—The great worth of the Gospel.—Move on, move on.

CHAPTER LV.

Eli H. Peirce.—Called on a mission.—Thoughtless of religion.—Taken by surprise.—Throws aside pipe and novel.—What his associates said.—What Moses Thatcher did.—Eli starts forthwith.—In New York.—To the coal regions, Pennsylvania.—Great success.—A testimonial.—Baptizes and administers to sick.—The power of God attends.—Organizes branches.—Heavenly messenger appears.—Release.—A second mission.—On the frontier.—Baptized a Sioux.—From Deseret News.—A third mission.—With B. Morris Young.—Meets with success.—Opposition.—Close of mission.—Happy expression.

CHAPTER LVI.

Alphonso Snow.—Letter from President Taylor.—Called on mission.—In Tennessee.—Strange dialect.—Travels and preaches.—Organizes a Branch.—Opposition.—Ordered to leave.—A dastardly letter.—Opposition promotes good.—Professors of religion the persecutors.—What a Deacon said.—Presides over a Conference.—In Georgia.—Alphonso released.—Visits relatives.

CHAPTER LVII.

Introductory.—Letter from Lorenzo's son-in-law on the Sandwich Islands.—The weather.—Cane crop.—Five hundred and forty-nine baptisms.—King David Kalakauna is coming to visit the Saints.—Great preparations for his reception.—Houses decorated.—Inscriptions.—Breakfast is waiting.—The steamer comes.—The King is escorted between two files of men, women and children.—Cheers.—Introductions.—Breakfast, then to the meeting house.—Reception.—Singing choirs.—Dedication prayer by President Partridge.—The King speaks approvingly of the Saints.—Meeting adjourned.—A "big feast" prepared by the natives.—What composed of.—How the King was seated.—How he ate.—How they all, numbering one thousand, ate.—The King escorted to the steamer.—A national custom.—Splendid conference.—Number of the Saints.

CHAPTER LVIII.

Expression of appreciation creditable.—Lorenzo speaks of his wives.—Their nobility.—How he made choice of them.—His earthly prospects.—How they accepted the position.—The Editor explains.—They prove superior to circumstances of trial and hardships.—Are comfortably situated.—Step forth as mothers in Israel.—Their positions.—Questions to the defamers of Latter-day Saint women.—Lorenzo's independence of character.—Where credit is due.—Wife-missions.—Success attributed to God.—Testimonials of love and respect.

CHAPTER LIX.

Start for Fort Hall Agency.—Meeting in Portage.—In Malad.—Reach the Reservation.—Meet Indians.—Pitched tent.—With two Bishops Lorenzo visits the agent.—Describes Mr. Cook.—Lorenzo asks the privilege of preaching to the Indians.—Prevarication.—An incident.—A discussion.—Mr. Cook says nothing so much needed as a farmer.—Brother Snow proposes to furnish one.—Mr. Cook will not accept.—Grows uneasy and will not have preaching.—A grave responsibility.—Mr. Cook shoulders it.—The school teacher enters and "brothers" Mr. Cook.—The brethren start for camp.—Meet Indians.—Visit school.—Little Chief, wife and daughter.

CHAPTER LX.

In Bannock Valley.—Happy meeting with Indians.—What Lorenzo said to them.—Lamanite Elders speak.—All shake hands.—Lorenzo describes the Agency.—What the Secretary of the Interior says.—A comparison between the two colonies.—The one at Washakie.—How located.—Sunday School.—Meeting exercises.—How Lamanites are taught.—How presided over.—Their Co-operative Store and Sheep Herd.—White families.—A re-action.—An Adage.—The United States Supreme Court decides.—Telegrams to Hon. L. Snow.

CHAPTER LXI.

Circular to the heads of families.—Names of Committees.—Exercises for Wednesday, a. m.—Wednesday, p. m.—Thursday, p. m.—Friday, p. m.—Prompt attendance.—Letter from H. A. Hendrickson.—Extracts from eastern communications.—Weather propitious.—Children amused.—The hall.—How occupied.—Invited guests.—Table scenes.—Bachelor group.—The Re-union indescribable.—Article from Deseret News, by C. W. Penrose.

CHAPTER LXII.

Our father's birthday.—Prose address by F. H. Snow.—Poem by M. D. Rosenbaum.—Prose address by G. F. Gibbs.—Poem by O. W. Snow.—Prose address by A. H. Snow.—Poem by E. R. S. Smith.—Closing address by Lorenzo Snow.

CHAPTER LXIII.

Births and deaths of our parents.—Their children.—Genealogies of Lorenzo's wives, children, grandchildren, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law.—Mary Adaline's children by her first husband.

LETTER I.

National Monument.—Its construction.—One hundred and eighty marble statues.—Lofty spire set with thousands of gems.—Embossed globe.—Statue of Prince Albert.—Tower of London.—Queen Elizabeth's Armory.—Torture rooms.—Ann Boleyn.—Earl of Essex.—Lady Jane Grey.—Executioner's axe.—Instruments of torture.

LETTER II.

At Haarlem.—Two thousand people executed.—Wonderful organ.—A Dutch wedding.—Amsterdam.—A city on piles.—Formidable army of worms.—One hundred islands and two hundred and eighty bridges.—Palace on piles.—Diamond cutting.—Charitable institutions.—Antwerp.—Notre Dame.—Masterpiece of Rubens.—Royal Palace.—Brussels.—St. Nicholas.—Singular marriage.—Royal Theatre.—National Palace.

LETTER III.

Paris.—Visit to Versailles.—Bois de Boulogne.—St. Cloud.—Attend the National Assembly.—French glory.—Interview with the President of the French Republic.—Paris Register speaks of the Party.

LETTER IV.

From Paris to Lyons.—Burgundy and its wines.—Famous towns.—Lyons and its silk industries.—Weaving portraits.—Ampitheatre eighteen hundred years old.—Olive plantations and vineyards.—At Venice.—Genoa.—Statue of Columbus.—The cathedral of St. Lorenzo.—Chain that bound John the Baptist.—Turin.—Milan.—Cathedral of our blessed Lady, the grandest religious edifice in the world.—Attend high mass.—Arrive in Venice, the City of Waters.

LETTER V.

Rome and its population.—The seven hills.—Excavations by the Government.—The Forum.—Antony and Julius Caesar.—Where Virginius stabbed his daughter.—Famous obelisks.—Temple of Venus.—The Tarpeian Rock.—St. Peter's.—Call on the American minister.—The Vatican.—Michael Angelo.—Paul III.—Appian Way.—Seneca.—Baths.—Footprints of the Savior.—Naples.—Mount Vesuvius.

LETTER VI.

Naples.—Beggars.—Pompeii.—Earthquakes.—Herculanaeum.—Museum.—"Secret Cabinet."—Ascent of Vesuvius.—Pliny the Elder.—From Naples to Brindisi.—Hardworking women.—Corfu.—Religious service in a Greek cathedral.—Take steamer for Alexandria.—Egypt.—Turkish mosques.—Copts.—Mohammedan schools.—Male and Female attire.—Dervish worship.—Suez.—Red Sea.

LETTER VII.

Jaffa.—Traveling arrangement.—Place where the Ark was built.—House of Simon the Tanner.—Mohammedan funeral ceremony.—Plains of Sharon.—A night in the desert.—Battlefield of David and Goliath.—Rose of Sharon.—Mount Zion.—Mount of Olives.—Jerusalem.—Rachel's Tomb.—Solomon's Pools.—Church of the Nativity.—Studio of St. Jerome.—Shepherds' field.—Jordan River.—Dead Sea.

LETTER VIII.

Jordan River.—Sacred localities.—Fountain of Elisha.—Brook Cherith.—Plains of Jericho.—Bethany.—Residence of Mary and Martha.—Tomb of Lazarus.—Garden of Gethsemane.—Hill of evil counsel.—Mizpah.—Valley of Jehoshaphat.—Absalom's Pillar.—Mosque of Omar.—Solomon's Temple.—Mount Moriah.—Worship of Moloch.—Place of Lamentation.

LETTER IX.

At Athens.—Plains of Attica.—Hill of Mars.—Galilee.—Scriptural reminiscences.—Fountain of Dan.—Cesarea Philippi.—Damascus.—An unfortunate Architect.

LETTER X.

Famous Scripture locality.—Village of robbers.—Battlefield of Palestine.—Mounts Tabor and Hermon.—Nazareth.—The Holy Grotto.—Table of Christ.—Arab plows.—Cana of Galilee.—Arab school.—Sea of Galilee.—Tiberias.—Bedouin spinsters.—Residence of Mary Magdalene.—Serenaded by Bedouins.—Backsheesh.

LETTER XI.

The Stone of Unction.—The Holy Sepulchre.—The Chapel of the Angel.—Hill of Calvary.—The hole in which the Cross was planted.—House of Pilate.—"Behold the Man!"—The true Cross.—A terrible Massacre.—Turkish Guards.—Christianity despised by Jews and Mohammedans.—Farewell to Jerusalem.—Gala day.—Arab Agriculture.—Shechem.—Ferocious People.—The Olive.—Samaria.

LETTER XII.

Beyrout.—Protestant college and schools.—Embark for Constantinople.—Island of Cyprus.—Mount Olympus.—Sea of Marmora.—Arrival at the Turkish Metropolis.—Greek Independence Day.—At Athens.—Classical ruins.—Peculiar Greek customs.—Funeral ceremony.

LETTER XIII.

Munich.—Visit to a Royal Palace.—Statue of Bavaria.—Imperial Wedding.—Vienna.—The Arsenal.—Summer Palace.—The Great Exhibition.—Berlin.—Royal Palace.—Banquet Hall.—Monuments.—U. S. Minister.—Parliament.—Soldiers.—Moral condition of Berlin.—Hamburg.—In London.

LETTER XIV.

At St. Louis.—Fine scenery.—Visit relatives.—Poem.—Obtain genealogies.—Acknowledgment.

LETTER XV.

Home again.—Reception by friends.
