If you have recently joined or returned to the Church, your leaders or friends may invite you to prepare to receive a limited-use temple recommend.

Receiving a limited-use temple recommend is an exciting time for many new members and youth in the Church. During an interview with your bishop, he will ask you questions similar to those you were asked for your baptism. These include questions about your observance of the commandments and your testimony of the gospel. When you receive your recommend, you can plan a trip to the temple with your family and ward friends.

When asked what she would tell someone who is worried about attending the temple for the first time, Mosa Moloi from the Cosmo City Branch in Johannesburg, South Africa said, “There is no need to worry. There is peace in that house—the temple. All your fears and trials are eased at the temple. The temple is a glorious, peaceful place . . . the safest place or building you could ever find on this earth. We are all invited. Circumstances may prevent us from being ourselves and being in unity with our Father in Heaven. The temple is the medicine, hospital for our souls where our lights turn from dim to light beyond measure. ‘Fear thou not for [the Lord] is with thee’ (Isaiah 41:10).”

The limited-use recommend allows you to serve in the baptistry of the temple and to perform baptismal and confirmation ordinances for your deceased family members and others who have died. The temple provides jumpsuits and towels for your use. Each person has an individual locker and dressing room to change from church clothes into white clothing.

Mosa remembers her feelings when she first went to the temple; “The first time I went to the temple and could participate in church ordinance was a day never to be forgotten. I could not express how happy I was when I could be baptized for the dead. It warmed my heart that I could help those who couldn’t get the opportunity to be members of the Church or baptized and know the truth. . . . I felt the Spirit with me.”

There are ways in which you can prepare to enter the house of the Lord for the first time. Our prophet, Russell M. Nelson has said, “I like to recommend that members going to the temple for the first time read short explanatory paragraphs in the Bible Dictionary listed under seven topics: ‘Anoint,’ ‘Atonement,’ ‘Christ,’ ‘Covenant,’ ‘Fall of Adam,’ ‘Sacrifices,’ and ‘Temple.’ Doing so will provide a firm foundation.”

Being worthy to enter the house of the Lord is a great blessing in your life. You can receive your limited-use recommend at the start of the calendar year in which you turn 12 years old. Men must receive the Aaronic Priesthood prior to entering the temple. You may need to call ahead to make an appointment with the temple. Have your family or church leaders help you reach out to the temple workers.

President Nelson also said, “Because the temple is the house of the Lord, standards for admission are set by Him. One enters as His guest. To hold a temple recommend is a priceless privilege and a tangible sign of obedience to God and His prophets.”

As you come to worship and serve in the temple, your life will be filled with peace.
