David J. Whittaker, Hugh Nibley, Tinkling Cymbals and Sounding Brass: The Art of Telling Tales About Joseph Smith and Brigham Young ( 1991)

Foreword: Responding to the Critics

Even before the Church was organized in April 1830, Joseph Smith's prophetic claims were ridiculed and dismissed. Such attacks were both frequent and harsh in the earliest days of the Church, and they have not abated since. At the same time, responding to critics is also a long-standing tradition.

When the first anti-Mormon pamphlets and books began to appear, the Mormon response was to send missionaries to preach and testify as individuals in an effort to counter the falsehoods being circulated against them. [^1] Such an approach was appropriate as long as missionaries remained in the rural hamlets and small villages of New England, but when proselyting efforts entered the larger cities, oral responses were no longer sufficient to counter the mass market techniques of tract societies or the accounts appearing in newspapers with large circulations available to urban and cosmopolitan audiences. Thus Mormon missionaries were forced by changing circumstances to use the written word to defend themselves and explain their message. The Church was eight years old before the first specific reply to an anti-Mormon attack was published by Parley P. Pratt in New York City. [^2]

Thereafter, apologetic works were regularly issued by the Latter-day Saint press. Pratt himself authored a number of replies to attacks that had been published in England during the early years of the British Mission. [^3] He finally concluded that he had responded to all the serious attacks and thereafter refused to dignify these works further by additional rejoinders, [^4] but critics continued to repeat the same old charges, most of which focused on Joseph Smith's character (or what they considered a lack thereof) or on the Book of Mormon.

Much of this critical literature circulated throughout the British Empire in the nineteenth century, and Mormon missionaries had to respond to it in South Africa, India, and Australia as well as in the United States, [^5] though seldom did their efforts stop the tirades against them or their message. Most came to feel, like Brigham Young, that it was best to ignore the malicious stories constantly circulating about him. He explained his approach in a letter to Jefferson Davis:

I am often made aware of the utter uselessness, and folly of seeking to vindicate my character, from such foul aspersions as are occasionally raised against me; for the simple fact, that although, the foul aspersion can be bruited far and wide, held to the fluttering breeze by every press, and rolled as a sweet morsel under every tongue, yet when the vile slander is fairly refuted, and truth appears in the most incontestable manner, it is permitted to lie quietly upon the shelf to slumber the sleep of death, or if by chance, it should get published in some obscure nook or corner of this great Republic, be most religiously suppressed, as though in fear that the truth should be known and believed. [^6]

But as a sagacious leader, Brigham Young also knew that public attacks on the institution could and did affect its missionary work and therefore its ability to accomplish its divine mission. He therefore encouraged efforts to correct the developing negative image of the Church, especially following the public announcement of plural marriage in August 1852. The establishment of Mormon publications in strategic locations throughout the United States during this period seems to reflect President Young's concerns about the public perceptions of the Church. [^7] During this period, George Q. Cannon also came to see the importance of effective public relations, a lesson that he eventually drew upon in the editorials he authored in a number of eastern newspapers, as well as through George Q. Cannon and Sons, his own publishing house. [^8] So successful was this establishment that he sold it to the Church, who renamed the business Deseret Book Company. It remains a publishing arm of the Church.

The intense anti-polygamy crusade of the late nineteenth century also encouraged Church efforts further, as a positive public image seemed even more important in the era of aggressive anti-Mormon agitation and yellow journalism. As the subject of many dime novels in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Mormonism was seldom treated fairly or seriously. Themes of sensuality, vengeance, and even murder run through the various novels and even in the more serious histories produced during this period. [^9] Authors learned that a Mormon theme was one way to sell their literary efforts. In fact, so pervasive were the images they created that they continue into our own day to shape the public image of the Church and its members. Mormon defenders such as B. H. Roberts authored various replies and histories in this period, seeking to explain Mormonism to a generation that had been saturated with the negative reports. [^10] The advent of the motion picture era increased the opportunities for both the Church and its critics to expand their respective activities. [^11]

In spite of the seeming "respectability" that has come to the Church in the twentieth century, anti-Mormon literature has if anything increased in size and virulence. More than two hundred book-length attacks on the Church have appeared since 1945, and there is little evidence this flood will abate as we enter the twenty-first century, in spite of a number of competent responses to such arguments and authors. [^12]

The religious claims of Joseph Smith are such that it has been almost impossible to be entirely neutral about them, whatever the pretense of the authors. A review of the criticism and invective issued during the Prophet's lifetime suggests that almost every charge, moral and otherwise, that could be made against him was made while he was yet alive. If we add the name of Brigham Young to the list, there are very few attacks that have been made on the Church and her leaders that were not in print by 1877, the year President Young died. Thus the foundational evidence and arguments against the Joseph Smith story were a product of the first generation. Such an understanding lies at the heart of Hugh Nibley's analyses of anti-Mormon literature, most of which have been gathered into this volume. [^13]

Trained in history and interested in classical rhetoric, Hugh Nibley brings a broad perspective to his study of the writings critical of the Latter-day Saint movement. His knowledge of language (he was memorizing Shakespeare plays at age fifteen) and history has given him a particular advantage in studying texts. First of all, his approach is historical, tracing the chronology of those works critical of the Church. He sees that the core of anti-Mormon writing remains historical in approach. He suggests that anti-Mormon writing suffered in the nineteenth century from geographical distance (few authors came to see the Mormons for themselves), and that it suffers from historical distance in the twentieth century (few authors have been willing to consult the texts of Mormon history in the archives). Secondly, he shows how distorted even the Mormon accounts of their own origins become in the jumbled and confused works of the critics. Third, he shows that most anti-Mormon writing suffers from a ghastly inbreeding; that much of what continues to pass for good history is just a rehash of the old arguments. Finally, he sees that the heart of much of this critical work has focused not on the topics and subjects of Latter-day Saint history, but rather on the Mormon claim to modern revelation which most anti-Mormon authors reject out-of-hand.

In all his treatments of the flaws of the works of those critical of the Church, Hugh Nibley's sense of humor combined with a biting satire is often evident. [^14] He has been dismissed by some as flippant. His work can be dismissed if the reader does not penetrate to the heart of the issues at hand. Satire in the hands of someone like Hugh Nibley, impatient as he is with the poor logic and the uncritical acceptance of the undependable sources upon which so many anti-Mormon works are built, can reveal that the anti-Mormon king is not wearing, after all, any clothes. His essay "How to Write an Anti-Mormon Book" is an especially useful summary of the whole genre. [^15]

While Nibley has been somewhat concerned with these kinds of works throughout his career, the majority of his work on anti-Mormon literature was done between 1959 and 1963. During this time, he acted in part under assignment from Church leaders and perhaps even wished that his time could be devoted to other projects. Thus, his responses to anti-Mormon literature manifest considerable impatience. But he did devote serious attention to the critical literature, and his efforts are worth reading even though he made no claims to be a student of either American or Mormon history. He is best understood as a counter-puncher. He did not start the fight and he will not finish it, but his efforts buy time for others to prepare to enter the arena by showing that the opponent is hardly unbeatable but indeed has serious flaws in both the style and the content of his punches. The critic, in fact, seems to have rigged the game, or at least refuses to fight fair.

His first work in this vein was a response to Fawn Brodie's biography of Joseph Smith, No Man Knows My History, published in 1945. [^16] Nibley's response was No Ma'am, That's Not History. It appeared the same year and was reissued in 1959 and has been available in pamphlet format since. In 1959 his series " 'Mixed Voices': A Study of Book of Mormon Criticism," was serialized in the Improvement Era. In 1961, from July to November, "Censoring the Joseph Smith Story" appeared in the Improvement Era. In 1961 The Myth Makers appeared, followed by Sounding Brass in 1963. As early as 1965 he was addressing the criticisms of the book of Abraham, some of which he included in the early installments of his series "A New Look at the Pearl of Great Price," published in 1968 in the Improvement Era. [^17] In 1974, he again reflected on Fawn Brodie's work on Joseph Smith, suggesting that her subsequent biographies, especially her work on Thomas Jefferson, seem to share the same flaws that her work on Joseph Smith exhibits.

Because the main thrust of Nibley's work is to analyze the published criticism of the Church and its leaders, he does not focus on the manuscript sources of Latter-day Saint history. Most of the collections of the Church Archives were uncataloged or otherwise simply unavailable when he was doing his work on early Mormon history. As a polemicist, Nibley provides an analysis of printed literature; his work is primarily intellectual history that examines the larger picture rather than the minute details. He focuses on ideas rather than biography or just historical facts. Thus we should not be surprised to discover that, with the subsequent professionalization of the Church library and archives, the study of Mormon history has deepened our knowledge of a variety of topics discussed in Nibley's works. For example, recent work has been done on the more recently available accounts of Joseph Smith's First Vision, as well as on money digging and his 1826 trial, topics addressed by Nibley in several essays. His discussion of the use of the "Danite" theme by anti-Mormon writers was right on target, and he early drew attention to the negative portrayal of Mormons in the various graphic cartoons that appeared in these early works. [^18] Such new research has strengthened Nibley's arguments in many cases; it has corrected him in several others. [^19]

One of the consequences of his work on anti-Mormon writing was to encourage and deepen his own understanding of Brigham Young. Nibley has broadened our understanding and appreciation of President Young in a variety of essays on such topics as the environment, consecration, Zion, education, and dealing with the "enemy." Nibley has thus invited us to take a closer look at Brigham Young's ideas. [^20]

Much of his own work has focused on the sacred texts of the Latter-day Saints; only indirectly, and usually by assignment, has he analyzed the more critical literature. Even in his works in which he is essentially evaluating anti-Mormon arguments, he invites critics to take more seriously the basic claims of Joseph Smith. He has tried to remove the fog that has obscured the view for students of Mormon history. He functions as a classical apologist as he explains and defends the life and teachings of the prophets. His own loyalty to the gospel message allows him to separate the chaff from the wheat. He knows the scriptures; he knows that Joseph's name would be known for good and evil, but he has clearly chosen to be numbered among those who sought counsel from the Prophet. He has little patience with those who write to persuade others to dismiss either the prophets or their divine messages.

Many people have assisted with this volume. I am particularly glad to acknowledge their invaluable work, especially in checking citations and performing various other necessary editorial labors. They include Glen Cooper, Lyle Fletcher, Fran Hafen, Andrew Hedges, Alan Goff, Michael Lyon, Brenda Miles?, Tyler Moulton, Phyllis Nibley, Don Norton, Shirley Ricks, Stephen Ricks, James Tredway, John W. Welch, and Natalie Whiting. Jack Lyon of Deseret Book has been very helpful as this volume has progressed from manuscript to finished product.

David J. Whittaker

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. This was the counsel of D&C 71 and 73, specifically to the impact of the Ezra Booth letters that appeared in the Ohio Star [Ravenna] (October-December 1831). Even after the publishing in 1834 of E. D. Howe's Mormonism Unvailed, which reprinted the Booth letters, no printed reply was issued by the Latter-day Saints. Mormons did move to establish several newspapers, but no pamphlet literature appeared this early. On Booth and his letters see Max Parkin, "The Nature and Cause of Internal and External Conflict of the Mormons in Ohio Between 1830 and 1838," Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1966, pp. 101-20; and Dennis Rowley, "The Ezra Booth Letters," Dialogue, A Journal of Mormon Thought 16 (Fall 1983): 133-37.
[^2] 2. Mormonism Unveiled: Zion's Watchman unmasked, and its editor, Mr. L. R. Sunderland exposed: Truth vindicated: the devil mad, and priestcraft in danger! (New York: Printed for the publisher, 1838). In 1835 Parley had published an account of the rough treatment he received at the hands of an anti-Mormon mob: A Short Account of a Shameful Outrage, committed by a part of the Town of Mentor . . . April 7th, [Kirtland?, 1835?].
[^3] 3. His replies include Plain Facts, Showing the falsehood and folly of the Rev. C. S. Bush (Manchester: Thomas, 1840); A Reply to Mr. Thomas Taylor's 'Complete Failure,' &c. and Mr. Richard Livesey's 'Mormonism Exposed' (Manchester: Thomas, 1840); and An Answer to Mr. William Hewitt's tract against the Latter-day Saints (Manchester: Thomas, 1840).
[^4] 4. See his editorial comments in LDS Millennial Star 1 (April 1841): 312.
[^5] 5. An overview is presented in David J. Whittaker, "Early Mormon Pamphleteering," Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1982, pp. 236-320.
[^6] 6. Brigham Young to Jefferson Davis, 8 September 1855, MS in Brigham Young Collection, Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^7] 7. See the summary in CHC 4:55-68.
[^8] 8. George Q. Cannon bridged the first- and second-generation Mormon publishers. He learned the printing business from John Taylor; he honed these skills further under Parley P. Pratt; and he was further guided through the maze of the non-Mormon eastern printing establishment by Thomas L. Kane. In addition, he received regular counsel from Brigham Young.
[^9] 9. Recent studies include Jon Haupt and Leonard J. Arrington, "The Missouri and Illinois Mormons in Ante-Bellum Fiction," Dialogue 5 (Spring 1970): 37-50; and Arrington and Haupt, "Intolerable Zion: The Image of Mormonism in Nineteenth Century American Literature," Western Humanities Review 22 (Summer 1968): 243-60.
[^10] 10. On Roberts' work see Davis Bitton, "B. H. Roberts as Historian," Dialogue 3 (Winter 1968): 25-44; Truman G. Madsen, "B. H. Roberts after Fifty Years: Still Witnessing for the Book of Mormon," Ensign 13 (December 1983): 10-19; and John W. Welch, "B. H. Roberts: Seeker after Truth," Ensign 16 (March 1986): 56-62.
[^11] 11. See, for example, Richard A. Nelson, "A History of Latter-day Saint Screen Portrayals in the Anti-Mormon Film Era, 1905-1936," Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1975.
[^12] 12. See, for example, Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Joseph Smith's New York Reputation Reappraised," BYU Studies 10 (Spring 1970): 283-314; Dean C. Jessee, "The Reliability of Joseph Smith's History," Journal of Mormon History 3 (1976): 23-46; Lester Bush, Jr., "The Spaulding Theory Then and Now," Dialogue 10 (Autumn 1977): 40-69; Craig Foster, "British Anti-Mormon Pamphleteering, 1837-1860," Master's thesis, BYU, 1989; and Gilbert W. Scharffs, The Truth about "The Godmakers" (Salt Lake City: Publisher's Press, 1986).
[^13] 13. The main exception is the series "Mixed Voices: A Study in Book of Mormon Criticism," Improvement Era 62 (1959), which appears in CWHN 8:127-206.
[^14] 14. The first piece of satire published by a Mormon author was Parley Pratt's An Epistle of Demetrius, Junior, The Silversmith . . . (Manchester, England, 1840). It compared the actions of certain English clergy to the mob activity of the Ephesian silversmith in Acts 19 when his income from making idols was threatened by Paul's missionary work.
[^15] 15. It was first published in the 1962 Seminar on Joseph Smith (Provo: Extension Publications, Brigham Young University, 1962), 30-41, and later included in Sounding Brass; it is reprinted in this volume, pages ;ls;ls;ls-;ls;ls.
[^16] 16. A useful discussion of the various responses to Brodie's biography is Newell G. Bringhurst, "Applause, Attack, and Ambivalence—Varied Responses to Fawn M. Brodie's 'No Man Knows My History,' " Utah Historical Quarterly 57 (Winter 1989): 46-63. Marvin S. Hill has written two article-length critiques of her work on Joseph Smith: "Brodie Revisited: A Reappraisal," Dialogue 7 (Winter 1972): 72-85; and "Secular or Sectarian History? A Critique of No Man Knows My History," Church History 43 (March 1974): 78-96.
[^17] 17. See especially Improvement Era 71 (January-October 1968). In a talk in Oakland, California, in 1965 he also discussed these matters.
[^18] 18. See Rebecca F. Cornwall and Leonard J. Arrington, "Perpetuation of a Myth: Mormon Danites in Five Western Novels, 1840-1890," BYU Studies 23 (Winter 1983): 147-65; David J. Whittaker, "The Book of Daniel in Early Mormon Thought," in John M. Lundquist and Stephen D. Ricks, eds., By Study and Also by Faith: Essays in Honor of Hugh W. Nibley, 2 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and F.A.R.M.S., 1990), 1:155-201; and Gary L. Bunker and Davis Bitton, The Mormon Graphic Image, 1834-1914 (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1983).
[^19] 19. Recent studies on Joseph Smith's First Vision include Paul R. Cheesman, "An Analysis of the Accounts Relating Joseph Smith's Early Visions," Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1965; Dean C. Jessee, "The Early Accounts of Joseph Smith's First Vision," BYU Studies 9 (Spring 1969): 275-94; Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision: Confirming Evidences and Contemporary Accounts, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1980); and Marvin S. Hill, "The First Vision Controversy: A Critique and Reconciliation," Dialogue 15 (Summer 1982): 31-46. Useful research on the 1826 trial includes Marvin S. Hill, "Joseph Smith and the 1826 Trial: New Evidence and New Difficulties," BYU Studies 12 (Winter 1972): 223-33; and Gordon A. Madsen, "Joseph Smith's 1826 Trial: The Legal Setting," BYU Studies 30 (Spring 1990): 91-108. On money digging see Ronald W. Walker, "The Persisting Idea of American Treasure Hunting," BYU Studies 24 (Fall 1984): 427-59; and Alan Taylor, "Rediscovering the Context of Joseph Smith's Treasure Seeking," Dialogue 19 (Winter 1986): 18-28. A particularly valuable study of the earliest treatments of Joseph Smith and his religious claims in the public prints is Walter A. Norton, "Comparative Images: Mormonism and Contemporary Religions as Seen by Village Newspapermen in Western New York and Northeastern Ohio, 1820-1833," Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1991. Norton shows how the critical perceptions of Joseph Smith were very early established in the local newspapers. And further, owing to federal legislation that allowed free carriage of exchange newspapers between newspaper offices throughout the country, how the various newspapers were thus encouraged to reprint material appearing in each others' prints, thus allowing the negative reports to spread far and wide.
[^20] 20. These essays will appear in a future volume of the Collected Works of Hugh Nibley.
