“And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.” (Genesis 3:13)

 
Beguiled.

What does that word mean? 

 

For a long time I thought it only meant “tricked” or ” deceived” and it bothered me to think that Eve, a woman who was suppose to be one of God’s most valiant daughters, could be so easily duped.

 

I mean Moses wasn’t deceived or tricked by Satan when he tried to appear to him as a being of light (Moses 1:12-16) Why then would Eve have been any less skeptical of Satan’s claims? 

 

According to Hebrew scholar  Dr. Nehama Aschenasy the word translated as ” beguiled” does not mean what we think it does. As I explained in my essay  ” We Are Each Eve”:

 

  “Dr. Nehama Aschenasy, a Hebrew scholar, said that in Hebrew the word which is translated as beguiled in the Bible does not mean “tricked” or ” deceived” as we commonly think. Rather, the Hebrew word is a rare verb that indicates an intense multilevel experience evoking great emotional, psychological, and/or spiritual trauma. As Aschenasy explained, it is likely that Eve’s intense, multilevel experience, this ” beguiling” by the serpent was the catalyst that caused Eve to ponder and evaluate what her role in tbe Garden really was.” (The Gift of Giving Life: Re-discovering the Divine Nature of Pregnancy and Birth, pgs. 2-3)

It completely changes our perspective on Eve if, instead of thinking of her being tricked into eating the fruit, we see her undergo an intense multilevel experience before choosing to partake. It is important to remember that Satan had used the symbol of the serpent, a symbol of Christ, to try to deceive her into thinking he had power and authority. He also didn’t lie to her outright, he just told her half-truths.

 

  “And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die (Lie) For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. (Truth)” (Genesis 3:4-5)

Yet even his disguise and half disguised lies were not enough to deceive Eve into blindly eating the fruit. What Satan’s efforts did do however was  to beguile her. He made her question, made her doubt, and sent her on a soul searching journey. 

 

What was her purpose in the garden?

 

 How were she and Adam to fulfill God’s command to multiply and replenish the earth?

 

What was God’s plan for her? 

 

Was there any other way it could be accomplished? 

 

These may have been questions she struggled with in the garden and one can only imagine that her choices must have weighed heavily on her heart. 

 

Eventually Eve chose to eat of the fruit, but not because she was deceived.

 

  “And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat,  and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.” (Genesis 3:6)

Eve ate because she saw.

 

In her own words she explained,

 

  “Were it not for our transgression we never should  have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient.” (Moses 5:11)

Furthermore, Adam also ate because he saw and understood. He said:

 

  “Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy and again in the flesh I shall see God.” (Moses 5:10)

And when the Lord called them forward there wasn’t any blaming, just an account of what had happened. 

 

  “And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.  And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.” (Genesis 3:12-13)

Both Adam and Eve understood what they had done and they were both willing to accept the consequences in order to move God’s great plan of happiness forward. Furthermore, God didn’t curse them, that was reserved solely for Satan. What He did do was explain to them what the consequences of their choices were and give them direction for navigating the world He was sending them into.

I think that too often Eve gets vilified for eating the fruit, or is tagged as being easily duped, when really the truth is that what she did was an act of sheer bravery and faith. Her choice was a conscious, faith filled leap into the unknown, and her struggle in the Garden should not be overlooked.

 

Her choice made all other choices possible.

  -----------------------------------------
   Adam and Eve Statue, Villa Montalvo, CA
  -----------------------------------------

 

“Mother, who willingly made that personal journey into the valley of the

shadow of death to take us by the hand and introduce us to birth—even to mortal life—deserves our undying gratitude.”

 

—Thomas S. Monson
