Be bold! How often do we read these words in the scriptures as they relate to testifying of the gospel, to choosing the right, to standing for truth, to doing acts of kindness, and to serving others? Are we bold in sharing the light? Do we hesitate to share with our family for fear of rejection?

Remember Lehi’s vision of the tree of life? “And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceedingly great joy; wherefore, I began to be desirous that my family should partake of it also; for I knew that it was desirable above all other fruit.” As soon as he realized how precious the plan of salvation was, he immediately wanted to share it—and he was not afraid to be bold. He knew Laman and Lemuel were not always receptive but because of his great love for them, he shared anyway.

As a young college student, fifty years ago, my member friend was bold. She asked me directly the golden questions: “What do you know about The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints? Would you like to know more?” As I learned, understood, and gained a testimony of the gospel, I wanted to share it with my family—even though I knew that many of them might not be receptive. And indeed, they were not! But my desire remains strong to be bold. I am constantly thinking of ways I can boldly but gently invite them to come unto Christ.

Perhaps we could consider these suggestions:

Our words and actions reflect who we are. “Be gentle and loving in deed and in thought, For these are the things Jesus taught.”

Express love, support, and confidence in each family member as they experience joys and challenges. Gently point out the Lord’s hand when we see it and help them recognize it.

Be a good example in prayer and scripture study. Share the good ideas and promptings we have as they pertain to relationships and experiences in our families.

Serve them in love and joy. And when they ask us, “Why are you being so understanding and helpful?” We can say sincerely, “We are striving to be more like Christ and to follow His example.”

And when the gospel questions come, let us not be afraid to share those principles and invite them to come unto Christ.

Let’s follow Lehi’s example: with gratitude, love and joy let us all be bold! There are so many opportunities during each day to share the light. Let’s not miss a single one of them!
