OUR FIRST VISIT TO PRESTON--OUR FIRST COUNCIL IN ENGLAND, IN 1840--WE
TAKE DIFFERENT FIELDS OF LABOR--A WOMAN POSSESSED OF THE DEVIL--ATTEMPT
TO CAST IT OUT AND FAIL--TURN OUT THE UNBELIEVERS, AND THEN
SUCCEED--THE EVIL SPIRIT ENTERS HER CHILD--COMMENCE BAPTIZING--THE LORD
MAKES KNOWN HIS WILL TO ME.

On January 13th, 1840, after visiting Mr. George Cannon, the father of President George Q. Cannon, and his family, we took cars in the evening, and arrived in the midst of the Preston branch of the Saints, built up in 1837, by Elders Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde and Willard Richards.

We very soon had a pleasant interview with Elder Willard Richards, who had remained in Preston to take care of the Church, while the rest had returned home to America.

We spent three days at Preston in visiting the Saints, and on the 17th we held a council at Elder Richards' home in that place.

After consulting upon the best course for us to pursue, it was finally resolved that Elder John Taylor and Joseph Fielding go to Liverpool, Elder Woodruff to Staffordshire Potteries, Theodore Turley to Birmingham, Elder Richards wherever the Spirit might direct him, and that Wm. Clayton preside over the branch in Manchester.

After various principles of the Church had been expounded by the Apostles present, the council adjourned.

Elder Willard Richards had been called to be one of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, but had not yet received his ordination.

On the day following I parted with Elders Taylor and Fielding, who went to Liverpool, and with Elder Richards, who tarried in Preston. Elder Turley and I went to Manchester.

It was the first time I ever visited that city. I here first met with Elder Wm. Clayton. As soon as I had an introduction to him, he informed me that one of the sisters in that place was possessed of the devil, and he asked me to go and cast it out of her, thinking that one of the Twelve Apostles could do anything in this line he might wish to.

However, I went with him to the house where the woman lay, in the hands of three men, in a terrible rage, and trying to tear her clothing from her.

I also found quite a number of Saints present, and some unbelievers, who had come to see the devil cast out and a miracle wrought.

If I had acted upon my own judgment I should not have attempted to administer to her with the company present, but as I was a stranger there, and Brother Clayton presided over the branch, I joined him in administering to the woman. But the unbelief of the wicked present was so great, we could not cast the devil out of her, and she raged worse than ever.

I then ordered the room to be cleared, and when the company left the house, except the few attending to her, we laid hands upon her, and I commanded the devil to come out of her, in the name of Jesus Christ. The devil left her, and she was entirely cured and fell asleep.

The next day being the Sabbath, she came before a large congregation of people, and bore testimony to what the Lord had done for her. We had a large assemblage through the day and evening, to whom I preached the gospel.

On Monday morning, the devil, not being satisfied with being cast out of the woman, entered into her little child, which was but a few months old.

I was called upon to visit the child. I found it in great distress, writhing in its mother's arms. We laid hands upon it and cast the devil out of it, and the evil spirits had no power over the household afterwards.

This was done by the power of God, and not of man. We laid hands upon twenty in Manchester who were sick, and they were mostly healed.

On the 21st, I arrived in Burslem by coach, and met, for the first time, with Elder Alfred Cordon. This being my field of labor, I stopped and commenced work.

Elder Turley stopped in the pottery district some eight days, then went to Birmingham, his field of labor.

I received a letter on the 10th of February, from Elder John Taylor, who was at Liverpool, saying they had commenced there and baptized ten persons.

I labored in the Staffordshire Potteries, in Burslem, Hanley, Stoke, Lane End, and several other villages, from the 22nd of January until the 2nd of March, preaching every night in the week and two or three times on the Sabbath.

I baptized, confirmed and blessed many, and we had a good field open for labor. Many were believing, and it appeared as though we had a door open to bring many into the Church in that part of the vineyard.

March 1st, 1840, was my birthday, when I was thirty-three years of age. It being Sunday, I preached twice through the day to a large assembly in the City Hall, in the town of Hanley, and administered the sacrament unto the Saints.

In the evening I again met with a large assembly of the Saints and strangers, and while singing the first hymn the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and the voice of God said to me, "This is the last meeting that you will hold with this people for many days."

I was astonished at this, as I had many appointments out in that district.

When I arose to speak to the people, I told them that it was the last meeting I should hold with them for many days. They were as much astonished as I was.

At the close of the meeting four persons came forward for baptism, and we went down into the water and baptized them.

In the morning I went in secret before the Lord, and asked Him what His will was concerning me.

The answer I got was, that I should go to the south, for the Lord had a great work for me to perform there, as many souls were waiting for the word of the Lord.
