CLOSING TESTIMONY--GOOD AND EVIL SPIRITS

Before closing this little book, as a reader for our children, I wish to bear my testimony upon several principles, to the Latter-day Saints, especially to the rising generation, the young men of Israel.

First, I wish to speak of the spirits of good and evil. The Lord says, whatever leads to good is of God, and whatever leads to do evil is of the devil. This is a very important subject for us to understand.

The scriptures again tell us that there are many spirits gone out into the world; and that we should try the spirits, to prove which are of God and which are of the evil one. The New Testament says that every spirit that confesses that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and every spirit that denieth that Jesus is the Christ is anti-Christ, and is not of God. I will also add that every spirit that confesses that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God, and that the Book of Mormon, Bible and Doctrine and Covenants are true, is of God; and every spirit that denieth this is not of God, but is of the evil one.

I wish here to ask our young friends as well as the older ones, the question: Do you ever consider or contemplate anything about the number of evil spirits that occupy the earth, who are at war against God and against all good, and who seek to destroy all the children of men in every age of the world?

Let us reason together a moment upon this subject. It may be impossible for any man, without direct revelation from God, to get to know the exact number, but we may approximate towards it.

The Lord has said by revelation that Lucifer, an angel in authority, rebelled against God, and drew away one-third part of the hosts of heaven; and he was cast down to the earth and the heavens wept over him.

How many were cast out of heaven down to the earth? We suppose that the inhabitants of heaven here referred to were the spirits begotten of our Father in heaven who were to come dawn to the earth and take tabernacles. How many were there to come down and take tabernacles? This, again, may be difficult to tell, yet perhaps we may come near enough for the purpose. It has generally been conceded that there are about 1,000,000,000 persons on the earth at a time, though the late statistics make out 1,400,000,000 at the present time. But we will say 1,000,000,000. It is also said that a generation passes off the earth every thirty-three and one-third years, making three generations in a century, which would be 3,000,000,000 in one hundred years. Multiply this by ten and it will make 30,000,000,000 in 1,000 years. Multiply again by seven and it will make 210,000,000,000 in 7,000 years.

The argument might be used that when our earth was first peopled there were but two persons on the earth, and after the flood but eight souls were left alive, but the probability is that during the millennium the inhabitants will increase very fast as the age of children will be as the age of a tree, and the inhabitants of the earth will not die off as they do now.

But we will suppose that there were 100,000,000,000 of fallen spirits sent down from heaven to earth, and that there are, 1,000,000,000 of inhabitants upon the face of the earth to-day, that would make one hundred evil spirits to every man, woman and child living on the earth; and the whole mission and labor of these spirits is to lead all the children of men to do evil and to effect their destruction.

Now, I want all our boys and girls to reflect upon this, and to see what danger they are in, and the warfare they have to pass through.

These one hundred evil spirits to each one of the children of men seek to lead them into every temptation possible, to use tobacco, smoke, drink whisky, get drunk, curse, swear, lie, steal, and commit adultery and murder, and do every evil to cut them off from exaltation as far as possible.

On the other hand, the Spirit of God labors and strives to preserve all the children of men from these evils; and the Lord has given His angels charge concerning us, and they do all they can for our salvation.

But yet we all have our agency, to choose the good and refuse the evil, or choose the evil and refuse the good. The Lord forces no man to heaven; neither does the Lord tempt any man to do evil. When a man is tempted to do evil, it is by the power of the devil, who is an enemy to all righteousness.

I feel very anxious to have our boys and girls, our young men and maidens, seek for that which is good.

Whenever you are tempted to do evil, turn from it. Never make light of any of the commandments or ordinances of the gospel of Christ, and when you meet with any persons who do it, shun their society.

Avoid the use of tobacco and strong drink, for they lead to evil.

You are laying the foundation while in the days of your youth, for a character which will decide your destiny through all time and throughout all eternity, either for good or evil.

The Lord has told us by revelation (See Doc. and Cov. Sec. 130) that whatever knowledge or principle of intelligence we attain to in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection, and any person who gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, will have so much the advantage in the world to come.

Therefore, we should all strive to be diligent in obtaining intelligence, and bringing to pass righteousness upon our agency, and not wait to be commanded in all things, and great will be our reward in so doing.
