Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter I

WHAT THE OLD TESTAMENT IS

A Record of How God Worked with a Covenant People. We may define the Old Testament as that body of literature or collection of Hebrew scriptures which records in the form of history, law, prophecy, psalms, and wisdom the relations of God with covenant peoples, more particularly the descendants of Abraham. Stated in another way it is "primarily the written record of the origin, terms, and history of the solemn agreement which existed between the Israelitish nation and Jehovah."fn The Old Testament is, indeed, a vital and inseparable part of that one Book which we call the Bible. It provides an indispensable foundation for the New Testament and furnishes much preparatory material needful for that record's proper understanding. In fact, apart from the Old Testament the New Testament loses much of its meaning. As we study the Old Testament we shall be impressed with it as a book of religious faith in which inspired scribes and prophets have recorded the manner in which God attempted to bring spiritual enlightenment and salvation to men through His covenant people, Israel.

Back of the Old Testament is a vast variety of vital experiences, national and individual, political and spiritual, social and ethical, pleasurable and painful. Back of all these deeply significant experiences is God Himself, through them making known his character and laws and purpose to man.fn

The Old Testament has delighted, captivated, and enthralled mankind through the centuries and will continue to do so because it has recorded in beautiful form the truths of life and is satisfying to the yearnings of the human spirit.

Why the Name Old Testament. The title Testament is derived from the Latin Vulgate'sfn Testamentum. The latter in turn is a translation of the Greek word diatheke which was often used to translate berith, the Hebrew word for covenant. The Latin testamentum would be acceptable if it were the correct translation of the Greek diatheke. The latter has a number of meanings of which we may notice the following: (1) a covenant between two parties. (2) a last will, testament. The Latin testamentum has only the last of these meanings and is the proper rendering of diatheke, will or testament, not diatheke, covenant. We believe that it would be far better, therefore, to speak of the Hebrew scriptures as the Old Covenant than as the Old Testament. It should be remembered that the idea of a covenant between God and a chosen group of people is one of the outstanding characteristics of the Hebrew scriptures. (See Gen. 9:8-17; 17:1; 26:1; Ex. 19:5; Jer. 31:31-34.)

The Order of the Books of the Old Testament. If we examine our English version we shall find that it contains thirty-nine books in the order of that assigned to them in the Greek translation (Septuagint) of the Hebrew Bible which was made sometime between B. C. 250 and B. C. 150. But in the Greek translation the various books are grouped according to their content. First come the historical books (Genesis--Esther), then the poetic books (Job--Song of Solomon), with the prophetic books (Isaiah--Malachi) in last place. While this order is convenient for some purposes, we ask ourselves whether it is the one used anciently by the Jews in Palestine.

Let us turn to the New Testament and see if there is any evidence bearing on the order of the books of the Old Testament as used by Christ and, in general, by the Jews of His day. In Luke 24:44 we find the risen Lord saying to His disciples, "These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me." It is to be noted that our Lord divides the Old Testament into three divisions, the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms. If we examine a modern Hebrew Bible and compare the order of its books we shall find that they also fall into three divisions--The Law, The Prophets, The Writings. We further observe that the Book of Psalms forms the first and leading book of the last division. It is possible that our Lord singled it out as an especially good witness of Himself in that division of the canon.fn Now let us list the books in order under each major division.

The Threefold Division of the Hebrew Bible

The Law

The Prophets

Former ---- 6. Joshua

Latter ----- 10. Isaiah

The Writings

Inspection reveals that the Hebrew Bible has but twenty-four books in contrast with thirty-nine in our more familiar English version, the above list showing that I and II Samuel, I and II Kings, I and II Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah, and the Twelve Minor Prophets are each reckoned as one book. The facts would seem to indicate that Christ was familiar with a Bible having the same general order as that in our present Hebrew Bible. The late John E. McFadyen, eminent Old Testament scholar, emphasized the importance of the Hebrew order of the books as follows: "It would somewhat simplify the scientific study even of the English Bible, if the Hebrew order could be restored, for it is in many ways instructive and important."fn

New Testament References to the Hebrew Scriptures. The New Testament indicates that the Old Testament was the Bible used by Christ and His followers. They revered it and loved it, and made constant reference to it in their preaching and writing. A good example of this is to be found in the use of the Old Testament in the Gospel of Matthew. It will be instructive to note some references the New Testament makes to the Hebrew writings. Thus the Lord speaks of "The Scriptures," (Matt. 21:42) and Paul of "the Holy Scriptures," (Rom. 1:2) "the oracles of God," (Rom. 3:2) of "the sacred writings," (2 Tim. 3:15) fn etc. In a number of cases--Matt. 5:17; Luke 16:16, 29, 31; John 1:45; Acts 24:14; Rom. 3:21 are good examples--the Hebrew scriptures are designated as "the law and the prophets" by which title or appellation is apparently meant the whole of scripture. Sometimes the lone term "prophets" is used in a broad sense to include all the inspired writers. (See Heb. 1:1) fn

The Old Testament a Survival of Early Hebrew Literature. The Old Testament is practically all that survives of Hebrew literature prior to B. C. 350.fn Latter-day Saints know from our modern scriptures that the Lord has preserved much of Hebrew sacred literature, but the time has not as yet arrived to reveal it to His people. (See 1 Ne. 5:10, 18, 19; 2 Ne. 27:7-9). The Hebrew sacred writings have been spoken of as a national literature, and, while that is true, it represents to the writer the actual writings of but relatively few men. There can be no doubt that the Hebrew people had a rich and varied literature, but our Old Testament represents, unfortunately, only a small part of it.

The catastrophes that befell the Hebrew people through the centuries were probably responsible for the destruction of a large number of records of all kinds. Those which were saved may have been the ones that were regarded as particularly precious and necessary to the religious welfare of Israel.

A Record Compiled Over a Period of One Thousand Years. If it be admitted that the Pentateuchfn was composed in the days of Moses--a fact denied by many--we could say that the Old Testament represents the writings of men over a period of about one thousand years. These writings in turn deal with events that took place during thousands of years of time--indeed, from the Creation to about B. C. 350.

The Old Testament Has a Remarkable Unity. Despite the fact that the Old Testament was written or compiled over a long period of time, it has a remarkable unity. The organic unity which we believe it displays is due primarily to the fact that most of the men who wrote it were prophets or historians who understood God's purposes with Israel. Latter-day Saints can understand this unity in the same manner that they understand the unity pervading the remarks of our Church Authorities published in the Conference Reports from Joseph Smith's day to the present time. The unity which prevails in the Hebrew scriptures is best appreciated by those who are most willing to study them prayerfully and intelligently.

The Old Testament Comes From an Oriental Culture. While the Old Testament is a rather complex book containing history, laws, prophecy, psalms, and wisdom it must not be forgotten that it comes out of an oriental culture. The Hebrews were a Semiticfn people whose language, manners, and customs were much different from our own. Their thought patterns and psychology make it impossible at this day for us to completely capture the charm and spirit of the Old Testament in any English version, beautiful as the latter may be. Few of us may take the trouble to learn the Old Testament languages, but we can increase our appreciation by studying books in English dealing with the customs, habits, and psychology of the native peoples of that land and of other lands bordering the Mediterranean Sea.fn The real student of the Old Testament will not only attempt to learn its languages, but will fulfill the other requirements as well. The dividends are large in satisfaction and in spiritual development.

The Canon of the Old Testament. Inasmuch as the word canon is often used in connection with the scriptures it is well to explain it here. It comes from the Greek word kanon which in turn was possibly derived from the Hebrew word qaneh (a reed used for measuring; cf. Ezek. 40:3, 5). Originally the word seems to have been applied to an object which was used as a measure, a rule, or a model. Finally, it seems to have acquired a derived meaning which was applied to something measured or ruled. In a metaphorical sense in Greek it is equivalent to a "rule" or "standard" of what is considered to be right and best. Its technical use with reference to books of the Bible seems to have become current among Greek and Latin authors by A. D. 350. Its use by Athanasius, Nazianzen, Rufinus, Priscillian, Jerome and others will attest that fact.

Latter-day Saints may assume that the expression "the canon of the Old Testament" has reference to that body of Hebrew scriptures which is considered by the Church to be divinely inspired, the word of God when the original words of the authors are correctly translated, and which contains an authoritative rule of faith and life for its people. The only book of the Old Testament which the Prophet Joseph Smith considered uninspired, hence uncanonical, was the Song of Songs.

The Language of the Old Testament. All of the books of the Old Testament were written in Hebrew, with the exception of Dan. 2:4-7:28 Ezra 4:8-6:18 7:12, which are written in Aramaic, a language having many affinities with Hebrew. The Book of Jeremiah also contains a verse of Aramaic (10:11) where it appears suddenly and with no good reason in a Hebrew context denouncing idolatry. Two words of Aramaic also occur in Gen. 31:47.
