Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter II

THE SOURCES FOR OLD TESTAMENT STUDY

Importance of Sources. Sources are of the greatest importance to the historian. It is not our purpose in this chapter to present in detail the sources for Old Testament study. We do wish, however, to point out to the Latter-day Saint reader the general sources on which the Old Testament specialist draws, not to mention the additional literary sources available to the Latter-day Saint scholar.

For convenience we may divide Old Testament sources into three general groups. (1) archaeological and epigraphical, [^1] (2) literary, (3) comparative folklore and history of religions.

Archaeological and Epigraphical Sources. a) Hebrew, Aramaic, Phoenician, Akkadian (Babylonian and Assyrian), Sumerian, Ugaritic, Hittite, Egyptian, Greek, and Latin inscriptions. Many of these have been collected in convenient form for the use of scholars. The number and variety of inscriptions are constantly increasing as archaeologists and linguists pursue their hungry search for information respecting the history of Palestine and other Bible lands. [^2] The Mesopotamian and Egyptian sources are especially numerous and instructive. Professor Adolphe Lods, of the Sorbonne, Paris, says of them, "The documents unearthed in Egypt and in Mesopotamia are an inexhaustible mine of information and facts of vital importance for the understanding of the history of Canaan, both before and after the Israelite settlement." [^3]

b) Monuments. Such are relatively scarce in Palestine. The most notable are the buildings in Samaria and Jericho, the remains of irrigation systems and graves of the dead. The Arch of Titus in Rome may also be mentioned. Through the years excavators have uncovered much of interest in Megiddo, Beth-shan, Debir, Tell-en-Nasbeh (possibly the Biblical Mizpah), Shiloh, Bethel, Ai, Gibeah, Beth-zur, Jericho, and many other sites of importance. One is tremendously impressed with the exactness and care with which modern archaeologists excavate and report the results of their work. Those who would like to read an interesting book on Palestinian excavation are referred to Dr. William F. Albright's The Archaeology of Palestine (Baltimore, Penguin Books, Fully Revised, 1961). [^4] Dr. Albright is the world's foremost Biblical archaeologist.

c) Coins. These comprise the Jewish, Seleuciden, and those of the independent cities of Palestine.

d) Hebrew and other seals of state.

e) Pottery. Pottery from the various levels of ancient Biblical sites has been found in great abundance. It is of great importance to the archaeologist, enabling him to date with reasonable accuracy the remains of various cultures with which it is associated. In fact, pottery may be called the archaeologist's chronometer. [^5]

f) Various articles used in daily life. Such are oil and wine presses, handmills, baking ovens, mortars, spindles, stones used in slingshots, bone articles, metal utensils, and ornaments.

g) Religious articles . These comprise such articles as altars, sacrificial pillars, images, and amulets.

The Literary Sources. a. The Old Testament. This is, of course, our most important source of knowledge of the ancient Hebrews and their patriarchal predecessors. One of America's greatest Semitists, Duncan B. Macdonald, in his book, The Hebrew Literary Genius, said:

The contributions of the Hebrews to the records of History are no longer regarded with primary suspicion. With the passing of bibliolatry, the distinction between traditionalists and critics has also passed, and it has become plain that, through the racial tenacity of the Hebrews, there has been preserved for us in the Old Testament a unique and trustworthy key to the history of the Near East. It is now possible to read together Herodotus, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel and to profit by the comparison of these first-hand records. How exactly true this is any one may verify by turning to the volumes of the Cambridge Ancient History which touch even remotely upon the Hebrews. There it will be found that the old "critical" suspicious attitude towards the historical tradition of the Hebrews has vanished and that these records are given equal credence with those—often much scantier—of the other peoples. It is true that this is part of a general reversal of historical attitude from extreme scepticism to a recognition of a basal truth in national tradition. Homer has come back and with him the tale of Troy divine. We need not, then, be surprised that Sinai and Jerusalem have also come back, and that Moses is on his way back. [^6]

b. The Apocrypha. This consists of a number of uncanonical books written by the Jews during the last two or three centuries B. C. and the first century A. D.

As to the term "Apocrypha", this was used, in the first instance, of books containing hidden teaching not to be disclosed to ordinary people. The Greek word apokryphos, in its technical sense, "is derived from the practice, common among sects, religious or philosophic, of embodying their special tenets or formulae in books withheld from public use, and communicated to an inner circle of believers." [^7]

Dr. W. O. E. Oesterley assigns the apocryphal books to three distinct periods as follows: [^8]

Pre-Maccabaean:I Esdras, circa B. C. 300.Tobit, circa B. C. 200.Ecclesiasticus, B. C. 200-180The Hymn in the Song of the Three Holy Children probably belongs to this period.Maccabaean:The Prayer in the Song of the Three Holy Children, circa B. C. 168.Judith, circa B. C. 150.Additions to Esther , circa B. C. 140-130.Post-Maccabaean:I Maccabees, circa B. C. 90-70.II Maccabees, circa B. C. 50.Susanna, B. C.?Bel and the Dragon, B. C.?Wisdom, circa 40 A. D. Baruch, after 70 A. D. II Esdras, circa 100 A. D. Prayer of Manasses?

The Apocrypha contains material of great interest for the study of the Old Testament. [^9] It is particularly valuable for the study of later Hebrew history. Many things in it are true, but it also contains many things that are not true, which may be regarded as interpolations by the hands of men. (D&C 91:1-2)

c. The Pseudepigrapha. These are spurious works purporting to emanate from Biblical characters. They are books not in the Apocrypha in the Protestant sense, but are designated as apocrypha by the Roman Church, though also pseudepigrapha in the broad sense. They may be dated at about the same period as the Apocrypha. (B. C. 300- A. D. 100)

The chief characteristic of their form is that of revelation or apocalypse. In these books the author is supposed to say only what is directly revealed to him by visions or by angelic visitors. The term pseudo is applied to these works because the purported revelations are given not to their real authors but to their assumed ones, to ancient Israelite heroes or saints. The assumed authorship was supposed to give the writings more authority.

Their contents deal mainly with such problems as immortality, the Messiah, the day of judgment, and the new world to follow the destruction of this world, and the problem of suffering.

The pseudepigraphical books are very numerous and their number is increasing by reason of scholarly researches. The names of some of the most important ones are as follows: (1) Book of Enoch, (2) The Book of Jubilees, (3) Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, (4) Psalms of Solomon, (5) Apocalypse of Baruch, (6) Assumption of Moses, (7) 2 or 4 Ezra, (8) Book of Adam and Eve, (9) Slavonic Enoch, (10) Sibylline Oracles.

These works are of special value for the study of the period in which they were written, and since they refer to so many biblical matters the Old Testament specialist takes notice of them. [^10]

d. The New Testament. The New Testament is especially valuable as a source for Old Testament study because it is a witness to the way our Lord, His apostles, and others used and regarded it. The New Testament confirms and explains many Old Testament themes. Professor William Henry Green, great American Hebraist, in discussing how Christ and the writers of the New Testament viewed the Hebrew scriptures said:

They have not left us a list of these books, but they have clearly indicated their mind in this matter, so that we need be under no mistake as to their meaning. They give their . . . authoritative sanction to the canon as it existed among the Jews. [^11]

Quotations are made in the New Testament of every Old Testament book with the exception of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon.

Incidentally, scholars have been divided on the question as to whether the New Testament writers ever quote from The Apocrypha. [^12] It should be pointed out, however, that whatever the view taken, none of the Apocrypha are cited by name in our New Testament.

The New Testament will prove to be a very interesting and illuminating source of information to the close student of the Old Testament.

f. Philo of Alexandria. Philo was an eminent Alexandrian Jew who flourished about the time of Christ. His writings have been classed as "gnomic" or "wisdom" literature. He was very industrious and is said to have been the most voluminous writer in all Hebrew history. Philo came of a very wealthy family and had unusual opportunities to become acquainted with Greek life and culture. Indeed, he became a devoted admirer of Hellenistic philosophy and as a true Eclectic attempted to explain the teachings of Moses and the Israelites in terms of Greek philosophy.

The supreme passion and effort of his life was to form a synthesis of Greek philosophy and Jewish religion, but with chief emphasis on the latter. "Philo's chief aim . . . is to demonstrate the universal validity of Jewish religion as enshrined in the Old Testament, and par excellence, in the Pentateuch" (Kennedy; Philo's Contribution to Religion, p. 31). His writings exhibit great deference for the law . . . Philo devoted but little attention to the prophets, though he breathed quite freely in their spiritual atmosphere. [^15]

Philo's repeated references to the books of the Old Testament, and his comments thereon, make him of some value as a source despite his faulty allegorical methods of interpretation.

g. Rabbinic Literature. This literature consists of the scientific treatment of the Old Testament in the form of commentaries (Midrashim and Targums) and systematic works such as the Talmud literature (Mishnah, Tosephta, the Jerusalem and Babylonian Talmud) as these were compiled in the second century A. D. The rabbinical productions contain source materials of great worth to the later periods of Jewish history and also traditions that bear upon the earlier periods. [^16] Rabbinical literature is vast and difficult to handle even by erudite scholars.

h. Greek and Roman Classics. Such works as those by Herodotus, Tacitus, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pliny, etc., contain materials that serve as background for the study of the Hebrew records. Such sources often need critical evaluation. [^17]

i. Arabic Literature. The nomadic Arabs of Palestine and surrounding countries live in many respects under the same cultural circumstances as the ancient Hebrews did. Their literature contains much of value, therefore, for background in Old Testament study. The Arabic language, though secondary to Assyrian and Babylonian in this respect, is of great value in understanding the history of the Hebrew language. Arabic literature by no means reaches the spiritual heights of the Old Testament but Professor Duncan MacDonald made this interesting comparison between Hebrew and Arabic literary art:

The Hebrews, it has become plain, were simply an Arab clan which, under strange and unique guidance, entered Palestine and settled there. But they remained Arab, although they denounced the name. And their literature, throughout all their history and to this day, in its methods of production and in its recorded forms, is of Arab scheme and type. Every kind of literature in the Old Testament, with partial exception of the Psalms, finds a pigeonhole for itself in the great scheme of Arabic letters. Many even of the Psalms find their parallels in the poems of the desert. And, further, while the Hebrew literature has often a spirit, a variety of picture, and an essential life lacking in that of the Arabs, it is in comparison, small in amount. [^18]

j. Works on the Modern Near East. These comprise the modern literature that has arisen in consequence of the travels and researches of numerous scholars all over the Near East. The works of Edward Robinson, Charles Doughty, J. L. Burckhardt, E. W. Lane, and Gustaf Dalman are good examples. Such literature reveals that the whole Mediterranean basin is a modern laboratory in which much that is in the Old Testament can be studied at close range.

k. The Dead Sea Scrolls. The finding in 1947 of the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran, near the northern end of the Dead Sea, created a sensation among Biblical scholars. These scrolls, together with the important documents and numerous fragments discovered in the years since, now prove to be important sources for both Old and New Testament studies. Not only do these finds provide us with a complete text of Isaiah a thousand years older than any previous copy of a book of the Hebrew Bible known to us, but they also give us extensive materials of especial value to the Old Testament scholar in the fields of Old Testament interpretation and textual criticism. Linguistic studies can now be made which are bound to enrich our knowledge of the history of the Hebrew language to a considerable degree. [^19]

As a source, the Book of Mormon is of special interest to Old Testament scholars in the Church for the following reasons among others:

Even a fairly well read layman can recognize from what has been said the tremendous significance and importance of the Book of Mormon to Old Testament study. [^20]

m. The Doctrine and Covenants . Like the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants is another unique source for the study of the Old Testament. It is not in many respects as valuable and prolific a source as the Nephite record which fact we should rather expect since it deals mainly with problems incident to the restoration of the Church of Christ in our own age. Nevertheless, it does contain materials of the greatest importance for the understanding of certain parts of the Old Testament. Nearly sixty sections of the Doctrine and Covenants would be recognized by close students of the Old Testament as having some bearing on that scripture. And of these sections the following would be acknowledged as being outstanding in importance: D&C 2, 13, 20, 27, 29, 45, 68, 76, 84, 91, 98, 107, 110, 113, 116, 124, 128, 132, 133.

Some of the subjects dealt with in the Doctrine and Covenants that illumine the Old Testament are these: (1) The ancient patriarchs from Adam to Moses and Aaron, (2) the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, (3) the work and mission of Elijah as referred to in Mal. 4:5-6, (4 the origin and nature of Israel's religion including the law of Moses (cf. D&C 84:6-28), (5) the nature of the fall and the atonement, (6) the gospel given to man from the beginning, (7) the nature of the relationship existing between ancient and modern Israel, (8) the reason for plural marriage among the ancient Hebrews, (9) the Urim and Thummim, (10) the lost tribes of Israel, (11) temples and their uses. [^21]

n. The Pearl of Great Price. This collection of modern scriptures, like the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants, is an extraordinarily rich source for the study of the Old Testament. In its modern dress, the Pearl of Great Price is divided into three parts, (1) The Book of Moses consisting of eight chapters containing the visions and writings of Moses, (2) The Book of Abraham in five chapters which consists of a translation by Joseph Smith of Abraham's writings upon papyrus when he was in Egypt, (3) the Writings of Joseph Smith, comprising his "inspired" revision of Matt. 23:39-24:51 and extracts from his own history.

Some of the reasons that the Book of Moses is such a valuable Old Testament source will be gleaned from the following:

The Book of Abraham is important as a source to the Latter-day Saint student of the Old Testament for the following reasons:

The "Writings of Joseph Smith" contain some materials of great interest to Latter-day Saint scholars but since they are included in the next source we shall mention it is not necessary to consider them at this point. [^22]

o. The Documentary History of the Church by Joseph Smith. This is officially published by the Church under the title History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Prophet's work in six volumes was edited by President B. H. Roberts of the First Council of Seventy who provided an introduction and notes. [^23] Aside from revelations now contained in the Doctrine and Covenants the Prophet frequently makes reference to the Old Testament and gives explanations of passages of scripture of great interest. We shall give but two illustrations of what the Prophet did, since the material is scattered throughout the volumes concerned. In Volume I, pp. 12-13, the Prophet makes reference to the Urim and Thummim and what consitituted "Seers" in ancient times, not to mention explanations concerning Chapters 3 and 4 of Malachi, Chapter 11 of Isaiah, and Chapter 2:28-32 of Joel. The explanations given are very useful to the Old Testament scholar. In Volume II, pp. 436-440, the Prophet gives his views on abolition which in his day was a subject of burning interest. His discussion of slavery in the light of Gen. 9:25-26 and of slavery among the Hebrews is of great interest to us. In the course of this volume we shall often have occasion to refer to the Prophet's views on Old Testament topics as found in the Documentary History (DHC, hereafter).

p. The "Inspired" Revision of the Bible. Between the years 1830 and 1833 the Prophet Joseph Smith revised the Bible through the spirit of revelation. Unfortunately, he never lived long enough to complete the work in the manner he intended. The Book of Genesis is the best and most complete of his work on the Old Testament. It is a pity that the Prophet did not find time to complete his work from Exodus to Malachi as well as he did Genesis. Some of these books received considerable attention, but others received little or no correction. The work done by the Prophet will prove of great interest and worth to Latter-day Saint scholars of the Old Testament. [^24]

Comparative Folklore and History of Religion as Sources. The third general source, comparative folklore and history of religions, is used to a degree in the study of the Old Testament. In times past many Old Testament scholars were prone to assume that the strictly documented history of Israel began with the reign of David. Before that time it was assumed that one could depend only on very uncertain traditions. Modern archaeological discoveries have done much to change these views, at least from the days of Abraham. [^25] The scholar attempts, in part, to test traditions for their historical worth by studying the laws governing the evolution of oral tradition generally. He keeps in mind the possibility that certain traditions in the Bible could be borrowed from international folklore.

The history of religions enables the scholar to make comparisons of one religion with another, which in turn makes it possible to check the scanty evidence of the Biblical texts in certain respects.

Our time has seen a great development of interest in folklore and these modern studies of the ideas and usages of the masses of the people have reached the Near East. Collections have been made of songs, proverbs, stories—popular literature in the widest sense. The modern dialects of Arabic and Aramaic have been booked in texts, lexicons and grammars. The manners and customs, the superstitions (as we call them), religious usages and beliefs, have been recorded and studied. And when all this is done, the astonishing fact comes out that these peoples today, living there in Syria, reaching back into the desert and north into the mountains and south into Egypt, are in all essentials of fundamental thinking and living, one with the masses of people in the pages of the Old Testament. The Canaanites are there; the Hebrews are there; the Arabs are there; the Arameans are there; the Phoenicians are there—still surviving, although they may call themselves by other names. Even the tremendous fact of Islam and the apparently overwhelming invasion of the Arabs have changed little but the names. In consequence, these modern folklore researches have come to be of the first importance for the interpretation of the Old Testament. [^26]

Comparative folklore and history of religions as sources for Old Testament study must be used with great care and insight. Adolphe Lods is right in giving these words of caution:

It must be emphasized here that these methods must only be employed in a subsidiary fashion and with great caution. Our foundations must rest on the evidence of the monuments and the texts. Comparative methods can only prove fertile in results if they lead us along the lines of the documentary history, not if they undertake to correct it. [^27]

1 Epigraphy is that science which deals with the deciphering and interpreting of ancient inscriptions.

2 See D. Winton Thomas (Ed.), Documents from Old Testament Times (Thos. Nelson and Sons, 1958). A very useful and valuable collection for students of the Old Testament.

3 Israel (English ed. trans. by Hooke), p. 5.

4 See also G. Ernest Wright, Biblical Archaeology (Westminster Press, 1957); J. B. Pritchard, Archaeology and the Old Testament (Princeton University Press, 1958).

5 See G. Ernest Wright, The Pottery of Palestine from the Earliest Times to the End of the Early Bronze Age (New Haven, American Schools of Oriental Research, 1937).

6 P. 217. There can be no doubt that a reaction has set in against the extreme critical views that have held sway for so long in Old Testament study. See Lods, op. cit., p. 9; W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period from Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbook, 1963), pp. 1-23; M. F. Unger, Introductory Guide to the Old Testament (Zondervan 1951), pp. 42-43.

7 W. O. E. Oesterley, An Introduction to the Books of the Apocrypha (Macmillan, 1935), p.4. But see C. C. Torrey, The Apocryphal Literature (Yale Univ. Press, 1945), pp. 7-9.

8 Ibid., p. 25.

9 In addition to the books already cited see L. H. Brockington, A Critical Introduction to the Apocrypha (Duckworth & Co., London, 1961); E. J. Goodspeed, The Story of the Apocrypha (Chicago, 1939); Bruce Metzger, An Introduction to the Apocrypha (New York, 1957); R. H. Pfeiffer, History of New Testament Times with an Introduction to the Apocrypha (New York, 1949).

10 For discussions of the Pseudepigrapha the student is referred to R. H. Charles, The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament (2 Vols. Oxford, 1913).

11 General Introduction to the Old Testament (The Canon), p. 41.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Mormon . The Latter-day Saint Old Testament scholar will find the Book of Mormon an indispensable source for his work. To be sure, the Nephite record as a scource cannot be said to be "scientific" in the usual sense of the term. It has a spiritual origin that transcends the scope and methods of science. But science is not the only way of arriving at the truth. The experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith teach us that through the instrumentality of His servants, God may reveal truths which could not otherwise be made known to men. The scientist' may, however, claim the right to test, as conditions make it possible, the products of revelation, and rightly so. Thus, certain linguistic and archaeological tests might be made of the Book of Mormon as time and advance of science makes it expedient to do so. Most of the peoples with which it deals were of Hebrew descent, had copies of the Hebrew scriptures as recorded down to B. C. 600, and were obviously well acquainted with their contents. Even the peoples dealt with in the Book of Ether (the Jaredites) were probably of the same general race as the patriarchal predecessors of the Hebrews and had similar traditions. (Cf. Ether 1:1-5) Chapter One tells about a vision in which Moses speaks with God face to face some time after his experience at the burning bush (vs. 17). Here he learns about the creation of worlds but more especially about this earth and its inhabitants. Moses also has an encounter with Satan. This chapter has an extemely important bearing upon the origin of Israel's religion, one of the Old Testament's greatest problems. It gives Abraham's own account of his early life in Ur of the Chaldees and of his successive removals to Haran, Canaan, Egypt, and back to Canaan.
[^2] The Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates in possession of the Nephites contained the five books of Moses or Pentateuch, not to mention a "record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah." (1 Ne. 5:11-13). Chapters Two to Eight deal with the writings of Moses as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December, 1830. These chapters deal with important matters from the Creation to the Flood. They have an important bearing on the greatest literary problem of the Old Testament—the problem of the authorship of the Pentateuch. The Book of Moses supports in an interesting way the Book of Mormon evidence that Moses did write five books dealing among other things with the Creation and also with Adam and Eve. (See 1 Ne. 5:11; cf. Moses 2:1-4:32 The Book of Moses also throws much light on the fall, on the Cain and Abel episode, upon the ministry and work of Enoch, and upon events prior to the Deluge, not to mention doctrinal and textual difficulties that have plagued scholars for generations in the early chapters of Genesis. It gives much information about the nature of the early religion in Chaldea, about the founding of the Egyptian government, about the Holy Priesthood, and informs us that the written records of the early patriarchs had fallen into his hands.
[^3] The Works of Flavius Josephus. The works of Josephus are valuable in many respects as a source. He discloses the Old Testament views of a cultured Jew of the period immediately following the time of Christ, and is an important source of later Hebrew history. Many scholars feel that Josephus is guilty of exaggeration in his attempts to magnify his people and their scriptures in the eyes of the Gentiles; consequently, that his writings must be used with caution. "His work was of a general historical character, but Josephus was essentially an apologist and not a historian." [^13] There can be no doubt, however, that Josephus has been too severely criticized by some writers. [^14] The Book of Mormon from the first is Christ centered. It reveals that the gospel was in the world from the beginning and that our Bible should be interpreted in that light. Abraham teaches important matters pertaining to astronomy, philosophy, and the doctrine of pre-existence.
[^4] The Book of Mormon affirms that Israel was a record-keeping people from the earliest times. One of their great records, the Brass Plates, has been preserved on this continent and will in due time be revealed to the world. (1 Ne. 5:17-19). It reveals to us that Abraham was a seer and throws much light on the use of the Urim and Thummim which the Lord had given him in Ur of the Chaldees.
[^5] It throws additional light on the creation of the world.
[^6] It corrects certain misconceptions concerning Abraham and his wife when they came to Egypt, corrects certain textual errors in Genesis, and gives us hope that many important records in Abraham's hands are yet in existence and may someday be forthcoming.
[^7] Judges 7 Note the references to the Hebrew scriptures in 1 Ne. 3:3; 7:11; 19:23.
[^8] Samuel 8 Some scholars think that Daniel, Ezekiel, and certain other writings of the Old Testament appeared at a later date. The writer does not agree entirely with the views presented by them.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] 19 The following books on the Dead Sea Scrolls may be recommended: Millar Burrows, The Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1955); More Light on the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1958); Frank M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (New York, 1958); J. T. Milik, Ten Years of Discovery in the Wilderness of Judaea (Naperville, Ill., 1959); F. F. Bruce, Second Thoughts on the Dead Sea Scrolls (Grand Rapids, 1956); G. R. Driver, The Judaean Scrolls (New York, 1966); T. H. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures in English Translation (Garden City N. Y., 1964).
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
[^25] 25 See W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1963).
[^26] 26 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 1.
[^27] 27 Lods, op. cit., pp. 15f.
