Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter III

GENESIS, THE BOOK OF BEGINNINGS

Origin of the Name, Genesis. The first book of the Old Testament is called Genesis in our English version of the Bible. This name is taken directly from the Greek translation of the Bible (Septuagint) which we mentioned in the first chapter of this book. The equivalent in our Hebrew Bible is Bereshith which is the opening word of the book. It means, literally, "in beginning". Consequently, the word Genesis is a good name for the first book of the Bible since it deals with the beginnings of things such as the earth, life, and the nations of mankind, but more especially with the beginnings of the house of Israel.

Genesis, a Literary Masterpiece. The Book of Genesis is, by common consent, one of the great books of mankind. It stands by itself in the whole of our Old Testament and produces the effect of a single great work of genius. Gauged by every worthwhile standard it must be reckoned one of the noblest literary and religious monuments ever produced by the hand of man. Thus to quote Dr. Duncan B. Macdonald, the great Old Testament scholar:

Genesis stands thus apart not only in the literature of the Hebrews but in the entire literature of the world. It is safe to say that there is no other book which combines as it does the philosophical study of the fundamental institutes of human life, a psychological study of a family of marked characteristics, developing into a people equally marked, and a political and economic study of that people over against the rest of the world, personified in the great figure of an adventurer of their race; the whole told in clear, objective stories which can be the delight of children, yet with a depth of sheer thought behind them which has stirred and led the thinking of the world more deeply than have the speculations of Plato. [^1]

In short, we can say the Book of Genesis was to the Hebrews what the Iliad and Odyssey were to the Greeks, the Aeneid to the Romans, and the Legend of Beowulf to the Nordic races. Unless this book is understood and its spirit captured it is quite impossible, in our opinion, to plumb the marvelous depths of the Old Testament. It constitutes a fine preface to the volume.

The Philosophical Basis of Genesis. To one who has read the Book of Genesis for the first time it might appear on the surface that it consists only of a series of simple stories, beautiful, but nevertheless, just a collection of stories. On the other hand, one who has studied the book more deeply will find that its stories conform to a definite philosophical scheme. As Dr. Macdonald has also pointed out they are philosophical in basis, treatment and object. The narrator or compiler of the Book of Genesis expresses in these philosophical stories the more fundamental things of life. We may sum up the philosophical basis of the book under three heads, (1) the foundations of life and its institutions, (2) the rise of the covenant people of Israel and an analysis of the more human and spiritual characteristics of Abraham and his immediate family, (3) Israel comes into contact with the world; Joseph, a highly spiritual Hebrew, is sold into the world and becomes a savior to his people.

It will be noted that the author of Genesis does not think of Israel as a conquering nation or as a nation aloof or apart from the world. He is rather thinking of Israel as a people who are to become influential by sending their sons into the world to make good and hold their own in that world by sheer force of character. [^2] We gain from the book the impression that Israel has a spiritual mission in the world, namely, to leaven and refine it through righteousness and unwavering loyalty to principle. Only a covenant people—one true to God in every respect—could make good in this mission. Joseph who was sold into Egypt became a temporal savior of his people and in a sense typified the spiritual mission of Israel in its peaceful penetration of a world that did not know the true God.

The divisions of the Book of Genesis corresponding to the above philosophical scheme are as follows: (1) chapters 1 to 11, (2) chapters 12 to 36, (3) chapters 37 to 50. Of these three divisions it is easily perceived that the writer is more interested in the last two, since they have to do with the immediate origin of a covenant people beginning with Abraham.

The Origin of Life and Institutions, Gen. 1-11. As hinted above, the writer of Genesis (in its present form) is more interested in showing to Israel who its great ancestors were than to tell about the origin of life and its institutions. This is readily seen in the fact that the origins of life and its institutions are briefly and concisely handled in the first eleven chapters, while thirty-nine chapters are required to tell about Abraham, the father of the faithful, and his immediate family. Nevertheless, the writer is at some pains to show that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and in short, Israel had a great ancestry from the days of Adam. The early patriarchs were men of God and it was entirely fitting that the righteous Abraham and his descendants have an ancestry of great men. Therefore, this people had a great tradition and responsibility to carry on. It will be noted that there are two rather long genealogies showing Abraham's descent. These are found in Chapters Five and Eleven.

Chapters One and Two give an account of the origin of this world and of man. These two chapters are master-pieces and should be carefully read by the student. The fundamental meaning of creation in the original Hebrew is to "cut" or "shape". The stories imply that the earth was created or organized out of existing materials and what is of interest to us is the fact that the world as first created seemed good in God's eye. This, is turn, gives us a clue as to why God created a physical world. He created it for the purpose of making it possible for man to exist. It is not directly stated that God was glorified thereby, but such may be deduced from the fact that man was made in the "image" of God. Man is the important thing in the stories of the creation.

In Chapter Three we find a story dealing with the origin of sin, or in other words, the fall of man. In Chapter Four we have the origin of civilization and incidentally, the first murder. The murder of Abel by Cain was so important in the eyes of the writer that he gives special attention to it. Cain and Abel are commonly supposed to be the first children of Adam and Eve, whereas, all that can honestly be deduced from the story is that they are mentioned first. Then, as now, a murderer gets the headlines. In Chapters Six to Nine we have the origin of the Flood, or in other words, how the wicked world was blotted out and how again under the leadership of Noah the earth was repopulated after the great destruction. In Chapter Nine we have the beginnings of vine culture explained. Here also is to be found an account of a weakness in a life of the Patriarch Noah. As indicated in our first chapter, the Bible is a book of life and it points out the weaknesses of men as well as their strong points. Chapter Ten gives the Hebrew account of the origin of the various nations of the world. Chapter Eleven discusses the origin of various languages and gives a genealogy from Shem to Abraham in whom the writer is especially interested. A quick reading of Genesis will show that while the matter contained in the first eleven chapters was important to the writer it was nevertheless secondary to what follows.

The Origin of the Covenant People, Israel. Beginning with Chapter Twelve we find the narrator of Genesis going more and more into detail about the lives of his subjects. Since he is so interested in the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he tells as much about them as he possibly can—their travels, the crises in their lives, their flocks and herds, their wives and love affairs—even their relations with God are rather minutely described. What is the reason for this? Because it was important for later Israel to know as much as possible about Abraham, their great ancestor who covenanted with God, and Isaac and Jacob unto whom the covenant was confirmed. It is to be noted throughout, that these stories of the patriarchs are significantly religious. We shall find it convenient at this point to inquire into the nature of the covenant God made with Abraham. The terms of the covenant may be summed up as follows: (1) Abraham was to be made a great nation. [^3] (2) in him all of the families of the earth were to be blessed, [^4] (3) his descendants were to inherit Palestine as an everlasting possession, [^5] (4) his descendants were to be as numerous as the dust of the earth or the stars of the heavens, [^6] (5) kings and nations were to come of his descendants, [^7] (6) the covenant he made with God was to be an everlasting one, or as we would say, a gospel covenant, [^8] (7) circumcision was to be the sign of the covenant. [^9] Some modern scriptures have given us some very interesting sidelights on the nature of Jehovah's covenant with Abraham.

And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and priesthood unto all nations; and I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father; and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal. [^10]

The covenant principle of sacrifice is beautifully exemplified in the life of Abraham and is to be accepted as one of the great teachings of the Book of Genesis. Abraham was so faithful and anxious to serve God at any cost that he was willing to offer up on the altar his beloved son Isaac. [^11]

We shall not at this point say anything about Jacob and his family because he is to be dealt with in the following chapter.

Israel Contacts the World. Few stories in all the history of the race can compare in beauty and conception with the stories of Joseph who was sold into Egypt. In these stories it is possible for the author of Genesis to point out in an appealing form the way in which Israel as a body came into contact with the world. [^12] Joseph is pictured as an individual who unwaveringly sought after righteousness and to whom character was paramount. Through him the house of Israel is saved from destruction. Also through him Israel is magnified in the eyes of the world for Joseph has become a prince among men. He is a type of the true Israelite of the covenant whose mission it is to penetrate the world and leaven and spiritualize it. The more one reads the Book of Genesis the more strongly do the philosophical and religious conceptions of the author appeal to the emotions and intellect. Genesis is a book to be read and re-read and studied and pondered over.

1 D. B. Macdonald, The Hebrew Literary Genius, p. 96.

2 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 98.

3 Gen. 12:2.

4 Gen. 12:3.

5 Gen. 13:14, 15.

6 Gen. 13:15; 15:5.

7 Gen. 17:6.

8 Gen. 17:7.

9 Gen. 17:10-14.

10 See Abr. 2:9-11; D&C 110:12. Note the connection of ancient with modern Israel.

11 Gen. 22:1-18. See Jacob 4:5.

12 Israel was a name divinely given to Jacob. See Gen. 32:24-28. Later on it was applied to his descendants as a whole.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Mormon . The Latter-day Saint Old Testament scholar will find the Book of Mormon an indispensable source for his work. To be sure, the Nephite record as a scource cannot be said to be "scientific" in the usual sense of the term. It has a spiritual origin that transcends the scope and methods of science. But science is not the only way of arriving at the truth. The experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith teach us that through the instrumentality of His servants, God may reveal truths which could not otherwise be made known to men. The scientist' may, however, claim the right to test, as conditions make it possible, the products of revelation, and rightly so. Thus, certain linguistic and archaeological tests might be made of the Book of Mormon as time and advance of science makes it expedient to do so. Most of the peoples with which it deals were of Hebrew descent, had copies of the Hebrew scriptures as recorded down to B. C. 600, and were obviously well acquainted with their contents. Even the peoples dealt with in the Book of Ether (the Jaredites) were probably of the same general race as the patriarchal predecessors of the Hebrews and had similar traditions. (Cf. Ether 1:1-5) Chapter One tells about a vision in which Moses speaks with God face to face some time after his experience at the burning bush (vs. 17). Here he learns about the creation of worlds but more especially about this earth and its inhabitants. Moses also has an encounter with Satan. This chapter has an extemely important bearing upon the origin of Israel's religion, one of the Old Testament's greatest problems. It gives Abraham's own account of his early life in Ur of the Chaldees and of his successive removals to Haran, Canaan, Egypt, and back to Canaan.
[^2] The Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates in possession of the Nephites contained the five books of Moses or Pentateuch, not to mention a "record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah." (1 Ne. 5:11-13). Chapters Two to Eight deal with the writings of Moses as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December, 1830. These chapters deal with important matters from the Creation to the Flood. They have an important bearing on the greatest literary problem of the Old Testament—the problem of the authorship of the Pentateuch. The Book of Moses supports in an interesting way the Book of Mormon evidence that Moses did write five books dealing among other things with the Creation and also with Adam and Eve. (See 1 Ne. 5:11; cf. Moses 2:1-4:32 The Book of Moses also throws much light on the fall, on the Cain and Abel episode, upon the ministry and work of Enoch, and upon events prior to the Deluge, not to mention doctrinal and textual difficulties that have plagued scholars for generations in the early chapters of Genesis. It gives much information about the nature of the early religion in Chaldea, about the founding of the Egyptian government, about the Holy Priesthood, and informs us that the written records of the early patriarchs had fallen into his hands.
[^3] The Works of Flavius Josephus. The works of Josephus are valuable in many respects as a source. He discloses the Old Testament views of a cultured Jew of the period immediately following the time of Christ, and is an important source of later Hebrew history. Many scholars feel that Josephus is guilty of exaggeration in his attempts to magnify his people and their scriptures in the eyes of the Gentiles; consequently, that his writings must be used with caution. "His work was of a general historical character, but Josephus was essentially an apologist and not a historian." [^13] There can be no doubt, however, that Josephus has been too severely criticized by some writers. [^14] The Book of Mormon from the first is Christ centered. It reveals that the gospel was in the world from the beginning and that our Bible should be interpreted in that light. Abraham teaches important matters pertaining to astronomy, philosophy, and the doctrine of pre-existence.
[^4] The Book of Mormon affirms that Israel was a record-keeping people from the earliest times. One of their great records, the Brass Plates, has been preserved on this continent and will in due time be revealed to the world. (1 Ne. 5:17-19). It reveals to us that Abraham was a seer and throws much light on the use of the Urim and Thummim which the Lord had given him in Ur of the Chaldees.
[^5] It throws additional light on the creation of the world.
[^6] It corrects certain misconceptions concerning Abraham and his wife when they came to Egypt, corrects certain textual errors in Genesis, and gives us hope that many important records in Abraham's hands are yet in existence and may someday be forthcoming.
[^7] Judges 7 Note the references to the Hebrew scriptures in 1 Ne. 3:3; 7:11; 19:23.
[^8] Samuel 8 Some scholars think that Daniel, Ezekiel, and certain other writings of the Old Testament appeared at a later date. The writer does not agree entirely with the views presented by them.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
