Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter IV

JACOB AND HIS FAMILY—THE TWELVE TRIBES

Jacob Foreordained to Leadership. In the previous chapter we pointed out that behind the stories in the Book of Genesis there is a definite religious philosophy prevailing. The most important lessons in the book deal with Abraham and the beginning of the house of Israel, a covenant people. In this chapter we want to pay special attention to Abraham's grandson, Jacob, who was the immediate father of the twelve men after whom the twelve tribes were named. Jacob, so the narrator of Genesis attempts to point out, has a great role to play in the history of Israel. In fact he is the one who was first named Israel. [^1] In the study of Genesis some writers spend far too much time pointing out Jacob's supposed weaknesses—his deceit, guile, grasping disposition, etc.—and not enough in observing his good points, particularly his untiring efforts to find and serve God. In our opinion there has not, heretofore, been enough emphasis given to the fact that Jacob was foreordained to be the leader in his father's house and not Esau. The author of Genesis is very careful to point out that Jacob's mother, Rebekah, is told by the Lord in answer to prayer before the birth of her two sons that "the elder [Esau] shall serve the younger [Jacob]." The full answer to her petition (note the poetic form) is as follows:

Two nations are in thy womb, And two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels; And the one people shall be stronger than the other people; And the elder shall serve the younger. [^2]

If the above passage has any significance at all it is that the younger son, Jacob, is to "supplant" [^3] his elder brother, Esau. It is not unreasonable to suppose that Rebekah made known to Jacob what the Lord had told her and this fact, as much as anything else, spurred him on to claim his blessings. Unless these facts are constantly kept in mind we are in great danger of misinterpreting the narrator's intentions in telling about Jacob's methods of obtaining leadership. The writer of Genesis wants us to understand that Jacob was a mighty man and favored by God.

Jacob Obtains the Birthright and Blessing. We should remember that those chapters of Genesis dealing with the way in which Jacob obtains the birthright and blessing from his brother Esau are meant to be deeply religious in nature—they portray the fight of a great man to obtain God's blessings due him by promise and by good living. According to ancient patriarchal customs, it appears that the eldest son in the family ordinarily fell heir to most of the material possessions of his father as well as to his spiritual calling. In the present instance Esau would have been heir to his father's estate and also to his patriarchal priesthood. Jacob, as the younger son, could not hope to obtain them except through extraordinary means. The writer of Genesis is not so seriously concerned with the shrewd and deceitful manner in which he got them as Western readers are apt to be. To the true Oriental, Jacob's methods of obtaining the blessings would not be looked upon as sinful or unethical. From the point of view of the ancient writer, Jacob was justified in being shrewd in obtaining his blessings, since God had promised them to him. Esau, on the other hand, is pictured as an individual who despises his birthright and is concerned only with his immediate creature comforts. [^4] He is shown to be unworthy of the blessing because at heart he proved himself to be murderous and bad in other respects. [^5] Such an individual could not be a covenant man—one meriting the great blessings of God. Whatever view we may take of Jacob, the fact remains that he did obtain the birth-right and blessing and God confirmed them upon him in the same way that he did to Isaac, his father, and to Abraham, his grandfather. [^6]

The Wives and Children of Jacob. Because of the intention of Esau to slay his brother after the death of Isaac, Jacob is persuaded by his parents to leave his pleasant home and journey to Haran, far to the north, where he is to stay with his kinsfolk and take to wife one of the daughters of Laban. [^7] Before the young man leaves, Isaac gives him a blessing as follows:

And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a congregation of peoples; and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land of thy sojournings, which God gave unto Abraham. [^8]

The above quotation shows that Isaac realized the blessings of God would indeed be given to his younger son. So Jacob betakes himself of Haran. One night, so we are told, he had a vision in which the angels of God ascended and descended upon a ladder set upon the earth. Finally the Lord stood before him and confirmed upon him the blessings of Abraham and Isaac. On awakening, Jacob called the place Bethel, which in the original language means "the house of God". [^9] When Jacob arrives at Haran he falls in love with a beautiful girl by the name of Rachel. [^10] One of his kinsfolk, Laban, her father, promises that Jacob may have her for wife if he will serve him seven years. This he does but when the marriage night arrives he is given Leah, her elder sister, and is obliged to work another seven years in order to obtain Rachel. [^11] The stories concerning these two women and their struggles, one to win Jacob's love and the other to be blessed with children, are full of pathos and at times appear humorous to Western readers. They are, however, truly Oriental in character and to be appreciated should be interpreted from that viewpoint. It happened that Rachel, the beloved wife, for a long time has no children. That gave her rival, Leah, an opportunity—so she thought—to win the favor of Jacob by bearing children. As the story shows, Leah is not completely successful. The names she gave to the six boys born to her are all indicative of the strivings that she made. The boys and the meanings of their names are given herewith in chronological order: Reuben (see! a son); Simeon (hearing); Levi (joined); Judah (praise); Issachar (hired); Zebulun (habitation). The reader is advised to look over the story concerning the birth of Leah's children with the meaning of these names before him. [^12] It will be found very enjoyable. When at the first Rachel finds that she is to have no children, though she is Jacob's beloved, she fears that the curse of God is upon her. Oriental women to this day consider it a curse of God not to have children. According to the law of the time she could give one of her handmaidens to Jacob, who might have children by her. She gave to him her maid Bilhah, who bore two boys, Dan (a judge) and Naphtali (my wrestling). [^13] Leah, not to be outdone, gives to Jacob her maid, Zilpah, who also bore two children, Gad (fortune) and Asher (happy). [^14] Finally, so the story points out, Rachel gives birth to a son, Joseph (added), and just prior to her death another is born to her who is called Benjamin (son of the right hand). [^15] The stories of these women and their children are full of human interest and that is exactly what the writer of Genesis wants them to be. He wants later Israel to understand all the details of the origin of the twelve tribes because they are of such tremendous significance. After working twenty years for Laban, Jacob leads his family to the land of his nativity. The story of his meeting with Esau is dramatically narrated and shows the practical wisdom of Jacob in meeting the issues of life. Through all these stories it is to be carefully noted that Rachel, the beloved wife, and her son Joseph, received preferential treatment and indeed, if we are to understand in part the prominent role played by the tribe of Ephraim in the Old Testament, that fact must be clearly understood. [^16]

incident and others of its kind because they are intended by the writer to reveal the extremely close relations existing between God and those patriarchs who covenanted with him.

Joseph, Prince Among Men. In the Joseph stories we have remarkable accounts of the character and work of the favorite son of Jacob by his beloved wife, Rachel. [^17] Joseph is portrayed from the first as a visionary man and his brethren make him the butt of their ridicule because they think that he is attempting to show his superiority to them. In this connection there is one phrase in Genesis, not often referred to, that it will be well for us to quote. Joseph's father says to him, "What is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down to thee to the earth?" The account goes on to say, "And his brethren envied him; but his father kept the saying in mind." The little phrase "kept the saying in mind" shows that the writer of the story wanted us to keep in mind the apparent prophetic qualities of the father who seemed to have a foreboding or forewarning of the greatness of his son. The Joseph stories are magnificent for the simple reason that they deal with a great man—a prince among men—and are told in a manner that befits the beautiful character of the hero. Above everything else, we see in them the integrity, chastity, honesty and sterling worth of Jacob's favorite son. They will remain undimmed for all ages to come.

While in Egypt as a great ruler, Joseph marries Asenath, the daughter of the priest of On. By her he has two sons, Manasseh (forgetting), and Ephraim (fruitful). [^18] Our understanding of Genesis and of the Old Testament would be very incomplete without an explanation of the position of Joseph's two boys among the twelve tribes of Israel. As we have already seen, Jacob's wives had borne him twelve sons and yet one reads in the Old Testament that Joseph's two sons are reckoned among the twelve whose names are applied to the tribes of Israel. Altogether there were fourteen men to be considered. How, out of these fourteen men, do we get twelve names selected? In Gen. 48:1-6 we find that Joseph's two sons were blessed by Jacob and literally adopted by him. Verse 5 reads,

And now thy two sons, who were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simeon shall be mine. (Italics ours.)

It is clear that Joseph's two sons were literally adopted by his father. 1 Chr. 5:1-2 indicates that Ephraim took the place of Reuben at the head of the twelve tribes. Reuben was not displaced from the group of twelve, but his position at the head was taken away because of his wicked actions with respect to his father. Manasseh also finds his place among the twelve. [^19] Joseph's place among the twelve and the blessings accompanying it were swallowed up in the blessings of his two sons so there are but thirteen left to be accounted for. Later on, as the Pentateuch [^20] indicates, Levi was chosen to have the Lord for an inheritance and not to have an inheritance in the same sense as the others. [^21] This leaves but twelve of the patriarchs to be formally accounted for and they are the progenitors of the so-called twelve tribes of Israel. Throughout the Old Testament the tribe of Ephraim is constantly recognized as having a preeminent position among the tribes of Israel. [^22] Judah, from whence the Christ was to come, was also given a prominent place among the twelve sons of Jacob. [^23]

1 Gen. 32:28.

2 Gen. 25:23.

3 "Supplanter" is one meaning assigned to Jacob's name. See Gen. 27:36.

4 Gen. 25:28-34.

5 Gen. 27:41-42; 27:46; 28:6

6 Gen. 28:10-15; 32:2, 24-30.

7 Gen. 27:43-45; 28:1

8 Gen. 28:3-4.

9 Gen. 28:10-19.

10 A shepherdess. Incidentally, her name means "ewe".

11 Gen. 29:16-30.

12 Gen. 29:31-35; 30:17

13 Gen. 30:1-8.

14 Gen. 30:9-13.

15 Gen. 30:22-24; 35:16

16 Ephraim was Joseph's son.

17 Gen. 32:24-31.

18 That is, He who strives with God.

19 Gen. 37-50.

20 Gen. 41:50-52; 46:20, 27.

21 See Gen. 35:22; 48:15; 49:3, 4.

22 The first five books of the Old Testament.

23 Deut. 10:8, 9; see also Josh. 13:14, 33.

24 See, e. g., Isa. 7:8, 9, 17; Jer. 31:9.

25 Gen. 49:8-12; 1 Chr. 5:2. If modern Israel will keep the above facts in mind it can understand and interpret correctly its connection with ancient Israel, for the two are spiritually akin. The Ephraim of our day, by virtue of its position at the head of Jacob's family, has been chosen to carry the gospel to the world. This fact should make Genesis and the Old Testament take on meaning and vitality for us.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Mormon . The Latter-day Saint Old Testament scholar will find the Book of Mormon an indispensable source for his work. To be sure, the Nephite record as a scource cannot be said to be "scientific" in the usual sense of the term. It has a spiritual origin that transcends the scope and methods of science. But science is not the only way of arriving at the truth. The experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith teach us that through the instrumentality of His servants, God may reveal truths which could not otherwise be made known to men. The scientist' may, however, claim the right to test, as conditions make it possible, the products of revelation, and rightly so. Thus, certain linguistic and archaeological tests might be made of the Book of Mormon as time and advance of science makes it expedient to do so. Most of the peoples with which it deals were of Hebrew descent, had copies of the Hebrew scriptures as recorded down to B. C. 600, and were obviously well acquainted with their contents. Even the peoples dealt with in the Book of Ether (the Jaredites) were probably of the same general race as the patriarchal predecessors of the Hebrews and had similar traditions. (Cf. Ether 1:1-5) Chapter One tells about a vision in which Moses speaks with God face to face some time after his experience at the burning bush (vs. 17). Here he learns about the creation of worlds but more especially about this earth and its inhabitants. Moses also has an encounter with Satan. This chapter has an extemely important bearing upon the origin of Israel's religion, one of the Old Testament's greatest problems. It gives Abraham's own account of his early life in Ur of the Chaldees and of his successive removals to Haran, Canaan, Egypt, and back to Canaan.
[^2] The Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates in possession of the Nephites contained the five books of Moses or Pentateuch, not to mention a "record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah." (1 Ne. 5:11-13). Chapters Two to Eight deal with the writings of Moses as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December, 1830. These chapters deal with important matters from the Creation to the Flood. They have an important bearing on the greatest literary problem of the Old Testament—the problem of the authorship of the Pentateuch. The Book of Moses supports in an interesting way the Book of Mormon evidence that Moses did write five books dealing among other things with the Creation and also with Adam and Eve. (See 1 Ne. 5:11; cf. Moses 2:1-4:32 The Book of Moses also throws much light on the fall, on the Cain and Abel episode, upon the ministry and work of Enoch, and upon events prior to the Deluge, not to mention doctrinal and textual difficulties that have plagued scholars for generations in the early chapters of Genesis. It gives much information about the nature of the early religion in Chaldea, about the founding of the Egyptian government, about the Holy Priesthood, and informs us that the written records of the early patriarchs had fallen into his hands.
[^3] The Works of Flavius Josephus. The works of Josephus are valuable in many respects as a source. He discloses the Old Testament views of a cultured Jew of the period immediately following the time of Christ, and is an important source of later Hebrew history. Many scholars feel that Josephus is guilty of exaggeration in his attempts to magnify his people and their scriptures in the eyes of the Gentiles; consequently, that his writings must be used with caution. "His work was of a general historical character, but Josephus was essentially an apologist and not a historian." [^13] There can be no doubt, however, that Josephus has been too severely criticized by some writers. [^14] The Book of Mormon from the first is Christ centered. It reveals that the gospel was in the world from the beginning and that our Bible should be interpreted in that light. Abraham teaches important matters pertaining to astronomy, philosophy, and the doctrine of pre-existence.
[^4] The Book of Mormon affirms that Israel was a record-keeping people from the earliest times. One of their great records, the Brass Plates, has been preserved on this continent and will in due time be revealed to the world. (1 Ne. 5:17-19). It reveals to us that Abraham was a seer and throws much light on the use of the Urim and Thummim which the Lord had given him in Ur of the Chaldees.
[^5] It throws additional light on the creation of the world.
[^6] It corrects certain misconceptions concerning Abraham and his wife when they came to Egypt, corrects certain textual errors in Genesis, and gives us hope that many important records in Abraham's hands are yet in existence and may someday be forthcoming.
[^7] Judges 7 Note the references to the Hebrew scriptures in 1 Ne. 3:3; 7:11; 19:23.
[^8] Samuel 8 Some scholars think that Daniel, Ezekiel, and certain other writings of the Old Testament appeared at a later date. The writer does not agree entirely with the views presented by them.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] 19 The following books on the Dead Sea Scrolls may be recommended: Millar Burrows, The Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1955); More Light on the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1958); Frank M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (New York, 1958); J. T. Milik, Ten Years of Discovery in the Wilderness of Judaea (Naperville, Ill., 1959); F. F. Bruce, Second Thoughts on the Dead Sea Scrolls (Grand Rapids, 1956); G. R. Driver, The Judaean Scrolls (New York, 1966); T. H. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures in English Translation (Garden City N. Y., 1964).
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
