Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter V

MOSES—ISRAEL'S GREAT LAWGIVER

Importance of Moses. Among Western Peoples the name of Moses is a household word. Revered and honored, his name and work have come down through the centuries. He has been spoken of as the founder of the Hebrew nation in the sense that he welded the tribes of Israel together and gave them a national self-consciousness. In fact, the Hebrews are a people still to be reckoned with. Their Jewish representatives are to be found in all parts of the world. They are making their contributions to society in numerous ways. Their religion, Judaism, which has made them what they are, is one of the great world religions. Historically, Christianity and Islam, two other great world religions, have very close connections with the Hebrew people. Thousands of Christian peoples think of Moses as the author or compiler of the first five books of the Old Testament. They especially think of him in connection with the Ten Commandments. Moses is looked upon by Christians, Jews, and Mohammedans alike, as a prophet. It is quite probable that in almost any list of the ten greatest men in the world Moses' name would be included.

The Course of Moses' Career. Moses' career may be logically divided into three periods of forty years each. The first forty years may be called the Egyptian period and is summed up in the first fifteen verses of the second chapter of Exodus. As the adopted son of Pharaoh's daughter, Moses must have been familiar with the inner circle of court life. We can presume that he was also familiar with the best in Egyptian education and diplomatic procedure of his day. His sympathies and heart, however, seemed to have gone out to his brethren, the despised Hebrews, who were in bondage. As the story in Exodus points out, this first period in the great lawgiver's life came to an end when he slew an Egyptian task-master who was abusing one of his people. He fled and came to the land of Midian.

The second period of his life could well be called the Desert Era or the Period of Preparation. During the time he was in Midian he herded sheep, meditated, became well acquainted with the desert wherein he afterwards led his people and finally received his call to the ministry. All of this is summed up in the third chapter of Exodus.

The third period of forty years deals with Moses' career as leader and lawgiver of his nation. It may not seem too presumptuous to say that the books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy are scarcely sufficient to give a complete outline of this last part of his life.

Divine Leadership, the Key to Moses' Career. Anyone making a careful study of the life of Moses can readily understand the reason for his great success. It is perfectly apparent in the Old Testament account that Moses subjected himself to divine guidance and leadership throughout his amazing career. As related in Exodus, we find that God, through Moses, remembers His people in bondage as He promised Abraham. [^1] We find that it is God who first calls Moses to His work, who sends Moses to Pharaoh to demand the release of His people, who brings the plagues upon the Egyptians, who directs the exodus of His people from Egypt, who commands the building of the tabernacle, who thunders out from Sinai with fire and smoke, who gives the Ten Commandments and, in general, is the one who directs the battles of His people. Moses, according to tradition, seems to have been a humble and meek man. [^2] He was intelligent, teachable and a good follower. These are among the most necessary qualifications for great religious leaders. It appears that when God finds a man of this type He uses him and makes a great man out of him and Moses was no exception. In the hands of God he became a mighty leader and as a result commands the affection of millions at this late date.

Moses Expresses Righteous Indignation. Let us suppose that we, like Moses, had been adopted by Pharaoh's daughter and brought up at court with its luxury and pomp while our fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, and relatives were in heavy bondage to the Egyptians. What would be our feelings and emotions as we saw our own flesh and blood beaten and abused and subjected to intolerable tasks day after day? When we ask ourselves this question we place ourselves in the position Moses was in. His mother had nursed and brought him up before he was presented at court. [^3] We can be sure that she hoped her boy might someday be the instrument to bring a mitigation of the sufferings of her people. As Moses grew to manhood the early teachings of his mother remained with him and he grieved as he contemplated the lamentable state of his brethren.

And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown up, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens; and he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren. And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand. [^4]

The real manhood of Moses is shown in the righteous indignation he expressed when he saw one of his helpless brethren being maltreated. Undoubtedly this kind of treatment had been going on for generations. No people has a moral right to subject another to bondage and ill-treatment. Sooner or later God takes a hand and in this case Moses was His instrument. The above incident was the beginning of Israel's liberation. Many have questioned the ethics of Moses' action, but we can imagine Old Testament writers would point out that it was far better for one man to die than for a whole nation to be subjected to slavery. There is such a thing as righteous indignation, rare in our day, and Moses could be aroused to it.

Moses, the Gentleman. After Moses had killed the Egyptian he fled to the land of Midian where there occurred an incident that vitally affected the course of his career.

But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian; and he sat down by a well. Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew water, and filled the trough to water their father's flock. And the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock. And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, `How is it that ye are come so soon today?' And they said: `An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and moreover, he drew water for us, and watered the flock.' And he said unto his daughters: `And where is he? Why is it that ye have left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.' And Moses was content to dwell with the man; and he gave Moses Zipporah, his daughter. [^5]

The above incident is a very revealing one. It portrays Moses as one of those noble men whom we call in our day a gentleman. A gentleman is one who in every circumstance of life attempts to do the kindly and just thing. Moses had the courage and kindliness on this occasion to help some girls in a trying situation. It is the opinion of the writer that this incident reveals the calibre and fibre of Moses' character as well or better than anything else in the Old Testament. Nor was Moses the only gentleman in the story.

Reuel, or Jethro, as he was often called, belonged to the same class as Moses. He recognized Moses' benevolent deed and invited him to dwell with him. That he seemed to think Moses the gentleman was a preferred matrimonial risk is seen in his presentation of Zipporah to him in marriage. And we can agree with Jethro that gentlemen are always preferred.

Moses and the Covenant at Sinai. The picture given by Exodus of the circumstances under which Israel received the Ten Commandments is one of the most vivid and striking in the Old Testament. God is portrayed as being very near His people. Moses is shown to be in close communication with Him and the people are given great manifestations of His presence.

And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called to him out of the mountain, saying: `Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: . . . Now therefore, if ye will hearken unto My voice indeed, and keep My covenant, then shall ye be Mine own treasure from among all peoples; for all the earth is Mine; and ye shall be unto Me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation. . . . And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and set before them all these words which the Lord commanded him. And all the people answered together, and said: `All that the Lord hath spoken we will do.' And Moses reported the words of the people unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Moses: `Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and also believe thee forever.' [^6]

When Moses had prepared his people to hear God, Mount Sinai seemed to be on fire and smoke ascended as from a furnace. [^7] In the midst of the fire and smoke God delivered instructions including what we call the Ten Commandments as found in Ex. 20.

And all the people perceived the thunderings, and the lighnings, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking; and when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off. [^8]

Moses would be forever remembered if he were responsible only for the Ten Commandments as we have them in Ex. 20. These commandments are recognized among most peoples as being absolutely necessary for a civilized society. They are given as specific commandments and are given in a negative form, as prohibitions. The higher and more fundamental laws upon which they are based are given in the Gospel of Matthew in the portion known as the Sermon on the Mount. [^9] This ancient code was, in general, superior to any code of the ancient world. Whatever people may think of it, it remains to this day the most famous code in the world, and certainly no code has been suggested that has had greater influence.

Moses, the Loyal. On one occasion, while on the Mount of Sinai, Moses was told by the Lord that the Israelites had made a molten calf and were worshiping it and in other ways dealing corruptly. The Lord said to Moses:

I have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked people. Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great nation. [^10]

This saying was a great test of Moses. Through long experience he knew the faults and failings of his people. They were none too easy to handle. And now the Lord was offering to make of him a great nation in their stead. What should he do? His answer is a wonderful tribute to another quality he possessed, namely, loyalty to his God and to his people despite the frailties of the latter.

"Lord, why doth Thy wrath wax hot against Thy people, that Thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, saying: For evil did He bring them forth, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from Thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against Thy people. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, Thy servants, to whom Thou didst swear by Thine own self, and saidst unto them: I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it forever." [^11]

This statement of the Lawgiver is a sufficient answer to the question, Why has Moses' name and work come down through the centuries?

Moses and the Origin of Israel's Religion. The origin of Israel's religion, according to Old Testament scholars, is one of the hardest problems of Hebrew history. There have been several schools of thought which have differed more or less widely on this subject. Some of their views may be fairly well gathered from the following: (1) One of them assumes that Moses' and hence Israel's religion, is of Midianitish origin and that Yahweh (Jehovah) was the God of the Midianites. They base this conclusion on the assumption that when Moses went into the land of Midian and came into close contact with Jethro, the Priest of Midian, he also came into close contact with the religion of the Midianites. Moses is supposed, therefore, to have introduced the Midianite god and religion to his people. Ex. 18 is pointed to as added proof of this assumption. (2) Another holds that Moses' god was not a new god or one with which he had not been heretofore acquainted with, but the God of the Israelite fathers. He is presumed to have revealed himself, however, to Moses for the first time as Yahweh, a name not known to the early Hebrew fathers. They base their claims upon Ex. 6:2-3 which reads as follows:

And God spoke unto Moses, and said unto him: "I am the Lord; and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, but by My name Yahweh, [^12] I made Me not known to them."

This group would deny the Midianitish origin of the Yahweh religion. (3) Yet another view was taken by Professor T. J. Meek of the University of Toronto, who thought that Yahweh (from an original Yah or Yahu) was originally a storm god, a personification of one of the powers of nature, of South Arabia, that was later adopted as the god of the tribe of Judah. Meek seemed to think that Moses' great work consisted in getting the Israelites in Egypt to put their trust in a Yahweh already known to them. [^13] The above illustrates well enough for our purpose here some of the different views that have been held by scholars with respect to the origin of Moses' religion. The present writer, however, would draw the following picture of the origin of the religion introduced to the Hebrews by Moses: Let us first consider the probable condition of the Hebrews in bondage. It is not likely that they had any strong or outstanding leaders during this period. As time went on it is not unreasonable to suppose that the Hebrew people turned, at least in part, to Egyptian religious practices. This is borne out by the fact that when Moses took them into the desert they made a golden calf and in other respects showed their liking and affinity for Egyptian religion. It would also seem doubtful that Moses, during the first forty years of his life, fully understood the high covenant religion of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, his forefathers. When Moses later went to Midian and met Jethro, the Priest of Midian, he, without any doubt, became well acquainted with the religion of the man who was later to become his father-in-law. To be sure, nothing direct is said about the matter in the text of Exodus. However, a careful reading of the eighteenth chapter of Exodus will reveal, so it seems to the writer, that the religion and God of Moses was essentially the same as that of Jethro. [^14] Throughout the chapter there seems to be a complete harmony in views between the two men. It is not pressing the matter too far to say that the God who appeared to Moses in the burning bush was the God worshiped by Jethro, and presumably other Midianites. It appears that there was a very close relation between the Midianites and the Hebrew people. It is quite possible that the Midianites were the relatives of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and that consequently some of them had religious contacts and views very similar to those of the patriarchs. [^15] When Moses, therefore, came into contact with Jethro he got a firsthand knowledge of the religion and God of the early Hebrew patriarchs, of whom we have already spoken. That would readily account for the fact that there seems to be no difference between the God who spoke to Moses in the bush and the God of Jethro. They were one and the same. However, it is necessary to say something about Ex. 6:2-3, quoted above. This text does, indeed, offer a difficulty but, in the writer's opinion, not an insurmountable one. It would appear to the writer that the Hebrew of verse 3 has been misunderstood. We propose a somewhat different translation of the latter, based on the Inspired Revision of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is that the last clause of verse 3 be read as a question rather than as a declaration. The two verses would then read as follows:

And God spoke unto Moses, and said unto him: "I am the Lord; and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as God Almighty, but by My name Yahweh was I not known to them?"

The answer expected would be "Yes". There may be some objections to this translation but we think the idea contained therein has merit and brings into harmony most of the traditions concerning the God worshiped by the Hebrew people. In other words, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as well as the "new" God of Moses had the same name, Yahweh (Jehovah). It is quite likely that Moses received a priestly blessing from his father-in-law, Jethro, giving him the right to act and function in the religion as understood by the Midianites. [^16] The call, therefore, made by God to Moses in the burning bush was a call to even greater service in which the Lord's people should be redeemed from bondage. In our opinion, the naturistic god suggested by Meek and others as the god of Israel could not have had such tremendous influence as did the living personal God of Abraham and Moses in close communion with His people.

We believe that a distinction should be made between the teachings which Moses first gave to his people when he led them out of Egypt and those which were given after they had rejected Moses by building the golden calf. As for the first teachings, they were undoubtedly about the same as those advocated by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. When Moses found that his people could not live up to the simple, but high ideals of the covenant religion, he gave them a lower law or one based upon the law of carnal commandments. [^17] This lower law became known as the law of Moses and was in general effect among his people until the time of Christ. Even the so-called lower law was despised and abandoned by many of the people of later Israel. On the other hand, the higher form as first propounded by Moses was in all essentials the same as that proposed by the great prophets in later Israelite history.

Such in broad outline, we believe, must have been the origin of the religion of Israel.

A Summary of Moses' Work. We may summarize Moses' great work as follows: (1) He, through the inspiration of the Lord, was the author—or better, the restorer—of Israel's religion. (2) He led the tribes of Israel, twelve in number, out of Egypt into the desert. We see no reason to doubt the ancient tradition, as so many scholars have, [^18] that the tribes which went down into Egypt were twelve in number. The persistent tradition is that twelve tribes went down into Egypt and that twelve came out. (3) Moses welded together the twelve tribes of Israel and gave them a national consciousness. (4) He gave them laws and a code that were binding throughout their national history and that have had a marvelous influence to this day. (5) He led them forty years in the wilderness, during which time he taught them and gave them wise directions relative to their future course as a nation. (6) He gave them the idea that they were to be "a kingdom of priests, a holy nation." [^19] (7) By delegating authority to others, he built up a democratic organization among his people. (8) The pattern of the organization he built up was God-centered. He taught the Hebrew people to look to God in all of their affairs of life. This prophetic pattern will be seen through much of the Old Testament.

1 Gen. 15:13, 14.

2 Num. 12:3.

3 Exo. 2:7-10.

4 Exo. 2:11, 12.

5 Ex. 2:15-21.

6 Ex. 19:3-9.

7 Ex. 19:18.

8 Ex. 20:18.

9 Matt. 5-7.

10 Ex. 32:9, 10.

11 Ex. 32:11-13.

12 The Hebrew text does not contain the vowels of this name. The above vowels are the ones generally used by scholars. The name Jehovah generally used dates back only to the fourteenth century A. D. and onward.

13 T. J. Meek, Hebrew Origins, (1st Ed.) pp. 92f.

14 In the Hebrew text the names Elohim (God) and Yahweh (Jehovah) are both used without any clear distinction between them. The reader's attention is called especially to verses 1, 9, and 12. Even in the English version our point is apparent.

15 Consult Gen. 25:2, 4; 1 Chr. 1:32, 33; Ex. 2:15, 16; 3:1, 18:1; Num. 22:4, 7; Judg. 1:16; 4:11, 17; 5:24; 1 Sam. 15:6. The Kenites mentioned in the last few references were apparently Midianites.

16 Latter-day Saints know from modern revelation that Jethro conferred the Holy Priesthood upon Moses. See D&C 84:6-25. This reference pretty well settles the question of the origin of Israel's religion in Moses' day.

17 D&C 84:19-28; Heb. 3:7-19; 4:1; Ezek. 20:5-11, 23, 25 (note especially verse 25); Gal. 3:7-9, 15-24; 1 Cor. 10:1-5 (important); John 8:56.

18 See Meek, op. cit., pp. 29 ff.

19 Ex. 19:6.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Mormon . The Latter-day Saint Old Testament scholar will find the Book of Mormon an indispensable source for his work. To be sure, the Nephite record as a scource cannot be said to be "scientific" in the usual sense of the term. It has a spiritual origin that transcends the scope and methods of science. But science is not the only way of arriving at the truth. The experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith teach us that through the instrumentality of His servants, God may reveal truths which could not otherwise be made known to men. The scientist' may, however, claim the right to test, as conditions make it possible, the products of revelation, and rightly so. Thus, certain linguistic and archaeological tests might be made of the Book of Mormon as time and advance of science makes it expedient to do so. Most of the peoples with which it deals were of Hebrew descent, had copies of the Hebrew scriptures as recorded down to B. C. 600, and were obviously well acquainted with their contents. Even the peoples dealt with in the Book of Ether (the Jaredites) were probably of the same general race as the patriarchal predecessors of the Hebrews and had similar traditions. (Cf. Ether 1:1-5) Chapter One tells about a vision in which Moses speaks with God face to face some time after his experience at the burning bush (vs. 17). Here he learns about the creation of worlds but more especially about this earth and its inhabitants. Moses also has an encounter with Satan. This chapter has an extemely important bearing upon the origin of Israel's religion, one of the Old Testament's greatest problems. It gives Abraham's own account of his early life in Ur of the Chaldees and of his successive removals to Haran, Canaan, Egypt, and back to Canaan.
[^2] The Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates in possession of the Nephites contained the five books of Moses or Pentateuch, not to mention a "record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah." (1 Ne. 5:11-13). Chapters Two to Eight deal with the writings of Moses as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December, 1830. These chapters deal with important matters from the Creation to the Flood. They have an important bearing on the greatest literary problem of the Old Testament—the problem of the authorship of the Pentateuch. The Book of Moses supports in an interesting way the Book of Mormon evidence that Moses did write five books dealing among other things with the Creation and also with Adam and Eve. (See 1 Ne. 5:11; cf. Moses 2:1-4:32 The Book of Moses also throws much light on the fall, on the Cain and Abel episode, upon the ministry and work of Enoch, and upon events prior to the Deluge, not to mention doctrinal and textual difficulties that have plagued scholars for generations in the early chapters of Genesis. It gives much information about the nature of the early religion in Chaldea, about the founding of the Egyptian government, about the Holy Priesthood, and informs us that the written records of the early patriarchs had fallen into his hands.
[^3] The Works of Flavius Josephus. The works of Josephus are valuable in many respects as a source. He discloses the Old Testament views of a cultured Jew of the period immediately following the time of Christ, and is an important source of later Hebrew history. Many scholars feel that Josephus is guilty of exaggeration in his attempts to magnify his people and their scriptures in the eyes of the Gentiles; consequently, that his writings must be used with caution. "His work was of a general historical character, but Josephus was essentially an apologist and not a historian." [^13] There can be no doubt, however, that Josephus has been too severely criticized by some writers. [^14] The Book of Mormon from the first is Christ centered. It reveals that the gospel was in the world from the beginning and that our Bible should be interpreted in that light. Abraham teaches important matters pertaining to astronomy, philosophy, and the doctrine of pre-existence.
[^4] The Book of Mormon affirms that Israel was a record-keeping people from the earliest times. One of their great records, the Brass Plates, has been preserved on this continent and will in due time be revealed to the world. (1 Ne. 5:17-19). It reveals to us that Abraham was a seer and throws much light on the use of the Urim and Thummim which the Lord had given him in Ur of the Chaldees.
[^5] It throws additional light on the creation of the world.
[^6] It corrects certain misconceptions concerning Abraham and his wife when they came to Egypt, corrects certain textual errors in Genesis, and gives us hope that many important records in Abraham's hands are yet in existence and may someday be forthcoming.
[^7] Judges 7 Note the references to the Hebrew scriptures in 1 Ne. 3:3; 7:11; 19:23.
[^8] Samuel 8 Some scholars think that Daniel, Ezekiel, and certain other writings of the Old Testament appeared at a later date. The writer does not agree entirely with the views presented by them.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] 19 The following books on the Dead Sea Scrolls may be recommended: Millar Burrows, The Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1955); More Light on the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1958); Frank M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (New York, 1958); J. T. Milik, Ten Years of Discovery in the Wilderness of Judaea (Naperville, Ill., 1959); F. F. Bruce, Second Thoughts on the Dead Sea Scrolls (Grand Rapids, 1956); G. R. Driver, The Judaean Scrolls (New York, 1966); T. H. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures in English Translation (Garden City N. Y., 1964).
