Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter VI

ISRAEL'S CLASH WITH CANAANITE CULTURE

Israel's Problem. After the Exodus from Egypt—so the Old Testament makes plain—the Lord through Moses consistently refused to allow His people to go into the land of Canaan. This was a wise decision, for in their unschooled state they would have succumbed too easily to the evils of Canaanite culture. They had little or no spiritual morale—years of bondage in Egypt had darkened their minds and perspective. Moses, at the Lord's command, therefore, took them in hand until all of the older generation, with their materialistic views of life and lack of faith had passed away. The younger generation, free from the contamination and pre-suppositions of Egyptian life and thought, would have a chance in Canaan to bring about the type of civilization desired by God. Even a new generation of Israelites would have extreme difficulties unless it was willing to root out and completely supplant the decadent, rotten and morally bankrupt civilization of the Canaanites. Incidentally, the writer of Genesis points out that in Abraham's day the Lord had said, "The iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full". [^1] That is to say, Canaanite civilization was not at that time completely ripe and ready for destruction. By Moses' time it was—so the great lawgiver makes clear in unmistakable language. In many books of the Old Testament numerous references are made to the terrible immoralities and gross orgies of the Canaanites. This will be shown presently. Canaanite civilization was a symbol to Old Testament prophets and historians of all that was bad and indecent.

Since Israel did not completely uproot Canaanite civilization as Moses advised, her problem was as follows:

For many centuries after their settlement in Canaan the Israelites were faced with a very serious practical problem. Could they preserve their ancestral traditions, above all their religion—the worship of Jahweh (Jehovah)—and at the same time adopt the civilization of the ancient inhabitants of Palestine, or were the two incompatible? It is becoming more and more clear that in the religious realm as in the rest, the conflict resulted in a compromise, and to a certain extent in fusion. [^2]

It will now be advisable for us to look at some of the characteristics of Canaanite culture in order to understand better the significance of Israel's entrance into Palestine.

Canaan and Her Culture. Canaanite civilization was already ages old when Israel entered Palestine. The people understood the working of iron and bronze, knew much about the arts, cultivated the vine and the fig-tree, were skilled in fortifying their cities, knew much about the art of dyeing and safeguarded commerce and travel. A certain class could read and write. It appears that there was considerable wealth among the Canaanites. In respect to foreign relations it seems that the Canaanites had established over a period of centuries close contacts with other countries, particularly Babylon and Egypt. [^3] These facts are all interesting and useful, but we are more particularly concerned with the morals and religious practices of the Canaanites.

The practice of human sacrifice was a feature of Canaanite religion. Archaeological excavation confirms the testimony of the Phoenician, Hebrew and classical writers. New-born children were often sacrificed; in fact, at the founding of a new house human victims of various ages were sacrificed for one reason or another. This old custom still prevails in Syria, strange to say, except that animals are sacrificed instead of human beings.

The Canaanites still practiced the foundation rite in all its primitive horror. At Megiddo there was found under the fortress the body of a girl of fifteen: the body had no ornaments and rested on the first stones of the building to which it had been fastened by a layer of cement. At Megiddo also was found in the middle of a wall a jar containing the body of an infant buried head first: the jar had been partly crushed by the stones of the wall; hence it had not been buried in the wall after it had been built. [^4]

The Canaanite religion was a cruel one as is evident in the bloody rites indulged in by the priests of Baal even as late as the time of Elijah. In order to obtain an answer from their God they cut themselves "with swords and lances, till the blood gushed out upon them." [^5]

During the seasons sacred to the Canaanites they indulged in orgiastic practices including sexual excesses. Such rites evidently played a considerable part in Canaanite religion. A homosexual guild was recognized in Canaanite temples. [^6]

The Canaanites had certain sacred men and women (qedeshim and qedeshoth, respectively) who devoted themselves to sacred prostitution. [^7] That such practice was not uncommon may possibly be deduced from the story of Tamar in the Book of Genesis. [^8] Since the Canaanites were agriculturists it is quite natural to assume that they were interested in fertility cults.

Belief in magic and divination was common, as well as belief in sacred animals which were supposed to have supernatural power or knowledge.

When the Hebrews first came into contact with the Canaanites the latter were worshiping what are commonly called in the Old Testament, baals and astartes. [^9] "Baals" were local divinities worshiped "on every high hill and under every green tree". The corresponding feminine title was "baalath". Names of these divinities are still preserved in place names in our Old Testament. [^10]

In addition to local divinities the Canaanites had numerous gods who ruled over large territories. The god Dagon mentioned in Judges and Samuel was such a one with a long and interesting history in various localities of the Near East. [^11]

Canaanite female deities of a general character such as Astarte, Asherah, Anath, Kadesh and the like, all representing various aspects of fertility, finally seem to have merged into one great female goddess who was called Astarte. This name finally came to mean a goddess in general. So arose the expression "the baals and astartes" among the Hebrews to denote all Canaanite gods and goddesses. [^12]

The Canaanites had numerous sacred things such as caves, rivers, mountains, springs, trees and idols. The last named existed in great numbers throughout Palestine as the writer can personally testify. Archaeologists are constantly finding them in their excavations. These sacred things naturally formed centers around which the Canaanites worshiped. Hence the proscription of Deuteronomy:

Ye shall surely destroy all the places, wherein the nations that ye are to depossess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every leafy tree. And ye shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and burn their Asherim with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods; and ye shall destroy their name out of that place. [^13]

Speaking of the morals of the Canaanites, Professor Lods has said:

Israelite writers of every period agree that among the Canaanites, family ties were lightly regarded, the paternal authority was flouted, while in the matter of sexual morality, liberty was carried to the extent of licence. . . . The depravity of the Canaanites was notorious: witness the vices attributed to the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, the reason alleged for their destruction by the fire of Jahweh (Gen. 13:13; 18:20; 19). . . In considering these judgments, allowance must be made for the narrower outlook of a people accustomed to the severity of desert morals and easily shocked by the greater laxity of city life. But there must have been a large residue of truth in these strictures: the very religion of the Canaanites, with its bloody ritual, its female deities, its frequent ceremonial orgies, the halo of sanctity with which it surrounded prostitution, all tended to foster licence rather than to eradicate it. [^14]

Even from the above meager description of Canaanite religion and morals it must be apparent, allowing to the Canaanites every benefit of doubt, that Israel faced a stiff problem in preserving her religious heritage when she invaded Canaan. This fact, well known to her leaders, helps explain in part the apparent ruthlessness of the Israelites in dealing with the Canaanites, both before and after invading Palestine.

The Effects of Canaanite Culture on Israel. The Book of Judges makes clear that Israel did not conquer all of Canaan when first she entered it. The so-called "conquest" consisted only of the Jordan valley and the eastern highlands of Ephraim. [^15] For a long time during the days of the Judges many of the Israelites were essentially "hillbillies", [^16] hemmed in by their enemies on every side. After the generations of Israelites who had been acquainted with Joshua passed away, the effects of Canaanite morals and religion began to be apparent upon the younger generation. For long periods of time the Canaanites conquered Israel and this fact alone would tend to disrupt her settled religious life and practice. Times were rough and banditry was rampant. As the record itself states: "In those days there was no king in Israel; every man did that which was right in his own eyes." [^17] All of this seems to have taken place because Israel did not drive the Canaanites completely out. The Lord said to the Israelites:

Ye have not hearkened to My voice; what is this ye have done? Wherefore I also said: `I will not drive them out before you; but they shall be unto you as snares, and their gods shall be a trap unto you.' [^18]

And a snare and a trap they were. Note the following which is but one of numerous similar accounts.

And the children of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and served the Baalim, and the Ashtaroth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines; and they forsook the Lord, and served Him not. [^19]

Israel's conduct during this period had a lasting effect upon her religion and morals. For centuries Israel's prophets and wise men referred to it and denounced her allegiance to old Canaanite practices. It is plain that Israel, during the period of the Judges, compromised her relatively high religious ideals with Canaanite practices and certain elements in her population must have apostatized completely. No better illustration of compromise can be found in the period of the Judges than that in Chapters 17 and 18 of the book. The student is advised to read these carefully. A man, Micah, of the hill-country of Ephraim, makes a "graven image and a molten image"—presumably of Jehovah—has a "house of God," consecrates his son to be his priest, but gives him up in favor of a young Levite who, for a stipend, becomes his priest. Then certain Danites come along seeking an inheritance. They kidnap the priest, take Micah's "graven image of the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image." The priest goes with them to be "a father and a priest." After arriving at their destination the Danites slay the native settlers and "set them up Micah's graven image which he made." Throughout the story the observant reader can perceive the union of the Canaanite religious practices with those of Israel. It will also be of value to read the story of the Levite's concubine in Chapters 19 and 20. We have no disposition to lighten the faults of the Israelites at the expense of the Canaanites—certainly the Old Testament does not—but the influence of Canaanite religion on Israel can scarcely be gainsaid.

Centuries later we find Elijah, [^20] Isaiah, [^21] Hosea, [^22] Jeremiah, [^23] and others of the prophets bewailing such influence. As for Ezekiel—in taunting tones, he says to Jerusalem,

Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, and say: Thus saith the Lord God unto Jerusalem; Thine origin and thy nativity is of the land of the Canaanite; the Amorite was thy father, and thy mother was a Hittite. [^24]

It seems quite evident that without a fair degree of acquaintance with Canaanite culture and its effect upon the Chosen People it is difficult to understand properly the work of Israel's prophets.

1 Gen. 15:16.

2 Adolphe Lods, Israel, p. 2.

3 Ibid., pp. 59-63. For an up-to-date discussion of the evolution of Canaanite culture and religion consult W. F. Albright, Yahweh and the Gods of Canaan, Ch. III. See also Albright's, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra , Ch. II, "The Age of Moses," and J. L. McKenzie, The World of the Judges , Ch. IV.

4 Lods, op. cit., p. 99.

5 1 Kgs. 18:28.

6 Lods, op. cit., p. 102; Albright, From Abraham to Ezra , p. 16.

7 Lods, op. cit., p. 103.

8 Gen. 38:13-16.

9 Judg. 10:6; 1 Sam. 7:4; 12:10, etc.

10 See Judg. 20:33; Josh. 19:8; 2 Sam. 5:20.

11 See Lods, op. cit., pp. 127 ff.

12 Ibid., pp. 132 ff.

13 Deut. 12:2, 3.

14 Lods. op. cit., pp. 147 ff.

15 For discussions of the "conquest" see T. J. Meek, "The Israelite Conquest of Ephraim," Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, No. 61, February, 1936, pp. 17-19; Albright, From Abraham To Ezra , Ch. III; McKenzie, op. cit., Ch. V.

16 Judg. 6:2.

17 Judg. 17:6.

18 Judg. 2:2, 3.

19 Judg. 10:6.

20 1 Kgs. 18:21-40.

21 Isa. 1:10, 29, 30, etc.

22 Hosea 2:8, 13, 16, 17; 4:13

23 Jer. 1:16; 2:1, 20-28.

24 Ezek. 16:2, 3.

---
Notas:
[^1] The Book of Mormon . The Latter-day Saint Old Testament scholar will find the Book of Mormon an indispensable source for his work. To be sure, the Nephite record as a scource cannot be said to be "scientific" in the usual sense of the term. It has a spiritual origin that transcends the scope and methods of science. But science is not the only way of arriving at the truth. The experiences of the Prophet Joseph Smith teach us that through the instrumentality of His servants, God may reveal truths which could not otherwise be made known to men. The scientist' may, however, claim the right to test, as conditions make it possible, the products of revelation, and rightly so. Thus, certain linguistic and archaeological tests might be made of the Book of Mormon as time and advance of science makes it expedient to do so. Most of the peoples with which it deals were of Hebrew descent, had copies of the Hebrew scriptures as recorded down to B. C. 600, and were obviously well acquainted with their contents. Even the peoples dealt with in the Book of Ether (the Jaredites) were probably of the same general race as the patriarchal predecessors of the Hebrews and had similar traditions. (Cf. Ether 1:1-5) Chapter One tells about a vision in which Moses speaks with God face to face some time after his experience at the burning bush (vs. 17). Here he learns about the creation of worlds but more especially about this earth and its inhabitants. Moses also has an encounter with Satan. This chapter has an extemely important bearing upon the origin of Israel's religion, one of the Old Testament's greatest problems. It gives Abraham's own account of his early life in Ur of the Chaldees and of his successive removals to Haran, Canaan, Egypt, and back to Canaan.
[^2] The Hebrew scriptures on the Brass Plates in possession of the Nephites contained the five books of Moses or Pentateuch, not to mention a "record of the Jews from the beginning, even down to the commencement of the reign of Zedekiah; and also many prophecies which have been spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah." (1 Ne. 5:11-13). Chapters Two to Eight deal with the writings of Moses as revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in December, 1830. These chapters deal with important matters from the Creation to the Flood. They have an important bearing on the greatest literary problem of the Old Testament—the problem of the authorship of the Pentateuch. The Book of Moses supports in an interesting way the Book of Mormon evidence that Moses did write five books dealing among other things with the Creation and also with Adam and Eve. (See 1 Ne. 5:11; cf. Moses 2:1-4:32 The Book of Moses also throws much light on the fall, on the Cain and Abel episode, upon the ministry and work of Enoch, and upon events prior to the Deluge, not to mention doctrinal and textual difficulties that have plagued scholars for generations in the early chapters of Genesis. It gives much information about the nature of the early religion in Chaldea, about the founding of the Egyptian government, about the Holy Priesthood, and informs us that the written records of the early patriarchs had fallen into his hands.
[^3] The Works of Flavius Josephus. The works of Josephus are valuable in many respects as a source. He discloses the Old Testament views of a cultured Jew of the period immediately following the time of Christ, and is an important source of later Hebrew history. Many scholars feel that Josephus is guilty of exaggeration in his attempts to magnify his people and their scriptures in the eyes of the Gentiles; consequently, that his writings must be used with caution. "His work was of a general historical character, but Josephus was essentially an apologist and not a historian." [^13] There can be no doubt, however, that Josephus has been too severely criticized by some writers. [^14] The Book of Mormon from the first is Christ centered. It reveals that the gospel was in the world from the beginning and that our Bible should be interpreted in that light. Abraham teaches important matters pertaining to astronomy, philosophy, and the doctrine of pre-existence.
[^4] The Book of Mormon affirms that Israel was a record-keeping people from the earliest times. One of their great records, the Brass Plates, has been preserved on this continent and will in due time be revealed to the world. (1 Ne. 5:17-19). It reveals to us that Abraham was a seer and throws much light on the use of the Urim and Thummim which the Lord had given him in Ur of the Chaldees.
[^5] It throws additional light on the creation of the world.
[^6] It corrects certain misconceptions concerning Abraham and his wife when they came to Egypt, corrects certain textual errors in Genesis, and gives us hope that many important records in Abraham's hands are yet in existence and may someday be forthcoming.
[^7] Judges 7 Note the references to the Hebrew scriptures in 1 Ne. 3:3; 7:11; 19:23.
[^8] Samuel 8 Some scholars think that Daniel, Ezekiel, and certain other writings of the Old Testament appeared at a later date. The writer does not agree entirely with the views presented by them.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] 19 The following books on the Dead Sea Scrolls may be recommended: Millar Burrows, The Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1955); More Light on the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1958); Frank M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (New York, 1958); J. T. Milik, Ten Years of Discovery in the Wilderness of Judaea (Naperville, Ill., 1959); F. F. Bruce, Second Thoughts on the Dead Sea Scrolls (Grand Rapids, 1956); G. R. Driver, The Judaean Scrolls (New York, 1966); T. H. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures in English Translation (Garden City N. Y., 1964).
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
