Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter VIII

THE NATURE OF HEBREW LITERATURE

Some Essentials of Great Literature. The Old Testament has been almost universally recognized to be literature in the truest and best sense of the term. It contains some literature that is thought by many to be the world's greatest. It may be well, therefore, for us to consider for a few moments some of the essentials of a great literature.

All of us can agree that great literature should have a great theme or subject. A petty, trivial or commonplace theme, no matter how beautifully handled, ill adapts itself to the requirements of great literature because it is too narrow and limited in its outlook on life. Its content is too easily exhausted, it does not constantly give the exhilaration of new discovery by repeated examination.

Then, too, we may agree that in addition to having a great theme, a given piece of literature must be beautifully expressed to be called great. Its diction and imagery should be well nigh faultless. If it has these qualities it has a good chance to survive.

Great literature has the faculty of bringing into activity man's whole being. The greater the scope of any literature—that is, the greater the number, variety, color and complexity of the impulses it arouses in man—the better its quality.

We are perhaps safe in saying that the authors of the world's best literature have had such varied and wide experiences, have had so many avenues of approach, and have known human nature so well that we can never quite get away from them. Each age reads them, relives and seems never to tire of them.

Longinus, the great Greek critic of the second century A. D. was right when he said: "Nature did thus implant in our souls an invincible and eternal love of that which is great, and by our standards divine."

Some General Observations on Hebrew Literature. One of the outstanding characteristics of the Hebrew literature in the Old Testament is the way in which it expresses the close personal relationship existing between God and His people. The Hebrews claimed to be a "covenant" people, a people who had made a special agreement with God to serve Him and keep His commandments. They claimed to be in close touch with God through their seers and prophets. The Almighty talked with His servants as one man talks with another. These claims may not be received by many modern thinkers, but the fact remains that they were the foundation of the Hebrew national existence. The quiet and firm assurance of the Hebrews in the reality of God and His nearness to them is expressed in their literature. God had a real interest in all of their doings, in all of the vicissitudes of their life. For that reason Hebrew literature makes no hair-line distinctions between what we regard as secular on the one hand and sacred on the other. It is mostly God-centered. This fact is one of the prime reasons why the Old Testament is great and world famous.

Another characteristic of Hebrew literature that we must notice is its strong tendency to be ruled by ideas rather than facts. Not that the Hebrews couldn't be objective and see facts, but the latter were used mainly to press home ideas.

If it was the weakness of the Hebrew mind to be ridden by ideas, it was its strength to be able to express these so that they seemed as real and unshakable as the eternal hills. [^1]

Inasmuch as most of the literature of the Old Testament was written in Hebrew we should be remiss if nothing was said about the characteristics of the language and its influence upon the English translation of the Bible.

Hebrew is essentially a farmer's language—it is close to the ground, so to speak. The vocabulary of the Hebrew Old Testament is comparatively small. To be sure, many rare words occur in books like Job; but the running vocabulary of average prose is small and simple. The noun has no case-endings and the verb has only two tenses, if we may speak of them as such. Broadly speaking, Hebrew syntax, though it has many subtleties of its own, is very simple. Whereas in Greek and Latin, sentences are built together: in Hebrew they are laid together. Hebrew has the habit of co-ordinating clauses rather than of subordinating them, and one principal verb follows another with a regularity that reminds one of the simple speech of children. The very regularity of the language caused Dr. John E. McFadyen to say to the student of it the following:

If he [the student] goes forward to the study of the language with a faith in its regularity, he will find its very phonetic and grammatical principles to be instinct with something of that sweet reasonableness, that sense of fair play, we might almost say that passion for justice, for which the Old Testament in the sphere of human life so persistently and eloquently pleads. [^2]

Perhaps few people realize that many of those elements which go to make up the greatness and beauty of the Authorized Version are due to the fact that it is an attempt to give a fairly literal translation of the Hebrew original.

I would also call attention to one feature of a really great style which our English Bible owes to its Hebrew original. This is the sense of dignity, restraint, and power which results from a sparing use of adjectives. Every student must be struck with the very small supply of these words possessed by Hebrew. We have the expression of a few elementary qualities, good, bad, big, little, holy, profane—and many of these are rather participial or nominal than strictly adjectival—bodily defects, and one or two color words. . . . It is partly the paucity of adjectives which gives stateliness and dignity to our Old Testament in the Authorized Version. There is no adjective in Ps. 23. . . . [^3]

The following statement also by Professor T. H. Robinson will be apropos at this point:

They [the Hebrews] possessed a concrete directness of thought, a clarity of vision, an instinct for synthesis, and an appreciation of reality, which made them ideal exponents of truth for simple people. And they had a great and stately music in their soul. I doubt not that others beside myself will feel that no better instrument than the Hebrew mind could have been found for the supreme literary revelation of God. [^4]

The student of the literature of the Old Testament in English translation should be cautioned against cramping it too tightly in the shoes of the English scheme of letters and literary classification. After all, the Old Testament is an oriental literature and not an occidental one. The Hebrews were an ancient people and their language and thought patterns, their manners and customs and, in general, their psychology was different in many respects from our own. Those who will keep these facts in mind will not make the mistake of calling the Twenty-third Psalm and certain of the Proverbs sonnets, not to mention other types of mistakes that might be cited. It may be permissible to treat the Old Testament purely as English literature but it will never do to claim that such treatment always represents the spirit of the original. Hebrew literature better follows the scheme of Arabic letters, and even here it does not completely fit. Certainly Arabic literature reveals no dominating personality like the Hebrew Jehovah.

Contrary to the views of many others, the writer has the firm conviction that the Old Testament was written by a comparatively few record keepers. The Hebrew people, as stated before, were a covenant people and the keeping of their records was probably not left to chance by the prophetic leaders among them. [^5] These record keepers over a long period of time revealed the many-sidedness of the Hebrews and in this sense the literature they produced is a national one.

It is the further conviction of the writer that far too much emphasis has been placed by modern critics on the element of folklore in the Old Testament. Some folklore there may be, but not in the great amount claimed by certain writers who seem in so many instances unable to penetrate the spirit that permeates the ancient literature.

Speaking in terms of our own literary art, it should be pointed out that Hebrew literature had no drama in the absolute sense. Their lyric had to serve for that and we shall say more about it presently.

Paronomasia or play on words is a very essential literary device in the Old Testament. Unfortunately those who have no knowledge of the original language are at a great disadvantage here since puns seldom carry over well into the English. Occasionally, by stretching a point, we can catch the spirit of the original in English. An interesting case in point is seen in Amos 8:1, 2. As usually translated this passage reads as follows:

Thus the Lord God showed me; and behold a basket of summer fruit. And He said: `Amos what seest thou?' And I said: `A basket of summer [kaiz] fruit.' Then said the Lord unto me:

The end [kez] is come upon My people Israel.

If the reader will allow the use of the word "fall" to be used instead of "summer" and "end" he will get an effect that closely approximates the effect in Hebrew. The passage will then read:

Thus the Lord God showed me: and behold a basket of fall fruit. And He said: Amos, what seest thou?' And I said: `A basket of fall fruit.' Then said the Lord unto me: The fall is come upon My people Israel.

The reader familiar with Amos will recognize at once how tame the first translation is compared to the last where the play on words is reasonably well duplicated in the English. But in most cases we can't do that well.

The Hebrews used numerous figures of speech with telling effect. Alliteration [^6] was a favorite device. Note the following in Micah 1:10 (Moffatt's translation):

Tell it not in Tell-town, In Weep-town weep.

So also onomatopoeia [^7] of which the following is a good example:

Ah! the booming of the peoples, the multitudes, Like the booming of the seas they boom. [^8]

Rhyme is not very frequently found in the Old Testament.

Characteristics of Hebrew Poetry. As with other peoples, the poetry of the Hebrews expressed their soul. Strangely enough, in the literature of the Old Testament there is no word for "poet". Much of the Hebrew wisdom and prophetic literature is poetry as any one can see for himself who possesses a modern translation of the Old Testament. There is in Hebrew literature, therefore, a very close connection between poetry and prophecy. The Hebrew poet was a singer and for that reason all Hebrew poetry in terms of English literary art is lyric poetry. Hebrew poets were spontaneous in their art. When under inspiration they wrote down or sang out immediately what was in their hearts without making any attempt to control and polish their product as did the ancient Greeks. The latter were masters of poetic form and patiently planned and polished every line of their work. Not so with the Hebrew poet. Fixed forms of literary art were not his forte. That is the reason there are no sonnets in Hebrew literature.

Hebrew poetry may be classified into three general types: (1) Didactic lyric, (2) Dramatic lyric, (3) Epic lyric.

Most of the psalms are of the first type. They are the impassioned, soul-stirring outbursts of penitent, suffering, exultant or worshipful men who give us the benefit of their inmost emotional and deeply religious experiences. For that reason they form one of the finest devotional collections in existence.

The dramatic lyric is beautifully exemplified by the monologues in the Book of Job.

The best example of the epic lyric is to be found in the Song of Deborah in the fifth chapter of the Book of Judges.

The outstanding rhetorical characteristic of Hebrew poetry is the phenomenon called parallelism. This feature of the poetry was first systematically dealt with by Bishop Robert Lowth at Oxford in the year 1753. By parallelism we simply mean the rhythm or balance felt as the poetry is read. This rhythm is a balance of thought rather than of syllables. That is to say, there is a parallelism of ideas between the two halves of a line. The half-line is known as a stichos. There are three main types of parallelism.

(1) Synonymous. The second line, or stichos, repeats the thought of the first line.

O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine anger;

Neither chasten me in Thy wrath.

Ps. 38:1.

Oh that my vexation were but weighed,

And my calamity laid in the balances altogether.

Job 6:2.

(2) Antithetic. The second line is in contrast to the first.

For the Lord regardeth the way of the righteous;

But the way of the wicked shall perish.

Ps. 1:6.

A soft answer turneth away wrath,

But grievous words stir up anger.

Prov. 15:1.

(3) Synthetic. The sense of the first line is completed or continued in the second.

O Lord my God, in Thee have I taken refuge;

Save me from all them that pursue me, and deliver me.

Ps. 7:1.

Wine is a mocker, strong drink is riotous;

And whosoever reeleth thereby is not wise.

Prov. 20:1.

In reference to the above it may be remarked that while synonymous parallelism may at times be monotonous it nevertheless has the advantage of being emphatic. It should also be noted that a knowledge of parallelism often helps in determining the meaning of a passage otherwise obscure.

What is the meaning of the following lines in Amos 4:6?

And I also have given you

Cleanness of teeth in all your cities.

The next line gives the clue.

And want of bread in all your places.

"Want of bread" is synonymous with "cleanness of teeth" so the latter means hunger or famine.

Another good illustration occurs in Gen. 4:23 where Lamech says:

For I have slain a man for wounding me,

And a young man for bruising me.

Query: How many men were slain? The answer is one, because the second line is synonymous with the first.

Another kind of parallelism that some think is a special type is known as "emblematic". Examples follow:

Where no wood is, the fire goeth out;

And where there is no whisperer, contention ceaseth.

Prov. 26:20.

As the hart panteth after the water brooks,

So panteth my soul after Thee, O God. [^9]

Ps. 42:1.

Still another kind is what may be called "stair-like" parallelism where a part of the first line is repeated, and the sense continued therefrom.

Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye sons of might,

Ascribe unto the Lord, glory and strength,

Ascribe unto the Lord the glory due unto His name.

Ps. 29:1, 2.

There are varieties of parallelism, but behind them all the same principle exists. Thus we have the triplet, quatrain, introverted quatrain, introverted triplet, double triplet, etc. To some of these varieties the writer has applied the name of "eccentric" parallelism and "concentric" parallelism. The concentric variety is so called because the segments of circles joining lines paralleling each other in thought are concentric. Note the following example using an introverted quatrain:

Prov. 23:15, 16.

The eccentric variety is so called from the fact that segments of circles joining lines parallel in thought are out of center and cross each other. The following is an example:

Ps. 27:1.

By combining lines of Hebrew poetry in certain ways stanzas and strophes may be formed somewhat analogous to those in English poetry.

Characteristics of Hebrew Prose. We may ask at the outset the difference between Hebrew prose and Hebrew poetry. Professor Duncan B. Macdonald has, in our opinion, given a splendid answer.

It is emotion and the emotion always goes with the song. The sequence appears to be this: The Hebrew artist can tell a story straight and clear in prose; his brain is cold; he can think about his creation and develop it and shape it. It may be a creation of pathos or of terror, of repentance or of joy, but, so long as it is not the poet's pathos, repentance, terror, joy, he creates in prose and his creation is not himself. But should his brain be fired by the situation in which his character is and his own emotion roused; should he feel this situation as his own; then the thread of narrative breaks; he bursts into song; he and his character melt together and for that moment he can render only himself, how he felt and reacted to it all. It may be that after his outburst he will recover his self-possession and resume his narrative, but it will be in prose. [^10]

Most of the Old Testament from Genesis to II Kings is prose. Occasionally a little poetry is met with. The prophetic books contain great amounts of poetry, but a large amount of prose is also to be found among them. We estimate that Jeremiah is nearly sixty per cent prose, Ezekiel about eighty-five per cent, Jonah seventy-five per cent. Haggai is nearly completely so; and Zechariah is about sixty-five per cent. The other prophets contain much less. [^11] The remaining books, the Writings according to the Jewish classification, [^12] contain prose and poetry as follows: The books from Esther to II Chronicles are almost solid prose. Most of the remaining books are poetry with the exception of the Prologue and Epilogue of Job, Ruth, and about sixty-five per cent of Ecclesiastes.

How is this prose to be classified? Authorities often differ greatly as to how it should be done. Thus Moulton would classify the prose of Genesis as epic stories, epic cycles and epic history. He also classifies as epic portions of Exodus, Numbers, Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings. Ruth and Esther are classified as epic history. [^13] The writer has no particular objection to this if the literature of the Old Testament is viewed purely as English literature, that is, if it can honestly be viewed as such. But he strenuously objects to the term "epic" if the literature is regarded as Hebrew literature for the reason that true epic is quite foreign to Semitic peoples.

We have here but little space in which to discuss the prose of the Old Testament. For our purposes we may classify it briefly as follows:

To the above we might have added prophetic prose but have refrained from doing so since, as we have seen above, in the literature of the prophets it is often difficult to determine the dividing line between prose and poetry. Then, too, prophetic literature needs a distinctive treatment.

The story has, of course, numerous examples in the Old Testament. Nearly all of Genesis would be classed as such. These stories can well be classed as philosophic in treatment and approach. (See Chapter III.) The Abraham and Isaac stories are admirably done and meet the requirements of good short stories, but they are not done with the consummate skill and artistry of the Joseph stories. The religious element in these stories is, of course, usually of a very high order.

The stories in Exodus are not nearly so well told as those in Genesis. Some of them remind one of historical romance.

The Book of Ruth may be classed as the first true "short story" known to literature. [^14] By nature it is a story that can best be put in short form. It is a gem of its kind.

The Book of Jonah which is classed among the prophetic books, is in form a religious story. The stories in the Book of Daniel may be classed in the same category. Those in Daniel are, however, not so well told as the one in Jonah.

The Book of Esther is a story of foreign origin.

There are but two fables in the Old Testament. These are found in Judg. 9:7-15 and 2 Kgs. 14:8, 9. It should be remarked that fables are not native to the Hebrews and the two mentioned must have been derived and adapted from foreign sources.

The parable is also to be classed under story. The stories given in 2 Sam. 12:1-6 and 2 Sam. 14:4-9 may be called parables.

The Hebrews never attained to the writing of history in our modern scientific sense. That is, they did not write history which could be considered the product of unbiased investigation. Nevertheless, there is preserved in the Old Testament a fairly reliable key to the history of the Near East. The Hebrew records are worthy of a respectful hearing before any modern court.

The Book of Genesis may be spoken of as a philosophy of history. So also the Book of Judges. The general view taken by Judges may be found condensed in 2:11-23.

Such professedly historical books as Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles are interesting to examine for the purpose of ascertaining their methods. The stories in Samuel are fresh, vigorous and picturesque, and seem so true to life that we can easily believe that they are trustworthy and told with little purpose other than to reveal the facts. The Books of Kings are more formal in arrangement. The author or compiler had something to teach and seems somewhat biased against the kings of the Northern Kingdom. The compiler of Chronicles covers essentially the same period of time as in Kings, but he emphasizes the theological aspects more than the latter. He has a tendency to moralize a great deal and attempts to show that blessings follow those who keep the law of the Lord and that punishment befalls the sinner.

Not all orations in the Old Testament are prose, but the following examples are sufficient for our purpose:

Deut. 1:6-4:40 Orations of Moses.

5:1-11:32. Orations of Moses.

29:2-31:8. Orations of Moses.

I K. 18:20-40.—Elijah on Mt. Carmel.

The Hebrew Prophetic Literature. The literature of the prophets is so distinctive in spirit that it ought to be described as a separate type. Some of the forms of prophetic literature with examples according to the English classification of Moulton [^15] are given herewith:

1.Prophetic Discourse. Isa. 1:2-4; Ezek. 34. 2.Lyric Prophecy. Isa. 9:8-10:4 3.Symbolic Prophecy.a. The Emblem. Jer. 13; 18:1; 24. b. The Vision. Ezek. 37:1-14. c. The Parable. Isa. 5; Ezek. 15-17, 23. 4.Prophetic Intercourse. [^16]a. With God.b. With Enquirers.c. With the World.5.Dramatic Prophecy. Micah 6:1-8; 6:9 6.The Doom Song. Jer. 25:15-31; Gen. 9:25; Isa. 21-22:14; Ezek. 26-28. 7.The Rhapsody. Hab. 1-3; Joel 1-3; Isa. 40-66.

This is as much space as can be allotted to the Old Testament as literature, but studied purely from that point of view the Hebrew scriptures will give a lifetime of delight and satisfaction.

1 Duncan B. Macdonald, The Hebrew Literary Genius, p. 11.

2 John E. McFadyen in A. B. Davidson—J. E. McFadyen, An Introductory Hebrew Grammar (Twenty-second Edition), p. 3.

3 Theodore H. Robinson, The Genius of Hebrew Grammar, p. 23.

4 Ibid., p. 24.

5 See Deut. 31:9, 24-26; 17:18; Josh. 24:26; 2 Sam. 20:24, 25; Isa. 34:16; Ezra 7:12-14.

6 Repetition of the same letter.

7 Formation of words to imitate the sound of the thing mentioned.

8 Isa. 17:2. (Translation of G. A. Smith).

9 Certainly this passage is more emblematic than synthetic.

10 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 22.

11 These estimates are made on the basis of the classification in the Jewish Publication Society Edition of the Old Testament and may differ from other editions. It is not always easy to distinguish prose from poetry and vice versa.

12 See Chapter I.

13 Richard G. Moulton, The Literary Study of the Bible (Revised and Partly Rewritten Edition) pp. 480-485.

14 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 121.

15 See Moulton, op. cit., pp. 363-456.

16 Ibid., pp. 383 ff.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapters 1-10. These chapters have been called the "Praise of Wisdom". The author, who speaks like a father to a son, admonishes that "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge" and warns against temptations and dangers. A strong appeal is made to obtain wisdom and avoid folly, particularly when she appears in the guise of the strange woman.
[^2] Chapters 10:1-22:16. This division contains proverbs in the strict sense of the term. Their form is regular and each verse, with the exception of one (19:7), contains a complete proverb consisting of two members only. The proverbs in this division are so miscellaneous in content as almost to prevent general characterization. They are usually bright in tone and the happy aspects of life are generally stressed. There are some very fine religious proverbs in this collection, but generalizations are usually drawn from secular life. An occasional flash of humor adds interest:
[^3] Chapters 22:17-24:22. This division is really a collection of maxims in which proverbs are interwoven. Instead of the two member proverbs as in the previous collection, we find them generally with four members and occasionally even more. Chapter 23:29-35 is really a short poem on wine drinking. The division warns against drunkenness, gluttony, undue pursuit of wealth and indulgence to excess.
[^4] Chapter 24:23-34. This collection is considered generally to be an appendix to the previous collection. There are a variety of forms as in the other. Verses 30-34 satirize the slothful man.
[^5] Chapters 25-29. This division is a series of loosely connected sayings resembling the second division above. It is an appendix to that division. Chapters 25-27 contain the most proverbs without any specific moral bearing. In this division religious proverbs are few. The "fool" is satirized, [^31] the sluggard derided [^32] and care in agricultural pursuits is urged. [^33]
[^6] Chapter 30. This division contains the skeptical and enigmatical words of Agur. The form of the proverbs in this division is peculiar and sometimes they are called "numerical" proverbs. Among other matters, the author calls attention to the four insatiable things, [^34] the four incomprehensible things, [^35] the four intolerable things, [^36] the four wise animals [^37] and the four things comely in their going. [^38]
[^7] Chapter 31:1-9. Contains the words of advice to King Lemuel by his mother. No one knows who Lemuel was. He is warned against women and wine, exhorted to judge righteously and to plead the cause of the poor.
[^8] Chapter 31:10-31. An alphabetic poem describing and praising the good housewife.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
