Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter IX

THE WISDOM OF THE SAGES—KOHELETH AND PROVERBS

The Scope and Nature of Wisdom Literature. The so-called Wisdom literature of the Old Testament includes Koheleth (Ecclesiastes), Proverbs, Job and the following from the Book of Psalms: 1; 19:7-14; 32:8-11; 34:12-23; 37; 49; 73; 94:8f.; 111; 112; 119; 127; 128; 133.

Outside of the Old Testament the following works should be included in Hebrew Wisdom literature: The Wisdom of Jesus Sirach (200 B.C.-180 B.C.); the Book of Tobit 4:13 f.; 12:6-11; 14:9 f. (circa 200 B.C.); I Esdras 3:1-4:63 (circa 300 B.C.).; The Letter of Aristeas, paras. 187-294 (circa 40 B.C.); The Wisdom of Solomon (circa 30 B.C.); IV Maccabees (circa 30 A.D.); The Book of Baruch 3:9-4:4 (after 70 A.D.); Pirque Aboth (Sayings of the Fathers, from 150 B.C. to 250 A.D.); the didactic poem of 250 hexameters of Pseudo-Phocylides (150 B.C.-70 A.D.). [^1]

The origin of Wisdom literature is usually explained as follows: At an early period of time, short, pithy sayings became popular when they expressed something which seemed to be true to life. Among the Hebrews, who had strong religious instincts, these sayings frequently took on a decidedly religious turn. At a later time when used in literature they became more complex and acquired an extended sense. Thus, the utterances of Balaam (Num. 23:7, 18, etc. are a supposed example. It is assumed that collections of popular sayings were eventually made by different individuals who added to them proverbs of their own. Finally, these collections were written down, and in this way their literary form began. Once the literary form had been attained, there gradually evolved a guild or group of Wisdom writers, Chakamin, "Wise men," or "Sages", who developed the Wisdom literature. It is supposed that the "Sages" came originally from the ranks of the learned scribes who often held important positions of state. The attention of the reader is called to 2 Sam. 8:17, where mention is made of Seraiah the Sopher or scribe, an officer of David's; reference may also be made to 1 Kgs. 4:3; 2 Kgs. 19:2; 22:3; Jer. 36:20, 21. These Scribes may have been trained in a town like Kiriathsepher which means "the book city", or, as the Septuagint reads it, "the Scribe city". [^2]

Professor S. R. Driver speaks of Hebrew Wisdom in the following terms:

Wisdom, among the ancient Hebrews, was a term which was used in special connections, and hence acquired a special limitation of meaning. It was applied to the faculty of acute observation, shrewdness in discovery or device, cleverness of invention. [^3]

And of the Hebrew "Wise Men" he says:

"Wise men" are alluded to in the Old Testament in terms which appear to show that they must have formed, if not a school, yet a tolerably prominent class in ancient Israel (cf. Jer. 18:18; Prov. 1:6; 22:17; 24:23; Job. 15:18). The interest of these "wise men," however, did not center in the distinctively national elements of Israel's character or Israel's faith; and hence, for instance, the absence in the Proverbs of warnings against idolatry, and of most of the favorite ideas and phraseology of the prophets (as "Israel," "Zion," "my people," "saith Jehovah," etc). The wise men took for granted the main postulates of Israel's creed, and applied themselves rather to the observation of human character as such, seeking to analyze conduct, studying action in its consequences, and establishing morality, upon the basis of principles common to humanity at large. On account of their prevailing disregard of national points of view, and their tendency to characterize and estimate human nature under its most general aspects, they have been termed, not inappropriately, the Humanists, of Israel. [^4] Their teaching had a practical aim: not only do they formulate maxims of conduct, but they appear also as moral advisers, and as interested in the education of the young (Prov. 1-9; cf. Ps. 34, 37). The observation of human nature, however, naturally leads on to reflection on the problems which it presents; hence Job and Ecclesiastes form part of the Hebrew Chokhmah (Wisdom)—literature. Nor is the observation of nature, especially in so far as it affords evidence of providential arrangements or designs, alien to the lines of thought which the wise men of Israel pursued. . . . [^5]

The above views of Wisdom literature have been for years the usually accepted orthodox, scholarly, variety. But they have been vigorously assailed by the very competent Semitist, Professor Duncan B. Macdonald, who protests against the prevailing ideas that the Hebrew mind was unphilosophical and that Wisdom took its place.

We come now to a more systematic consideration of the philosophy of the Hebrews. Such a study is made difficult by the prevailing prejudice that the Hebrews had no philosophy—that the Hebrew mind was essentially unphilosophical—and the whole subject is further obscured by a myth which has been built up that, instead of philosophy, the Hebrews had something called Wisdom which is expressed in a part of their literature commonly called the Wisdom Literature. [^6]

Macdonald shows how the whole temper of the Hebrew mind was Platonic. He points out how the substitution of the word "reason" or the cognate words, "rational," or "rationality" for the word "wisdom" in the Wisdom literature of the Old Testament will often cause the meaning to flash out in new reality. [^7] Macdonald makes a strong case and the writer is inclined to believe that he is right in many respects. [^8] At any rate, the student is entitled to know that the older views respecting the Wisdom literature have been disputed.

After this general discussion of the literature we may now proceed to a consideration of Koheleth (Ecclesiastes) and Proverbs. The Book of Job will be treated in the next chapter.

KOHELETH

The Meaning of Koheleth. It has been commonly supposed that Solomon, the wise king of ancient Israel, wrote the book we are now to consider. In fact, the first verse of the book says:

THE WORDS OF KOHELETH, THE SON OF DAVID, KING IN JERUSALEM.

The Hebrew title of the book is Koheleth and we would do well to use it instead of Ecclesiastes. The word is a feminine participle, derived from a root meaning "assemble." At first used to designate an activity or office, the word was finally extended to the man who held the office. So the participle probably has reference to one who convenes or addresses an assembly. Hence "Speaker" or "Preacher" are approximately correct renditions of the word.

Some Facts About the Book and Its Author. The Jewish scholars at the synod held in Jamnia, Palestine, in 90 A.D. were undecided as to whether or not Koheleth should be accorded a place in the canon of scripture. Only the reputed Solomonic authorship and the last two verses in the book seem to have fixed a place for it. The scholars were much perplexed by its contradictions [^9] and distressed by the skeptical spirit and apparent heretical tendencies that pervaded it.

Martin Luther rejected the tradition that Solomon wrote the book and now only a few conservative scholars hold that he did so. [^10] Those who reject the Solomonic authorship date the book late [^11] for linguistic, historical and philosophical reasons. In respect to the last point, scholars have variously argued that Babylonian, Greek and even Egyptian influence pervade the book. The writer believes that none of their general claims can be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Modern scholarship differs as to whether the book is the product of a single person or many. One scholar held that at least eight persons had a hand in its composition. The writer sees no good reason to doubt the essential unity of the book though aware that a number of difficulties present themselves in doing so. But it will also be found difficult to explain certain facts about the book on the basis of multiple authorship.

The author—let us call him Koheleth—seems to have come from an old and noble family and was the possessor and cultivator of large estates—the gentleman-farmer type with much worldly experience. Though an aristocrat by family connection, he was also such in feeling and appreciation for his fellow men, because he said:

But I returned and considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun; and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter. [^12]

How true that statement rings today!

After a long experience in all classes of society and amid all kinds of living, Koheleth comes to certain conclusions or rules concerning life. He carefully weighs the points for and against each—reason will be found ruling throughout his formulations. Koheleth points out that something can be said for almost every course of action except folly—and even a fool may have certain satisfactions in his own way. The author seems to be writing in his old age, [^13] and one of the high points of his teaching is the admonition to enjoy life with a beloved partner.

Enjoy life with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which He hath given thee under the sun. [^14]

The book has a thoroughly pessimistic tone in many parts of it, nevertheless, men still read and enjoy it. Said Professor Macdonald:

Every age has found itself in his book and yet there is no end. It is safe to say, that of the Hebrew literature that has reached us, this book is the fullest and most perfect flowering of the essential Hebrew genius in its strength and in its weakness. [^15]

Some Teachings of Koheleth. The teachings in the book are seldom developed in any systematic way and, in fact, many of them are inconsistent with each other, thus revealing the changing moods and temperament of the author.

One of the outstanding teachings of the book is the fact that we live in a changing world and that it is constantly "becoming" and not "being". The changes that constantly go on in the world, Koheleth observed, could be put into a table of opposites such as we find in Chapter 3.

A time to be born, and a time to die; A time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; A time to kill, and a time to heal; A time to break down, and a time to build up. [^16]

Koheleth in the same way would express the doctrine that there is no good without evil.

Another teaching of Koheleth is that God has given man labor to do so that ultimate reality behind events in the world remains a mystery to him.

I have seen the task which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith. He hath made everything beautiful in its time; also He hath set toil [^17] in their heart, yet so that man cannot find out the work that God hath done from the beginning to the end. [^18]

Under these circumstances there can be nothing better for man to do than enjoy life as best he can by making proper adjustments to events as they occur in the world. Because of the will to work placed in man, he will enjoy labor; in fact, find it to be his only real enjoyment in life.

I know that there is nothing better for them, than to rejoice, and to get pleasure so long as they live. But also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy pleasure for all his labor, is the gift of God. [^19]

By means of labor and toil man can achieve a transitory happiness. Since old age will surely come, men should enjoy its opposite when the opportunity is at hand. [^20]

We can now understand what is meant in the first chapter of Koheleth where the usual translations say:

Vanity of vanities, saith Koheleth; Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. [^21]

In the words of Dr. Macdonald, to whose brilliant insights we owe so much in this discussion of Koheleth:

The world was very far from being "vain" or "empty" to Ecclesiastes; it was very full of the most worthwhile things in the doing of which was joy. But they did not abide; they were in perpetual flux; and man had to toil after them. In that toiling there was joy, but he had to keep it up; the accomplished work was always escaping him. So he could say, "Oh, how transitory; all things are transitory!" and go on to describe the groaning, travailing universe in its perpetual circlings. There was no progress in it and man was carried with it, round and round. But man by giving himself to it; by laboring at each thing as it came could snatch a joy.

But we must never forget that this round of events was not ultimate. Behind it was God, and it was only a kind of screen that God had erected between man and Himself that He Himself, behind it, might remain inscrutable. [^22]

Koheleth points out that successful work makes a man an object of jealousy. Peaceful poverty, he thinks, is better than troubled and profitless wealth. [^23] He also shows that wealth does not satisfy its owner, for others "eat it". The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, but not that of the rich man. Riches are often kept by the owner to his hurt; or perhaps they perish and his son has nothing left. A rich man can not take his wealth with him at death. [^24]

The author pleads with one not to be self-righteous or to be over-wise; neither on the other hand to be over-wicked or a fool. [^25] "Why should you die before your time?"

It is a good thing to be conveniently deaf at times, lest you hear your servant curse you; for you know in your own heart that you have cursed others. [^26]

Koheleth comes to the conculsion that, since the work of God is inscrutable from beginning to end, the only course left to man is to make the most of the present.

Such are a few of Koheleth's teachings. It is impractical to summarize them all here. With many of them we may disagree, but a careful reading of the book will make us enjoy the calm and steadfast courage with which the author faced life.

The end of the matter, all having been heard: fear God, and keep His commandments; for this is the whole man. [^27]

THE BOOK OF PROVERBS

The Authorship of Proverbs. The authorship of this Wisdom book is commonly ascribed to Solomon. The superscription of the book reads:

The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel.

Again in 10:1 we have another title:

The proverbs of Solomon.

At the head of another collection, beginning at 22:17, there is now no title in our Hebrew text, but the Septuagint has preserved it.

Sayings of the Wise.

The collection beginning at 24:23 has the title:

These also (belong) to the Wise men.

Then the collection beginning with 25:1 has the interesting title:

These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah copied out.

And no less interesting is the superscription of Chapter 30:

The words of Agur the son of Jakeh; the burden.

Finally, at the head of Chapter 31 there appears:

The words of king Lemuel; the burden wherewith his mother corrected him.

Looking back over these titles it is evident that not all of the Book of Proverbs is claimed to have been written by Solomon. However, a goodly portion of it would appear to be so.

According to the Book of I Kings, Solomon was a very wise man who was the author of a large number of proverbs.

And God gave to Solomon wisdom and discernment abundantly, and largeness of understanding, as the sand that is on the sea shore. And Solomon's wisdom was greater than the wisdom of all the sons of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt. And he was wiser than all men . . . and his name was in all the nations around. And he spoke three thousand proverbs. . . . [^28]

But in spite of the apparently strong testimony of the above citations, most modern scholars have a tendency to doubt or deny Solomon's authorship of the sections ascribed to him. The writer can not help feeling that their strongest arguments are based on rather slender threads of evidence. They do not actually prove anything. We can see no real reason to doubt that a good proportion of the proverbs ascribed to Solomon are really his, though at the same time admitting that they were collected, or "copied out," edited, and put into various collections at a later time.

Let us now proceed to a consideration of the form and teaching of the Book of Proverbs.

An Analysis of Proverbs and Some of Its Teachings. It is usual to discuss Proverbs under eight divisions. We shall point these out to the student and indicate the trend of teaching in each. Space prevents a detailed discussion.

Say unto wisdom: `Thou art my sister,' And call understanding thy kinswoman; That they may keep thee from the strange woman, From the alien woman that maketh smooth her words. [^29]

As a ring of gold in a swine's snout, So is a fair woman without discretion. [^30]

Unfortunately, the Book of Proverbs has been much neglected. It deserves a wider reading than it usually gets. To be sure it has its limitations, but is in certain respects of special interest and value to our modern world. It has a simple creed throughout, the fear of Jehovah, and this point is driven home with many practical examples. The appeal of the book is to experience and in this sense it is "in the Land of Us." (Job 1:1)

Its appeal is therefore one which cannot be evaded, as it commends itself, without the support of revelation, to the universal moral instincts of mankind. [^39]

1 See O. S. Rankin, Israel's Wisdom Literature, p. 9. Rankin's dates have not been followed in every instance. This material is given for the sake of completeness. A recent book which discusses Wisdom and the Wisdom books is Sellin - Fohrer (tr. D. Green), Introduction to the Old Testament, Part Three, pp. 304-341. For an excellent survey of Proverbs as wisdom literature see R.B.Y. Scott, Proverbs (Anchor Bible), pp. xv-liii and 3-30. For a discussion of Canaanite literary influence on Israel, including Wisdom, see W. F. Albright, Yahweh and the Gods of Canaan, especially pp. 220-229.

2 See W. O. E. Oesterley and T. H. Robinson, An Introduction to the Books of the Old Testament, pp. 150, 151, 157.

3 S. R. Driver, An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament (New Edition, Revised 1913), p. 392.

4 Rankin, op cit., p. 3, says: "The Wisdom literature may be called the documents of Israel's humanism, not in the sense of a rejection of the supernatural, or even as intending a concern chiefly with man's welfare, but because its general characteristic is the recognition of man's moral responsibility, his religious individuality and of God's interest in the individual life."

5 Driver, op cit., p. 393.

6 Duncan B. Macdonald, The Hebrew Literary Genius, p. 171.

7 Ibid., pp. 171 f. Those interested should read completely Chapters 13 and 14 of his work.

8 See Macdonald's, The Hebrew Philosophical Genius.

9 Cf. 4:2 with 9:4.

10 See Robert D. Wilson, A Scientific Investigation of the Old Testament, p. 12.

11 300 B.C.—250.

12 Eccles. 4:1.

13 See Eccles. 11:9; 12:1.

14 Eccles. 9:9.

15 Macdonald, The Hebrew Literary Genius, p. 199. The writer does not agree completely with this statement, but cites it as an example of the favor in which the book is held.

16 Eccles. 3:2, 3, etc.

17 The will to toil is what is meant. In the usual English translations, "the world," or "eternity" which render the present Hebrew text, are meaningless in this context. The simple interchange of two Hebrew letters gives the above excellent result.

18 Eccles. 3:10, 11.

19 Eccles. 3:12, 13.

20 See Eccles. 11:9.

21 Eccles. 1:2.

22 Macdonald, The Hebrew Literary Genius, pp. 207 f.

23 Eccles. 4:4, 6.

24 Eccles. 5:9-16.

25 Eccles. 7:15-17.

26 Eccles. 7:21, 22.

27 Eccles. 12:13. The translation "the whole man" is much deeper and more significant than the usual one, "the whole duty of man." The words "duty of" were added by the Authorized Version translators. It is possible that "the duty of all men" is meant by the Hebrew text.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapters 1 and 2. The Prologue, in prose.
[^2] Chapters 3-31. Three cycles of speeches between Job and his friends, Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar, in poetry. (Chaps. 3-14; 15-21; 22-31.)
[^3] Chapters 32-37. The Elihu speeches, in poetry with the exception of 32:1-6.
[^4] Chapters 38:1-42:6, also in poetry.
[^5] Chapter 42:7-17. The Epilogue, in prose.
[^6] Chapter 30. This division contains the skeptical and enigmatical words of Agur. The form of the proverbs in this division is peculiar and sometimes they are called "numerical" proverbs. Among other matters, the author calls attention to the four insatiable things, [^34] the four incomprehensible things, [^35] the four intolerable things, [^36] the four wise animals [^37] and the four things comely in their going. [^38]
[^7] Chapter 31:1-9. Contains the words of advice to King Lemuel by his mother. No one knows who Lemuel was. He is warned against women and wine, exhorted to judge righteously and to plead the cause of the poor.
[^8] Chapter 31:10-31. An alphabetic poem describing and praising the good housewife.
[^9] Kings 9 From the Greek pente (five) and teuchos (tool or implement). The term was applied finally to a sheath or case in which five scrolls or books were kept. The use of the term Pentateuch as a name for the five books of Moses can be traced to early Christian times.
[^10] 10 The word Semitic or Shemitic was derived from the name of Noah's son, Shem, who was the traditional ancestor of the Hebrews.
[^11] Jeremiah 11 A suitable number of such books will be found in the bibliography.
[^12] 12 See W. H. Green, op. cit., pp. 145f.; A. T. Robertson, A Grammar of the Greek New Testament in the Light of Historical Research (Fifth Ed.), p. 126; F. W. Danker, Multipurpose Tools for Bible Study (St. Louis, 1960), p.94.
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] 19 The following books on the Dead Sea Scrolls may be recommended: Millar Burrows, The Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1955); More Light on the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York, 1958); Frank M. Cross, Jr., The Ancient Library of Qumran and Modern Biblical Studies (New York, 1958); J. T. Milik, Ten Years of Discovery in the Wilderness of Judaea (Naperville, Ill., 1959); F. F. Bruce, Second Thoughts on the Dead Sea Scrolls (Grand Rapids, 1956); G. R. Driver, The Judaean Scrolls (New York, 1966); T. H. Gaster, The Dead Sea Scriptures in English Translation (Garden City N. Y., 1964).
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
[^25] 25 See W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1963).
[^26] 26 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 1.
[^27] 27 Lods, op. cit., pp. 15f.
[^28] 28 1 Kgs. 4:29-32.
[^29] 29 Prov. 7:4, 5.
[^30] 30 Prov. 11:22.
[^39] 39 John E. McFadyen, Introduction to the Old Testament (New Edition, Revised), p. 299.
