Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XII

THE BOOK OF PSALMS (Continued)

Psalms of Adoration. We shall now proceed to become acquainted with some of the great psalms in a few of the classes mentioned in the previous chapter. Of the first class, according to McFadyen's classification, we select two, Ps. 8 and 19:1-6. We shall give each psalm a name as was done in the psalm studied in Chapter XI. It is hoped that the reader will disagree with the name given and proceed to give it a better one.

Ps. 8 The Divine Immanence of God. For the Leader; upon the Gittith. A Psalm of David. 1. O Lord, our Lord, How glorious is Thy name in all the earth! Thou hast set Thy glory above the heavens. 2. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast Thou founded strength, Because of Thine enemies; That Thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger. 3. When I behold Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers, The moon and the stars, which Thou hast established; 4. What is man, that Thou art mindful of him? And the son of man, that Thou visitest him? 5. Yet Thou hast made him but little lower than the Gods, And hast crowned him with glory and honor.

This psalm is one of the most inspiring and beautiful in the Book of Psalms. The poetry is good and metrically well organized. The writer justifies the title given above because the psalm treats of the glory and power of God which is manifested throughout all His creations. [^1] The Psalmist contemplates how glorious God's name is over all the earth, but when he beholds the planets and stars at night he wonders how the Almighty can take notice of man who seems in comparison so weak and insignificant. Yet he realizes that man was created in the image of God, belonging, in fact, to the same race. Man's creative power and his desire to achieve righteousness in the world make him the greatest revelation of God. Even in his humble, mortal state he is "little lower than the Gods." (So the Hebrew text.) The dignity and supreme worth of man have been seldom better taught than in this poem.

Professor Oesterley calls attention to a significant point in this psalm:

Unique in the Psalter is the teaching that within the hearts of little children lies enshrined divine strength which has the power to subdue everything; the deep significance of this is only realized when our Lord's words are recalled: "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein." (Mark 10:15; Luke 18:17). [^2]

Ps. 19:1-6. The Heavenly Bodies Testify For the Leader. A Psalm of David. 1. The heavens declare the glory of God, And the firmament showeth His handiwork; 2. Day unto day uttereth speech, And night unto night revealeth knowledge; 3. There is no speech, there are no words, Neither is their voice heard. 4. Their line is gone out through all the earth, And their words to the end of the world. In them hath He set a tent for the sun. 5. Which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, And rejoiceth as a strong man to run his course. 6. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, And his circuit unto the ends of it. And there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

Readers may at once ask why only six verses are given of this psalm. It is thought by many authorities that verses 7-14 originally formed a separate psalm. Certainly the subject matter of these verses seems to have little in common with what precedes. Neither is the poetry of as good quality as in the earlier verses. At any rate, verses 7-14 are reflective in type, not belonging to the classification we are at present considering.

This psalm, like the one preceding, is in adoration of God for His revelation in nature. Many commentators have attempted to connect it with pagan mythology, expecially of the Babylonian variety. Such procedure is errant nonsense. The psalm is very deeply spiritual and in a very vivid, picturesque style tells how the heavenly bodies, particularly the sun, testify of God's majesty and glory.

The reader's attention is called to verse 4 where the word "line" is hard to understand. Note that the difficulty is cleared up by the synonymous parallelism in the next line. (See Chapter VIII.)

Psalms of Reflection. In this group we select Ps. 15; 23; 24:1; 90.

Ps. 15 Who May Commune With God? A Psalm of David. 1. Lord, who shall abide in Thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell on Thy holy mountain? 2. He who walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, And speaketh truth in his heart; 3. And slandereth not with his tongue, Nor doeth evil to his friend, Nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbor; 4. In whose eyes a vile person is despised, But he honoreth them who fear the Lord; Nor sweareth falsely to do harm, [^3] and changeth not; 5. He that putteth not out his money on interest, Nor taketh a bribe against the innocent. He that doeth these things shall never be moved.

This psalm gives an answer to the question, Who may acceptably commune with God? The poem has received rather shabby treatment at the hands of a number of commentators who fail to see its high spiritual and moral values. The Psalmist very simply and effectively describes the character of him who can draw near to God and abide in His presence; or as we would say, worship effectively. This psalm ought to be more widely read and taken to heart than it is today. It breathes the true prophetic spirit throughout.

The last line, "He that doeth these things shall never be moved," means that he who lives in accordance with what precedes is fortified against the evils and temptations of life. In New Testament terms, such a person is built upon a rock. [^4]

The Epistle of James and Isa. 33:13-16 may profitably be read in connection with this psalm.

Ps. 23. The Lord is My Shepherd. A Psalm of David. 1. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. 2. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; He leadeth me beside the still waters. 3. He restoreth my soul; He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name's sake. 4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, For Thou art with me. Thy rod and Thy staff, they comfort me. 5. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; Thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over. 6. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; And I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.

This exquisite and beautiful psalm is probably the best known and loved in the Book of Psalms. It breathes a spirit of calm, peace, and serenity. Through the psalm there is felt an absolute assurance and trust that all is well, that the Lord is at the helm. To appreciate it completely one ought to spend some time in Palestine. The writer has had the privilege of watching Palestinian sheep and shepherds in many parts of that land. There the shepherd leads the sheep from place to place. They know his voice and follow him. The shepherd's life is the inspiration of this poem.

In reference to the anointing with oil in verse 5 the reader may consult Dan. 10:3; Amos 6:6; Micah 6:15; 2 Sam. 12:20; Deut. 28:40, with profit. In connection with the psalm as a whole, Ezek. 34; John 10:1-16; 21:15 will be found valuable supplementary reading as will also modern accounts of the shepherd's life in Palestine.

Ps. 24:1-6. Who Shall Stand in God's Holy Place? A Psalm of David. 1. The earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; The world and they who dwell therein. 2. For He hath founded it upon the seas, And established it upon the floods. 3. Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord? And who shall stand in His holy place? 4. He who hath clean hands, and a pure heart; Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, And hath not sworn deceitfully. 5. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, And righteousness from the God of his salvation. 6. This is the generation of them who seek Him, Who seek Thy face, O Jacob. Selah.

As with Ps. 19, so it is necessary to divide Ps. 24 into two parts. The last part of this psalm (verses 7-10) is different in content and treatment from the portion printed above and belongs to a different classification. [^5]

The reader will at once perceive that this psalm is similar in many respects to Ps. 15. But it surpasses the latter in general treatment and poetic excellence. The spirituality of this psalm is very high and it deserves a careful reading. The essence of the good life is defined briefly and inclusively.

The last clause in verse six should possibly read, with some manuscripts, "O God of Jacob." The meaning of "Selah" is unknown. Some scholars think it is a term having reference to the music used, whether vocal or instrumental.

Ps. 90. Lord, Be Merciful to Us. A Prayer of Moses the Man of God. 1. Lord, Thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

This psalm is one of the best-known and loved selections in the Psalter. Isaac Taylor said of it:

The ninetieth Psalm might be cited as perhaps the most sublime of human composition, the deepest in feeling, the loftiest in theological conception, the most magnificent in its imagery. True is it in its report of human life as troubled, transitory, and sinful. True in its conception of the Eternal,—the Sovereign and the Judge, and yet the refuge and the hope of men who, notwithstanding the most severe trials of their faith, lose not their confidence in him; but who, in the firmness of faith, pray for, as if they were predicting, a near-at-hand season of refreshment. Wrapped, one might say, in mystery, until the distant day of revelation should come, there is here conveyed the doctrine of immortality; for in this very plaint of the brevity of the life of man, and of the sadness of these his few years of trouble, and their brevity and their gloom, there is brought into contrast the divine immutability; and yet it is in terms of a submissive piety; the thought of a life eternal is here in embryo. [^7]

Herder calls it "that ancient Psalm, that hymn of eternity." [^8]

Many critics who have denied Moses the authorship of the psalm,

Nevertheless admit, that in depth and loftiness of thought, in solemnity of feeling, and in majesty of diction, it is worthy of the great lawgiver and prophet. [^9]

This psalm is used as a burial chant by the Anglican Church.

Psalms of Thanksgiving. In this group of psalms we should like to have printed three, Ps. 46, 76 and 118, but due to the limitations of space the first-mentioned must suffice.

Ps. 46 A Song of Faith. For the Leader; [a Psalm] of the sons of Korah; upon Alamoth. A Song. 1. God is our refuge and strength, A very present help in trouble. 2. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth do change, And though the mountains be moved into the heart of the seas; 3. Though the waters thereof roar and foam, Though the mountains shake at the swelling thereof. Selah.

This beautiful psalm is really a psalm of the future and envisages a day when wars shall cease and deadly weapons be abolished. The universalism of the poem is shown in the hope that God will be exalted among the nations, among all men everywhere. It is full of faith and hope. The simplicity, warm emotion, and depth of thought which characterize this psalm have made it famous. Not without good reason has it been called "the grandest song of faith" ever written.

Ps. 46 was Martin Luther's favorite and upon it he based his noble hymn, "Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott" (A Strong Fortress is Our God).

The Imprecatory Psalms. Of these psalms we select but one, the famous one hundred thirty-seventh.

Ps. 137. A Lamentation of the Captivity. 1. By the rivers of Babylon, There we sat down, yea, we wept, When we remembered Zion.

This psalm evidently dates from the Babylonian Captivity. In beautiful language the writer laments the sad state and despondency of captive Israel among her Babylonian foes. As he broods over her wrongs and the memory of the past he grows resentful and vindictive as verses 7-9 show.

Perowne says of the Psalm:

What a wonderful mixture is the Psalm of soft melancholy and fiery patriotism! The hand which wrote it must have known how to smite sharply with the sword, as well as how to tune his harp. The words are burning words of a heart breathing undying love to his country, undying hate to his foe. The poet is indeed

"Dowered with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn, The love of love." [^10]

This psalm is a human document of the first rank.

The Penitential Psalms. We choose from this group the profound Ps. 51. With it should be read Ps. 130, another of the great penitentials.

Ps. 51 Cleanse Me From Sin. For the Leader. A Psalm of David; when Nathan the prophet came unto him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba. 1. Be gracious unto me, O God, according to Thy mercy; According to the multitude of Thy compassions blot out my transgressions. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, And cleanse me from my sin. 3. For I know my transgressions; And my sin is ever before me. 4. Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, And done that which is evil in Thy sight; That Thou mayest be justified when Thou speakest, And be in the right when Thou judgest. 5. Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, And in sin did my mother conceive me. 6. Behold, Thou desirest truth in the inward parts; Make me, therefore, to know wisdom in mine inmost heart. 7. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness; That the bones which Thou hast crushed may rejoice. 9. Hide Thy face from my sins, And blot out all mine iniquities. 10. Create me a clean heart, O God; And renew a stedfast spirit within me. 11. Cast me not away from Thy presence; And take not Thy holy spirit from me. 12. Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation; And let a willing spirit uphold me. 13. Then will I teach transgressors Thy ways; And sinners shall return unto Thee. 14. Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God, Thou God of my salvation; So shall my tongue sing aloud of Thy righteousness. 15. O Lord, open Thou my lips; And my mouth shall declare Thy praise. 16. For Thou delightest not in sacrifice, else would I give it; Thou hast no pleasure in burnt-offering. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; A broken and a contrite heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise. 18. Do good in Thy favor unto Zion; Build Thou the walls of Jerusalem.

This psalm is perhaps the most heart-searching of the penitential psalms. A sense of guilt and sinfulness seems to have penetrated the very soul of the writer, and he pleads with God to purge him and deliver him with all the fervor and power at his command. It is a marvelous plea of a penitent man for forgiveness. He throws himself wholly and completely upon God's mercy.

This psalm is one of the four reckoned by Martin Luther as being the best psalms. It was read to Henry V on his death-bed at his own request. Thomas More, Lady Jane Grey and Count Egmont each recited it prior to their execution. Numerous other famous persons have quoted it in times of trouble, not to mention thousands of others less well known but deeply mournful individuals.

Despite the fact that many leading commentators deny this psalm to David, the writer cannot help but feel that it could have come from him when the dire consequences of his sin were explained by Nathan, the prophet. (See 1 Sam. 12:1-14.)

Royal Psalms. Of this type we select Ps. 63.

Ps. 63. A Soul's Yearning for God. A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah. 1. O God, Thou art my God, earnestly will I seek Thee; My soul thirsteth for Thee, my flesh longeth for Thee, In a dry and weary land, where no water is. 2. So have I looked for Thee in the sanctuary, To see Thy power and Thy glory. 3. For Thy loving kindness is better than life; My lips shall praise Thee. 4. So will I bless Thee as long as I live; In Thy name will I lift up my hands. 5. My soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness; And my mouth doth praise Thee with joyful lips;

Ps. 63 is without question one of the most beautiful and exquisite psalms in the Psalter. It is the outpouring of a soul who earnestly seeks communion and rest with his God.

Unfortunately, space forbids our printing other great psalms in their different classifications, but it is hoped that the reader will find added joy and satisfaction in seeking still others that will appeal to his religious and esthetic sensibilities.

1 "He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever." D&C 88:41.

2 W. O. E. Oesterley, The Psalms , I, 141.

3 The text is corrupt at this point. "He that sweareth to his own hurt" does not make sense. Commentators have tried in various ways to emend the clause. The writer thinks that three Hebrew words have dropped out of the text. Restore lo . . . `al-sheqer . . and we get the satisfactory result above.

4 See Matt. 7:24.

5 It does not necessarily follow that the same author was not responsible for both parts of the psalm. Authorities are divided upon this question.

6 This line is apparently corrupt. The writer finds no emendation that is satisfactory.

7 As quoted by J. J. Stewart Perowne, The Book of Psalms (Third London Edition, Revised), II, 157.

8 Ibid., p. 159.

9 Ibid., p. 158.

10 Perowne, op. cit., II, 407.

---
Notas:
[^1] Ps. 1-41. The Jehovistic Psalter. The David Psalms: 3-9, 11-32, 34-41, 51-65, 68-70, 86, 101, 103, 108-110, 124, 133, 138-145. A total of 72. Hymns, or songs of praise; a special class is formed by the "Enthronement" psalms. Psalms of Adoration.a. Adoration of God for His revelation in nature, 8; 19:1-6; 29; 104.b. Adoration of Him for His love to His people, 33; 103; 111; 113; 115; 117; 147.c. Praise of His glorious kingdom, 145; 146; ending with the call to universal praise, 148; 150.2. Psalms of Reflection.a. Upon the moral order of the world, 9; 10; 11; 14; 36; 37; 39; 49; 52; 62; 73; 75; 82; 90; 92; 94.b. Upon Divine Providence, 16; 23; 34; 91; 112; 121; 125; 127; 128; 133; 139; 144:12-15.c. On the value of scripture, 1; 19:7-14; 119.d. On the nature of the ideal man, 15; 24:1-6; 50.3. Psalms of Thanksgiving, most of them for historical deliverances, 30; 40; 46; 48; 65; 66; 67; 68; 76; 116; 118; 124; 126; 129; 138; 144:1-11; 149.4. Psalms in Celebration of Worship, 5; 24:7-10; 26; 27; 42-43; 84; 122; 134.5.Historical Psalms.a. Emphasizing the unfaithfulness of the people, 78; 81; 106.b. Emphasizing the love or power of God, 105; 114; 135; 136.6.Imprecatory Psalms, 58; 59; 69; 83; 109; 137.7.Penitential Psalms, 6; 32; 38; 51; 102; 130; 143.8. Psalms of Petition.a. Prayers for deliverance, preservation or restoration, 3; 4; 7; 12; 13; 17; 25; 31; 35; 41; 44; 54; 55; 60; 64; 71; 74; 77; 79; 80; 85; 86; 88; 120; 123; 131; 140; 141; 142.b. Answered prayers, 22; 28; 56; 57.9.Royal Psalms.a. King's coronation, 21.b. Marriage, 45.c. Prayers for his welfare and success, 20; 61; 63.d. His character, 72; 101.e. Dominion, 2; 18; 110.f. Yearning for the Messianic King, 89; 132.10. Psalms concerning the universal reign of Jehovah, i. e., Messianic psalms in the largest sense of the word, 47; 87; 93; 95; 96; 97; 98; 99, 100. [^8] O clap your hands, all ye peoples;
[^2] Before the mountains were brought forth, Or ever Thou hadst formed the earth and the world, Even from everlasting to everlasting, Thou art God. 3. Thou turnest man to contrition; And sayest: "Return, ye children of men." 4. For a thousand years in Thy sight Are but a yesterday when it is past, And as a watch in the night. 5. Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep; In the morning they are like grass which groweth up. 6. In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; In the evening it is cut down, and withereth. 7. For we are consumed by Thine anger, And by Thy wrath are we confounded. 8. Thou hast set our iniquities before Thee, Our secret sins in the light of Thy countenance. 9. For all our days are passed away in Thy wrath; We spend our years as a thought. 10. The days of our years are three-score years and ten, Or even by reason of strength four-score years; Yet is their pride but travail and vanity; For it is speedily gone, and we fly away. 11. Who knoweth the power of Thine anger, Even according to Thy fear so is Thy wrath. [^6] 12. So teach us to number our days, That we may gain a heart of wisdom. 13. Return, O Lord; how long? And have pity upon Thy servants. 14. O satisfy us in the morning with Thy mercy; That we may rejoice and be glad all our days. 15. Make us glad according to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted us, The years wherein we have seen evil. 16. Let Thy work appear unto Thy servants, And Thy glory unto their children. 17. And let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us; And establish Thou the work of our hands upon us; Yea, the work of our hands establish Thou it. Upon the willows in the midst thereof We hanged up our harps. 3. For there they that led us captive asked of us words of song, And our tormentors asked of us mirth: "Sing us one of the songs of Zion." 4. How shall we sing the Lord's song In a foreign land? 5. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, Let my right hand forget her cunning. 6. Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, If I remember thee not; If I set not Jerusalem Above my chiefest joy. 7. Remember, O Lord, against the children of Edom The day of Jerusalem; Who said: "Rase it, rase it, Even to the foundation thereof." 8. O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed; Happy shall he be, who repayeth thee As thou hast served us. 9. Happy shall he be, who taketh and dasheth thy little ones Against the rock.
[^3] Ps. 90-150. Another Jehovistic Psalter. The Asaphite Psalms: 50, 73-83. A total of 12. Royal psalms. He subdueth peoples under us,
[^4] There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God, The holiest dwelling-place of the Most High. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her, at the approach of morning. 6. Nations were in tumult, kingdoms were moved; He uttered His voice, the earth melted. 7. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, Who hath made desolations in the earth. 9. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth the chariots in the fire. 10. "Let be, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth." 11. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah.
[^5] The Hallelujah Psalms: 104-106, 111-113, 115-117, 135, 146-150. A total of 15. Thanksgiving of the individual. God is gone up amidst shouting,
[^7] Pilgrim psalms. For God is the King of all the earth;
[^8] Thanksgiving of the Israelite nation. God reigneth over the nations;
[^9] Legends. Let the princes of the people be gathered together,
[^10] Psalms dealing with the Law.
