Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XIV

ELIJAH THE PROPHET

The Man and His Times. In Chapter I it was pointed out that the first group of the prophetic books as classified by the ancient Hebrews was the Former Prophets, comprising Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings. Although these books do mention a number of prophets we shall discuss but one of them in this book, namely Elijah. This prophet left such an impress upon his times that the legends and stories about him are legion. Even to this day the Jews make much of him and look forward to his coming. Elijah was one of the greatest of the prophets, but the reasons for this are best understood by the Latter-day Saints. Rudolf Kittel, a great German specialist in the Old Testament, once said:

What Moses had been to their ancestors, Elijah was to his time. Indeed after Moses, Elijah was the greatest man in Israel's religious life. [^1]

Elijah is commonly known as the "Tishbite," having been born perhaps at Tishbeh in Galilee; but he seems later to have dwelt in Gilead. [^2] The ministry of Elijah is most prominent during the reign of Ahab, king of Israel, the date of whose reign is usually placed at 869-850 B.C. Ahab's father, Omri, had earlier usurped the throne of Israel when that kingdom had sunk into virtual anarchy. A brave, successful soldier, he proved to be a strong, capable ruler, and made a notable impression on history outside of Israel. The Moabites were conquered by him, and even after his death and the destruction of his family the Assyrian records for a time continue to refer to him as Humri. Omri transferred the seat of Israelite government from Tirzah to Samaria which he built for the purpose. [^3] He followed the idolatrous practices of Jeroboam and acted even more wickedly than those who had preceded him on the throne of Israel. [^4] Thus the father set the stage for the actions of his son, Ahab, who inherited the throne after his death.

Ahab continued his father's political successes. He continued to rule the Moabites with a firm hand and brought the long-drawn wars with Judah to an end. He sealed the treaty of peace by a marriage between his daughter Athaliah and Joram, the heir to Jehoshaphat's (of Judah) crown. [^5] Ahab succeeded in taking his formidable rival, Benhadad of Damascus, as a prisoner, and thereafter stood side by side with him as ally in the great battle of Karkar (853 B.C.), which signalled the first movement of Assyrian arms in force against the West.

Ahab's military successes went to his head; but his vaulting ambition over-reached itself and in time brought about his ruin. His marriage to the terrible idolatress, Jezebel, daughter of Ethbaal, king of Sidon, was a tragedy to Israel as King Solomon's marriages to foreign women had been at an earlier time. [^6] Jezebel was an oriental princess with extraordinary force of character, whose aim was to win absolute authority for herself and her own notions of rule. She worshiped Baal, and finding her husband as putty in her hands, she made him a Baal worshiper also. [^7] Jezebel was not content merely to find recognition and toleration of her oriental cult; she made up her mind to secure for her god Melcarth, more than equal acceptance with Jehovah, Israel's god. Accordingly, as the scripture makes clear, Ahab built her a temple of Baal, with its customary pillar and Asherah, the pole or tree-trunk which was dedicated to the licentious rites of Ashtarte. Not only that, he allowed his unholy siren of a wife the privilege of wreaking vengeance on all who opposed her evil designs. She attempted to force all of the people to adopt the worship of Baal. And with such force and determination did she carry out her foul purpose that not only were most of the prophets of the Lord slain, but also the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal openly "ate at Jezebel's table." [^8] The Lord's prophets who escaped were hidden in a cave by a high functionary, Obadiah, who fed them with bread and water. [^9]

The Baal worship espoused by Jezebel had its origin in the belief that all tracts of ground owed their productivity and fertility to supernatural beings, or baals, that dwelt there. Baal worship was frequently associated with lewd rites (cf. 1 Kgs. 14:24), the sacrifice of children by fire (Jer. 14:5), and kissing the image. [^10]

The faith of Israel was in dire plight under the circumstances described above. It could hardly be otherwise, because Jezebel, uncompromising champion of Baal-worship, sat on the throne; the true prophets of Jehovah were either dead or in hiding, and the masses of the people were wavering or halting "between two opinions" (1 Kgs. 18:21), scarcely able to judge whether Jehovah or Baal was the true god they ought to worship.

Such was the religious scene in Israel when the brave Elijah came on the stage to do battle for Jehovah.

Elijah Begins Work of Stemming the Tide in Jehovah's Favor. Elijah was one of the non-writing prophets. If he wrote anything, it has not come down to us. His deeds have been recorded by others. When the religious situation in Israel seemed hopeless as a result of the tyranny of Jezebel and Ahab, the Lord's great prophet stepped forward to stem the tide. Using the keys of the sealing powers of the Priesthood vested in him, Elijah stood before Ahab and said:

As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word. [^11]

On certain occasions the Lord in His mercy has used the persuasive powers of hunger, drought, war, and pestilence in an endeavor to guide His people into righteous paths. Witness the testimony of Amos the prophet (4:6-11) and the appeal of the great prophet Nephi to the Lord.

O Lord, do not suffer that this people shall be destroyed by the sword; but O Lord, rather let there be a famine in the land, to stir them up in remembrance of the Lord their God, and perhaps they will repent and turn unto thee. [^12]

During the ensuing drought, the Lord directed Elijah to the brook Cherith, near the Jordan. There he had water to drink and ravens brought him food (1 Kgs. 17:2-6) to miraculously sustain him.

When the brook Cherith dried up during the extended drought, the Lord sent Elijah to a widow woman in Zarephath in Zidon near the sea. This woman had been commanded to sustain the prophet during the continued drought in Israel. The scriptural account of how Elijah, through his marvelous powers, caused her barrel of meal and cruse of oil to fail not are too well known to repeat here. [^13] Nor is it necessary to repeat the famous account of how he raised the widow woman's son from the dead. [^14] These miracles only emphasize the power of the keys the Lord had vested in His servant Elijah.

Elijah Tests the Powers of Baal and of Jehovah. In the third year of the drought, the Lord instructed Elijah to go and show himself to Ahab; moreover, He promised to send rain upon the earth. [^15] The ensuing account (vss. 2-18) tells how the prophet met Obadiah, one of the king's servants, and instructed him to notify Ahab to come and meet him. This Ahab did.

And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel. And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou has followed Baalim. [^16]

Then follows the famous narrative of how Elijah had Ahab gather the prophets of Baal together in order to test their powers and that of Jehovah in the presence of the people. Both Elijah and the prophets of Baal were to put a dressed bullock upon separate altars as for sacrifice. Then Elijah said:

And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the god that answereth by fire, let him be God. [^17]

The people gave their assent to the test. The prophets of Baal cried and called from morn until evening, but their gods did not answer or burn their sacrifice. Elijah taunted and mocked their efforts. However, when his turn came he called upon the God of Israel to show to His people that He was the only true God.

Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces; and they said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God. [^18]

Elijah had gone far in stemming the tide of pagan religion in Israel. Jehovah had shown His hand to the satisfaction of the people. Not only that, but the prophets of Baal were all slain at the brook Kishon, which flows at Mount Carmel's base. Elijah prayed for the rain, which came in torrents, and Ahab drove back to Jezreel with the prophet running before him. [^19]

Elijah Forced to Flee Discouraged. Although Elijah had won an important round in his battle with paganism, the war was not yet over. When the wicked Jezebel heard what Elijah had done, and how he had slain the prophets of Baal, she sent a messenger to him with a threat on his life. The prophet fled beyond Beer-sheba to the south of Judah where he sat under a juniper tree and wished that he might die. [^20] In the ensuing account we find that the discouraged prophet made his way to a cave in Mount Horeb where he complained to the Lord.

I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. [^21]

In the midst of spiritual experiences in the wilderness, the Lord commanded the prophet to go and anoint Hazael to be king over Syria, Jehu as king over Israel, and Elisha, the son of Shaphat, to be prophet in his stead. Then the Almighty assured Elijah that there were seven thousand in Israel who, like himself, had not bowed unto Baal or kissed him. Elijah cast his mantle upon Elisha who arose and followed him. [^22]

The Episode of Naboth's Vineyard—Jehovah Hates Iniquity. The judicial murder of Naboth by Jezebel in order to obtain a coveted vineyard for Ahab was quite typical of the arbitrary deeds of oriental monarchs of the time. [^23] Such an atrocity would have aroused little or no comment, still less moral condemnation, among neighboring states. But the God of Israel was a righteous God before whose bar of justice murder was murder, whether it was committed by king or the common man. The Divine penalty was announced by Elijah who was sent by the Lord to Ahab:

Thus saith the Lord, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine. And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thee: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord. Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity. [^24]

Not only had Jehovah won a decisive battle with Baal, but He had now upheld to all Israel His standard as a righteous and moral God, supreme in goodness as in power. It is one of the glories of the Old Testament that it proclaims high moral and ethical standards of conduct in a world too often guided by low ideals and pagan standards of conduct. Ancient Israel bequeaths to us a great legacy in this literature.

Elijah Taken into Heaven as a Translated Being. 2 Kgs. 2:1-12 gives the account of how Elijah in the company of Elisha, who refused to leave his side, proceeded from Gilgal to Jericho. It appears that not only did Elisha know that Elijah was to be taken from the earth, but that the "sons of the prophets" along the way knew also. Elijah and Elisha went to the banks of the Jordan where the former struck the waters with his mantle, and the two of them went across on dry ground. When on the other side, Elijah asked his companion what he could do for him, before he was taken. Elisha asked that a double portion of his (Elijah's) spirit be upon him. Elijah replied that he had asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if he saw Elijah when he was taken, his request should be granted; but if not, it should not be so. As the two of them went on, and talked, a marvelous thing happened.

Behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. [^25]

Elijah's public ministry was ended. He became a translated being. To the uninitiated the accounts of the prophet in 1 Kings and 2 Kings do not betray the sealing powers of the priesthood, but to those who understand the gospel his powers are more readily understood.

We speak of Elijah as having become a "translated" being. What is meant by this? The Prophet Joseph Smith gives this explanation:

Now the doctrine of translation is a power which belongs to this [Melchizedek] Priesthood. . . . Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead. [^26]

It will be remembered that Elijah and Moses, as translated beings, appeared upon the Mount of Transfiguration with the Savior and Peter, James, and John. (Matt. 17) On that occasion, Elijah probably conferred the keys of the sealing powers of the priesthood upon our Lord's apostles. Joseph Smith said:

The Priesthood is everlasting. The Savior, Moses, and Elias [Elijah], gave the keys to Peter, James, and John, on the mount, when they were transfigured before him. [^27]

The sealing powers of the priesthood held by Elijah were also conferred, it will be remembered, upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple, April 3, 1836. The resurrected Elijah himself said to them:

Behold, the time has fully come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi [Malachi 4:5, 6]—testifying that he [Elijah] should be sent, before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come—to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse—therefore, the keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands; and by this ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors. [^28]

The mission of Elijah has to do with the higher spiritual functions of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Elijah was the last prophet to hold the keys of the sealing powers of the Priesthood—that is, to seal in heaven what is bound upon the earth. The spirit of Elijah implies the power to invoke a fullness of priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained it in this way:

The spirit, power, and calling of Elijah is, that ye have power to hold the key of the revelation, ordinances, oracles, powers and endowments of the fullness of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the kingdom of God on the earth; and to receive, obtain, and perform all the ordinances belonging to the kingdom of God, even unto the turning of the hearts of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children unto the fathers, even those who are in heaven. [^29]

Through the powers of the priesthood given to Elijah, men and women may be sealed to each other in marriage for time and eternity in the temples of God. Children born of these unions may be claimed by their righteous parents forever, since the latter are united by an everlasting covenant. The family organization thus continues beyond the grave, and one generation is thus sealed to another back to the days of Adam. Families that have passed into the spirit world without a knowledge of the gospel, and hence without being sealed to each other, must have the work done vicariously for them in the temples of the Lord. All of the gospel ordinances that are necessary to be performed for a living person to obtain salvation must also be performed for the dead. The Lord has made no exceptions other than for children who die under the age of eight years. That is the reason why the fathers (the dead) spoken of in Mal. 4:6 turn to their children, their living descendants, to have all the gospel ordinances from baptism to marriage, performed vicariously for them in the temples. If the children do not turn their hearts to their ancestors and perform this necessary work for them, it will make it impossible for the Lord to accomplish his purpose of making this earth the celestial abode of the righteous. Said the Prophet Joseph Smith:

I wish you to understand this subject, for it is important; and if you will receive it, this is the spirit of Elijah, that we redeem our dead, and connect ourselves with our fathers which are in heaven, and seal up our dead to come forth in the first resurrection; and here we want the power of Elijah to seal those who dwell on earth to those who dwell in heaven. This is the power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah. [^30]

It should be quite obvious why Elijah, ancient prophet that he was, should awaken our interest in this modern age.

1 Great Men and Movements in Israel, p. 171.

2 1 1 Kgs. 17:1.

3 1 1 Kgs. 16:24.

4 1 1 Kgs. 16:25-26; Micah 6:16.

5 2 Kgs. 8:18.

6 1 Kgs. 11:1-10.

7 1 Kgs. 16:30-33.

8 1 Kgs. 18:19.

9 1 Kgs. 18:4.

10 1 Kgs. 19:18; Hosea 13:2.

11 1 Kgs. 17:1; italics ours.

12 He. 11:4.

13 1 Kgs. 17:9-16.

14 1 Kgs. 17:17-24.

15 1 Kgs. 18:1.

16 1 Kgs. 18:17-18.

17 1 Kgs. 18:24.

18 1 Kgs. 18:38-39.

19 1 Kgs. 18:44-46.

20 1 Kgs. 19:1-4.

21 1 Kgs. 19:10.

22 1 Kgs. 19:11-21.

23 1 Kgs. 21:1-16.

24 1 Kgs. 21:19-21; cf. 22:37-38.

25 2 Kgs. 2:11-12.

26 Joseph Fielding Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 170.

27 Ibid., p. 158.

28 D&C 110:14-16.

29 DHC 6:251.

30 DHC 6:252; see Sperry, Book of Mormon Compendium, pp. 426-429.

---
Notas:
[^1] It is thought to be allegory or a parable used by Hosea to symbolize the relation existing between Jehovah and Israel.
[^2] The story is assumed to be an account of actual facts. This theory has several variations.
[^3] A third interpretation, now very popular, insists that "Gomer was a pure woman when he (Hosea) married her, and continued pure till after the birth of her first child." [^13]
[^4] There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God, The holiest dwelling-place of the Most High. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her, at the approach of morning. 6. Nations were in tumult, kingdoms were moved; He uttered His voice, the earth melted. 7. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, Who hath made desolations in the earth. 9. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth the chariots in the fire. 10. "Let be, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth." 11. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah.
[^5] The Hallelujah Psalms: 104-106, 111-113, 115-117, 135, 146-150. A total of 15. Thanksgiving of the individual. God is gone up amidst shouting,
[^6] Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet: 7. Sheep and oxen, all of them, Yea, and the beasts of the field; 8. The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea; Whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas. 9. O Lord, our Lord, How glorious is Thy name in all the earth! When I remember Thee upon my couch, And meditate on Thee in the night-watches. 7. For Thou hast been my help, And in the shadow of Thy wings do I rejoice. 8. My soul cleaveth unto Thee; Thy right hand holdeth me fast. 9. But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, Shall go into the nethermost parts of the earth. 10. They shall be hurled to the power of the sword; They shall be a portion for foxes. 11. But the king shall rejoice in God; Every one that sweareth by Him shall glory; For the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
[^7] Pilgrim psalms. For God is the King of all the earth;
[^8] Thanksgiving of the Israelite nation. God reigneth over the nations;
[^9] Legends. Let the princes of the people be gathered together,
[^10] Psalms dealing with the Law.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; Then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
[^25] 25 See W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1963).
[^26] 26 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 1.
[^27] 27 Lods, op. cit., pp. 15f.
[^28] 28 1 Kgs. 4:29-32.
[^29] 29 Prov. 7:4, 5.
[^30] 30 Prov. 11:22.
