Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XV

HOSEA—PROPHET OF LOVE

Some Facts Concerning the Prophet's Person. Hosea's name means "help" or "deliverance" and it is the prevailing opinion among scholars that he was a prophet of the Northern Kingdom. According to the superscription [^1] of the book he was the son of Beeri, of whom we know nothing. We are further informed that Hosea was a prophet "in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel." Jeroboam II, king of Israel, reigned from 786 B. C. until at least 746, and Hezekiah, king of Judah, the last named of the others, did not begin to reign until 715 B. C. Hosea could, therefore, have had a long ministry, but we shall be reasonably conservative if we assign his work and labors to the years 750 B.C.—715. He was, therefore, a contemporary of the prophets Amos, Isaiah, and Micah and may have been personally acquainted with each of them.

All questions as to Hosea's home life depend upon the interpretation accorded Chapters 1-3 in the book. Since these have been so warmly discussed and differently interpreted by very able commentators, we shall have to lay aside the question of the prophet's domestic status for the moment.

Concerning Hosea's personal characteristics Professor G. L. Robinson writes:

He was gentle, pensive, and inclined to melancholy, but frank, affectionate, and full of domestic feeling. He was the Jeremiah of the northern kingdom, and, like him, was little less than a martyr, prefiguring Christ. Both were ardent patriots, possessed of finely sensitive religious natures. Jeremiah was the more studied and self-conscious in his grief; Hosea, the more artless and passionate. Jeremiah was more of a theologian; Hosea, more of a poet. [^2]

The Times of the Prophet. In the days of Hosea the Northern Kingdom had been elevated to a position of great power by Jeroboam II. This elevation to power brought in its wake wealth and luxury with all their attendant vices. What was true of the vices of the Northern Kingdom was in the main true also of the Southern Kingdom under Uzziah. The rich oppressed the poor, politicians looked to their own interests rather than to the nation's they were supposed to serve, women became debauched and thus seriously weakened the moral fiber of the country. While Jehovah was worshiped, it was done under the symbols of oxen or calves as a state-religion. This was essentially Baal-worship, for though He was outwardly confessed, and His feasts observed (Hosea 2:13), yet Jehovah was Himself made into a Baal, so that the people even called Him their Baal (Hosea 2:16), and observed "the days of Baals" (Hosea 2:13). [^3]

All of this constituted an inward apostasy from Jehovah, notwithstanding that the people still continued to worship Him outwardly. Such worship was bound to have a devastating effect upon the nation.

With the breach of the fundamental law of the covenant, viz. of the prohibition against making any likeness of Jehovah, or worshipping images made by men, more especially in consequence of the manner in which this prohibition was bound up with the divine authority of the law, all reverence not only for the holiness of the law of God, but for the holy God Himself, was undermined. Unfaithfulness towards God and His word begot faithlessness towards men. With the neglect to love God with all the heart, love to brethren also disappeared. And spiritual adultery had carnal adultery as its inevitable consequence, and that all the more because voluptuousness formed a leading trait in the character of the idolatry of Hither Asia. Hence all the bonds of love, of chastity, and of order were loosened and broken, and Hosea uttered this complaint: "There is no truthfulness, and no love, and no knowledge of God in the land. Cursing, and murder, and stealing, and adultery; they break out and blood reaches to blood." (Ch. 4:1, 2.) No king of Israel could put an effectual stop to this corruption. By abolishing the worship of the calves, he would have rendered the very existence of the kingdom doubtful. [^4]

Hosea's sketch of the state of Israel is a very gloomy one from beginning to end. Whilst offensive Canaanite religious influence and practice still continue, the nation thus persisting in its ingratitude and infidelity to God, great violence and cunning have gained the upper hand; rebellions follow one upon the other, and the kingdom advances steadily toward the ruin predicted for it by the prophets. Alliances with foreign nations such as Egypt and Assyria would be of no avail. In fact, these lands, whose friendship is courted by the nation, would only prove to be its prison. Hosea dreaded appeals to foreign governments for aid. [^5] Outside aid could be no effective remedy for Israel's decay, morally and politically.

With the moral decay of Israel the thing that seems to have impressed and saddened Hosea most is the state of family life. It had become dissolute, and accordingly the prophet lays upon it his heaviest indictment. The word "whoredom," distasteful to us as it is, is used by the prophet some sixteen times to express his opinion of the situation. [^6]

Such were the times in which Hosea prophesied. A knowledge of them will help us materially in understanding the prophet's message.

The Book of Hosea. It is a peculiar coincidence that the Book of Hosea, which deals with such a corrupt society as we have described, has suffered more from textual corruption than any other book of the Old Testament. It is not too much to say that certain parts of it defy successful translation and there is hardly a verse of which one can be sure is in the form it left the pen of the original writer.

The book consists of two sections, very unequal in length, Chapters 1-3 and Chapters 4-14. The first section, which is a fairly compact unit, and which contains much narrative, purports to tell the tragic domestic life of Hosea. Whether regarded as a symbolic action, or otherwise, the prophet is commanded by God in the narrative to "take a wife of harlotry" for the purpose of begetting children whose significant names were to set forth to Israel the disastrous fruits of her spiritual whoredom.

In the second section we have, as Sir George A. Smith has said, "a stream of addresses and reflections, appeals, upbraidings, sarcasms, recollections of earlier history, denunciations and promises, which, with little logical connection and almost no pauses or periods, start impulsively from each other, and for a large part are expressed in elliptic and ejaculatory phrases." [^7]

Israel's spiritual adultery, which the prophet has described in the first section, is more elaborately dealt with here. He tells of Israel's religious apostasy and moral decay and of the consequences that must inevitably follow. Even Judah is referred to occasionally. Finally, he appends a solemn appeal to return to Jehovah and promises that the Lord will show compassion to the penitent and heal their apostasy.

The Story of Hosea's Unfaithful Wife. Immediately following the superscription of Hosea's book we are startled to find these lines:

When the Lord spoke at first with Hosea, the Lord said unto Hosea: `Go take unto thee a wife of whoredom, and children of whoredom; for truly the land plays the harlot instead of following Jehovah.' [^8]

After reading these surprising lines, we ask ourselves the question: "Can it be possible that God, who hated Israel's licentious ways and moral depravity, would ask one of His own servants to marry a profligate woman?" The answer would obviously seem to be in the negative, but we read on and find that the woman Gomer, bore the prophet two sons and one daughter. The names of the sons were Jezreel, "Whom God sows," and Lo-ammi, "Not my people"; the name of the daughter was Lo-ruhama, "That hath not obtained compassion." The first name, Jezreel, was given probably because of the historical importance the plain of Jezreel had in Israel's history. There Israel had contracted blood-guiltiness which was now to be speedily avenged upon the house of Jehu. [^9] Lo-ammi was a reminder that God would no longer call Israel "My people" [^10] and Loruhamah meant that He would no longer have compassion upon her. [^11]

Perhaps it is not to be wondered at that commentators have put very different interpretations on Hosea's marriage. We shall not take the space to consider these in detail. Mere mention of the leading theories must suffice. [^12]

Despite the heavy attack made upon the first view in modern times, the writer is inclined to think it the correct one. [^14] The problem is admittedly difficult.

In spite of the various interpretations given to Hosea's marriage as related in Chapters 1-3, the religious message conveyed therein is fairly clear. Gomer, the wife of Hosea, represents Israel, the disloyal and harlotrous bride of Jehovah. Israel is, of course, unworthy of Jehovah's great love. For her gross sins she must go into exile and learn by bitter experience that her husband means more to her than she at first supposed. Jehovah steadfastly loves her throughout the long years of her wayward career and finally attempts to woo her again:

Therefore, behold, I will allure her, And bring her into the wilderness, And speak tenderly unto her. [^15]

His tender and compassionate wooing will result in the wife's eventual return to the fold. No longer will she indulge in the vicious Canaanite immoralities mentioned so frequently in Chapter 2.

And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord, That thou shalt call Me Ishi, [^16] And shalt call Me no more Baali. [^17] For I will take away the names of the Baalim out of her mouth, And they shall no more be mentioned by their name. [^18]

Note the wonderful promises God makes to Israel in the following lines:

And I will betroth thee unto Me forever; Yea, I will betroth thee unto Me in righteousness, and in justice, And in loving kindness, and in compassion. And I will betroth thee unto Me in faithfulness; And thou shalt know the Lord. And it shall come to pass in that day, I will respond, saith the Lord, I will respond to the heavens, And they shall respond to the earth; And the earth shall respond to the grain, and the wine, and the oil; And they shall respond to Jezreel And I will sow her upon Me in the land; And I will have compassion upon her that had not obtained compassion; [^19] And I will say to them that were not My people: [^20] `Thou art My people'; [^21] And they shall say: `Thou art my God.' [^22]

The above lines are a marvelous description of Jehovah's loving kindness to Israel. In the last days, [^23] after Israel has gone through the furnace of affliction, God will remember her and listen to her prayers. No wonder Hosea has been called the prophet of love. Some writers have called him the St. John of the Old Testament. The love that God has for His people, and patience He has in reclaiming them from their sins, are amply brought out in the story of Hosea's domestic life.

Israel to be Destroyed for Lack of Knowledge. In the second section of Hosea's prophecy, we shall take notice of a number of his teachings that expand on what is pointed at in the first section. One of the finest teachings of Hosea is that lack of knowledge—religious knowledge—is the thing that is destroying his people. We shall have occasion later to note that the prophet Isaiah emphasized the same thing.

Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel! For the Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, Because there is no truth, nor mercy, Nor knowledge of God in the land. [^24]

Notice truth, mercy, knowledge. What a trilogy!

Truth and love are mutually conditions, the one of the other. "Truth cannot be sustained without mercy; and mercy without truth makes men negligent; so that the one ought to be mingled with the other" (Jerome). They both have their roots in the knowledge of God, of which they are the fruit (Jer. 22:16; Isa. 11:9) for the knowledge of God is not merely "an acquaintance with His nature and will" (Hitzig), but knowledge of the love, faithfulness, and compassion of God, resting upon the experience of the heart. Such knowledge not only produces fear of God, but also love and truthfulness towards brethren. Where this is wanting, injustice gains the upper hand. [^25]

Another fine passage follows:

Yet let no man strive, neither let any man reprove; For thy people are as they that strive with the priest. Therefore shalt thou stumble in the day, And the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night;

And I will destroy thy mother. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; Because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to Me; Seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy children. [^26]

The prophet is here pointing out that the priests and professional prophets of Israel are without knowledge. The common people, guilty as they are, are not so guilty or responsible as their religious counselors who live upon their (the people's) fines, and sin-offerings. Priests and prophets alike have given themselves over to formal ritual and have forgotten that they have an intellectual and moral responsibility to the nation. Let us never forget that the true prophets of Israel always kept their eyes open to the fact that priesthood is an intellectual, as well as a moral, trust. The prophet Malachi in a later day made a noble statement that is pertinent at this point.

For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, And men seek law from his mouth; Because he is a messenger of Jehovah. [^27]

Hosea adds another statement that is well worth quoting.

Harlotry, wine, and new wine take away the heart. [^28]

The word "heart" in Hebrew is often equivalent to our English words "brains" or "understanding". So, again, Hosea is administering an intellectual rebuke. He means here that sexual immorality and strong drink (anciently they went hand in hand as now), weaken the mental power and show themselves in the idolatry and folly of which the nation is guilty.

A Warning Against Entangling Alliances. Many people still entertain the idea that George Washington was the first to sound warnings against "entangling alliances" with other nations. But in the case of Hosea we find a Hebrew prophet, centuries before Washington's time, sounding somewhat similar warnings to Israel against entangling alliances with Egypt and Assyria.

And Ephraim is become like a silly dove, without understanding; They call unto Egypt, they go to Assyria. [^29]

Hosea, like Isaiah in this respect, wanted his people to avoid making covenants with nations whose sole reliance was on force. Let the big nations fight their own wars. Little nations that elected to mix up with them were sure to be worsted. The big nations, furthermore, had religious practices that were totally and utterly opposite to prophetic ideals. Their immoralities, added to those Israel already had, would, in time, wreck the nation. So Israel would spread the net of destruction over herself. Instead of courting God's love and protection, her courting of the nations would only put her in a trap—and it did.

Even as they go, I will spread My net upon them; I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will chastise them, as their congregation hath been made to hear. Woe unto them! for they have strayed from Me; Destruction unto them! for they have transgressed against Me. [^30]

God's Love For His People. As we have already seen, God's love for His people is such that He cannot give them up completely.

How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I surrender thee, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned within Me, My compassions are kindled together. I will not execute the fierceness of Mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim;

For I am God, and not man, The Holy One in the midst of thee, And I will not come in fury. [^31]

The above passage is the greatest in Hosea. It is the heart and key of the book. It breathes the spirit of the Man of Galilee whose mercy and love for His brethren transcend all understanding. The passage does not mean that Israel shall escape the due consequences for all her sins. But it does foreshadow the long arm of Jehovah's love reaching for her in the day of redemption, the latter day, and rescuing the little righteous remnant of which Isaiah and other prophets also speak. [^32]

Whoso is wise, let him understand these things, Whoso is prudent, let him know them. For the ways of the Lord are right, And the just do walk in them; But transgressors do stumble therein. [^33]

1 Hos. 1:1.

2 G. L. Robinson, The Twelve Minor Prophets, pp. 15 f.

3 C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament (The Twelve Minor Prophets), I, 19 f. Note the influence of Canaanite religion upon Israel.

4 Ibid., p. 20.

5 See Hosea 8:9; 10:6.

6 Robinson, op. cit., p. 18.

7 G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Revised Edition), I, 219.

8 Hosea 1:2.

9 See Hosea 1:4, 5. Jehu was one of the earlier kings of Israel (circa 842 B.C.).

10 Hosea 1:9.

11 Hosea 1:6.

12 See Smith, op. cit., pp. 246-252 and J. M. P. Smith, The Prophets and Their Times, pp. 56-60, for discussion and relevant literature.

13 Smith, op. cit., p. 250.

14 For a fine defense of this view see Keil and Delitzsch, op. cit., pp. 27-36, 66-68.

15 Hosea 2:14.

16 Hebrew for My husband.

17 Hebrew for My master. Note the word play. See Baalim in following line.

18 Hosea 2:16, 17.

19 That is, Lo-ruhamah.

20 That is, Lo-ammi.

21 That is, Ammi.

22 Hosea 2:19-23.

23 So we take the reference to "that day" in Hosea 2:18, 21 to mean.

24 Hosea 4:1.

25 Keil and Delitzsch, op. cit., pp. 74 f.

26 Hosea 4:4-6. The word mother in this passage has reference to the whole nation and kingdom as in Chapter 2:2.

27 Mal. 2:7.

28 Hosea 4:11.

29 Hosea 7:11.

30 Hosea 7:12, 13.

31 Hosea 11:8, 9. Admah and Zeboim were two cities of the valley of Siddim which were destroyed by fire from heaven along with Sodom and Gomorrah. See Gen. 19:24; Deut. 29:23.

32 See Hosea 14 for promise of pardon to those who turn to the Lord.

33 Hosea 14:9.

---
Notas:
[^1] The coming judgment—Chapters 1 and 2.
[^2] The grounds for God's judgment—Chapters 3 to 6.
[^3] Visions of judgment and the dawn of a brighter day—Chapters 7 to 9.
[^4] There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God, The holiest dwelling-place of the Most High. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her, at the approach of morning. 6. Nations were in tumult, kingdoms were moved; He uttered His voice, the earth melted. 7. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, Who hath made desolations in the earth. 9. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth the chariots in the fire. 10. "Let be, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth." 11. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah.
[^5] The Hallelujah Psalms: 104-106, 111-113, 115-117, 135, 146-150. A total of 15. Thanksgiving of the individual. God is gone up amidst shouting,
[^6] Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet: 7. Sheep and oxen, all of them, Yea, and the beasts of the field; 8. The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea; Whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas. 9. O Lord, our Lord, How glorious is Thy name in all the earth! When I remember Thee upon my couch, And meditate on Thee in the night-watches. 7. For Thou hast been my help, And in the shadow of Thy wings do I rejoice. 8. My soul cleaveth unto Thee; Thy right hand holdeth me fast. 9. But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, Shall go into the nethermost parts of the earth. 10. They shall be hurled to the power of the sword; They shall be a portion for foxes. 11. But the king shall rejoice in God; Every one that sweareth by Him shall glory; For the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
[^7] Pilgrim psalms. For God is the King of all the earth;
[^8] Thanksgiving of the Israelite nation. God reigneth over the nations;
[^9] Legends. Let the princes of the people be gathered together,
[^10] Psalms dealing with the Law.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; Then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
[^25] 25 See W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1963).
[^26] 26 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 1.
[^27] 27 Lods, op. cit., pp. 15f.
[^28] 28 1 Kgs. 4:29-32.
[^29] 29 Prov. 7:4, 5.
[^30] 30 Prov. 11:22.
[^31] 31 Prov. 26:1, 3-12.
[^32] 32 Prov. 26:13-16.
[^33] 33 Prov. 27:23-27.
