Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XVI

AMOS—PROPHET OF SOCIAL JUSTICE

Early Life and Times of Amos. The early life of Amos, and for aught we know most of his life, was spent at Tekoa, a small town located on a hill at the edge of the Judaean plateau six miles south of Bethlehem. The writer spent considerable time at this place, and a more desolate site for a town or village can scarcely be imagined. It is necessary to walk the six miles from Bethlehem or ride one of the poor donkeys that can be hired for a small sum from Arab owners. Little remains of the buildings that were constructed at various times on the site of the town. To the south, north, and west limestone hills obscure the view, and eastward the even more barren desert stretches out for eighteen miles to the Dead Sea. Here Amos, one of the greatest religious reformers of all time, herded sheep (an ugly variety known as noked, but prized for their fine wool) and dressed sycomore trees that produced a small inferior fig, having a sweet but watery taste. His shepherd profession made him appreciate the open country with its freshness and vigor, as compared with the cities to which he doubtless carried wool. The prophecy under his name indicates that he was a very thoughtful and discerning observer of the religious and social state of his times. The superscription of his book sets forth that Amos entered on his ministry "in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of Israel, two years before the earthquake." We do not know exactly when the earthquake—it must have been severe—took place, but we can, with some confidence, date Amos at about 785 B. C.

Israel, the kingdom to the north of Judah, against which his preaching was mainly directed, was prosperous—yes, even wealthy. [^1] Greed, corruption, and vice reigned supreme in the so-called upper classes of society. The social lot of the poor classes was pitiful. Religion had little real vitality and the dishonesty, insincerity, and blindness of public officials made it possible for the strong to exploit the weak. Morals seemed all but forgotten. Into such a society walked the prophet of Tekoa and denounced it with such vigor, clarity of thought, and authority, that his message is still eagerly read and applied to modern situations.

The Call of Amos to Prophesy. In the seventh chapter of Amos we glean the information that the prophet was called from his flock to prophesy against Israel.

Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah: `I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was a herdman, and a dresser of sycomore-trees; and the Lord took me from following the flock, and the Lord said unto me: Go, prophesy unto My people Israel.' [^2]

The prophet went without question from his native Judean home to Bethel, the sanctuary of the court of Israel, the Northern Kingdom, to deliver the message the Lord confided to him. Fearlessly he delivered it in forceful, classical Hebrew—the best in the Old Testament. The prophecy falls naturally into three great divisions:

The Lord Roars From Zion. The first division, judgment, is masterly in its conception and execution. The Lord is portrayed as "roaring" from Zion. In the words of Professor McFadyen:

The clear eyes of Amos saw the symptoms of rottenness and inevitable decay; and the words of his first recorded message are that Jehovah, the God of this easy-going people, would roar from His temple in Jerusalem, like a lion just before he makes his spring. The implication is that Jehovah will soon spring upon his people, to tear them in pieces; and Amos's message we might describe as the Gospel of the Lion's Roar. [^3]

The prophet spins a web about his listeners and, at the same time, holds their interest by first pronouncing God's judgments upon successive nations outside of Israel. The nations in order are Damascus, Philistia, Phoenicia, Edom, Ammon, Moab and Judah. [^4] Amos begins each of his denunciations with the words: "Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions, yea, for four, I will not reverse it." By "three transgressions" is meant much sin. One sin is then named out of many to justify the coming judgment upon each nation. Amos's words thrill and delight his audience, particularly his pronouncements upon Judah, its hated rival kingdom. But suddenly, as a bolt from the blue, Amos turns upon his audience and the nation it represents. He stalks Israel as a lion does its prey. Israel, too, is as guilty of misconduct as the nations before-mentioned. The wealthy mistreat the poor and humble, prostitution is rampant, the people are wine-bibbers, prophets are disregarded, and young men are made to break their covenants. [^5] But retribution is to come upon the guilty nation. God will strike and the strong shall not be delivered. [^6]

Law Reigns in the Realm of the Spirit. In this day of scientific method and observation, we are far too prone to assume that while law and order reign in the realm of material things, it is questionable that they do so in the realm of spiritual values. It is to the eternal honor of Amos that he perceived law reigning as inexorably in the realm of the spirit as it does in the physical world. Amos applied his observation with characteristic vigor and clarity to the position of Israel before the Lord.

Hear this word that the Lord hath spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up out of the land of Egypt, saying:

You only have I known of all the families of the earth; Therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities. [^7]

The two poetic lines above form one of the grandest passages in all scripture. In the Hebrew scriptures, "to know" often signifies "to care for", both with the understanding and the heart. Thus Amos pointed out the unique place God had assigned to Israel in the world. Amos understood that Israel was the "chosen" people of God in the sense that it was a covenant people. But we can easily imagine Amos saying:

Special privilege implies corresponding responsibility, O Israel, and you have not measured up to it. "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." [^8]

As Professor McFadyen said it: "They [Israel] believed in their election without understanding the reasons for it; they failed to realize that election to privilege is always election to duty and responsibility." [^9]

Amos then proceeded to clinch, by a series of homely illustrations from the physical world, his point that law reigns also in the realm of spirit.

Will two walk together, Except they have agreed? Will a lion roar in the forest, When he hath no prey? Will a young lion give forth his voice out of his den, If he have taken nothing? [^10]

Women Determine the Temper and Quality of a Civilization. Amos must have been a man of superb courage and daring. He boldly continued that part of his address dealing with the reasons for God's coming judgments by giving a scathing rebuke to women in high places. Many of our English translations are too elegant to reveal effectually Amos's contempt for the women of Israel. These women were helping to make its social life cruel and rotten and its religion a gorgeous sham. What he actually said was:

Hear this word, you cows of Bashan, Who are on the Mount of Samaria, Who oppress the poor, who crush the needy, Who say to their lords: `Bring, and let us drink.' The Lord Jehovah has sworn by His holiness: Behold, days come upon you, That He will carry you away with hooks, And the remnant of you with fish-hooks. [^11]

Amos compares the women of Samaria with the fat and well-fed cows roaming on pastures to the east of the Sea of Galilee. These rich, voluptuous, and violent women are qualified partners for their lords whom Amos has already denounced, who "store up violence and robbery in their palaces." [^12] The sin of these sleek women consisted in their tyrannical oppression of poor people in that they requested their husbands to procure them wine bought with money squeezed from their victims.

A country is largely what its women make it; if they are cruel or careless or unwomanly, the country is on the road to ruin. But these cattle on the hills of Samaria at whom Amos flings his words of scorn are worse than the cattle on the hills of Bashan; for they have done what no animal could do—they have made coarse pleasure the deliberate end of life. . . . Intemperance and cruelty went together then, as they go so often still. When women, who should be pitiful, sink to such depths of shame and heartlessness, it must be made plain that God will soon appear to mete out to them what they had meted to the poor. [^13]

Like so many fish pulled out of their element with fish-hooks, these women with all their luxury would be taken in hand by Israel's enemies. They would be insulted, abused, and cast around like old rags. In sorrow and shame they would realize that repentance came too late.

Every Disaster a New Call to Repentance. Amos's heart was bleeding over the sinful state of Israel. It was no pleasure for him to pronounce judgment upon his brethren. So he took up a lamentation over them:

The virgin of Israel is fallen, She shall no more rise; She is cast down upon her land, There is none to raise her up.

For thus saith the Lord God: `The city that went forth a thousand shall have a hundred left, and that which went forth a hundred shall have ten left, of the house of Israel.' [^14]

After this lament Amos paradoxically proceeds to exhort his listeners to change their ways:

For thus saith the Lord unto the house of Israel: Seek ye Me, and live; But seek not Beth-el, . . . Seek the Lord, and live— Lest He break out like fire in the house of Joseph, And it devour, and there be none to quench it in Beth-el— Ye who turn justice to wormwood, And cast righteousness to the ground. [^15]

A nation in the process of moral decay can still repent and find God if it will. And here is the paradox of prophecy: When God makes threats against His people, His threatenings are conditional.

When God threatens he is promising . . . when he comes near in any way it is for our salvation . . . God is not obliged to fulfill his threats, but he is obliged to fulfill his promises. [^16]

Israel's disaster in the realm of morals and spiritual perspective, so Amos thinks, should constitute a new call to repentance.

Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live; And so the Lord, the God of hosts, will be with you, as ye say. Hate the evil, and love the good, And establish justice in the gate; It may be that the Lord, the God of hosts, Will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. [^17]

Note Amos's emphasis on the word live. He uses the word here in much the same sense as the Syriac version of the New Testament uses the word life. Life stands equally for salvation, and to be saved is to live. Note also his insistence on justice. Amos had a passion for social justice. Goodness to Amos had a strong social color—he wanted justice in society and fair play between man and man. Few lines better portray his love of justice than the following:

But let justice well up as waters, And righteousness as a perennial stream. [^18]

This clarion call to repentance is one of the finest of all time.

Jehovah's Love for All Nations. There are three passages in Amos that clearly portray the prophet's conception that God loves and cares for all nations. We have already considered two of them in other connections. The first is found in Amos 1:3-2:3 which, it will be remembered, was a pronouncement of doom upon a number of peoples living near Israel. Jehovah's very pronouncement upon them, however, shows how interested He was in their doings. Failure to live up to better ideals of living caused Jehovah regret and disappointment. The second is found in Amos 3:2.

You only have I known of all the families of the earth; Therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities.

This passage, as pointed out above, implies that Israel is "chosen" only in the sense that she accepts greater responsibility. The greater the privileges given, the greater the responsibilities. Therefore, God's dealings with all peoples are essentially equal. "God is no respecter of persons," or we may add, of races. [^19]

In still another passage, Amos makes even clearer the point in question:

Are ye not as the children of the Ethiopians unto Me, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, And the Philistines from Caphtor, And Aram from Kir? [^20]

Because of her sins, Amos considers Israel on the same level as other nations.

The Dawn of a Better Day. Amos has painted to his audience a sorrowful picture of sin and doom. Here and there to be sure are flashes of hope. [^21] But mostly it is doom. Suddenly Amos ceases his message of doom and portrays a future of hope and promise. [^22] Someday—presumably far in the future—the remnant of Israel that has escaped destruction shall be restored to its inheritance, the captivity of its people is to be turned, it shall build cities and plant vineyards and never be dispossessed.

And I will turn the captivity of My people Israel, And they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; And they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; They shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them upon their land, And they shall no more be plucked up Out of their land which I have given them, Saith the Lord thy God. [^23]

This section, a rosy picture of Israel's future blessed state, has been denied to Amos by many scholars. But the writer can see no reason to doubt its authenticity. What would be the point in warning a people if it were completely doomed and without a ray of hope? Furthermore, Amos is in harmony with other prophets who looked forward to Israel's future blessings.

So far as Israel, as a kingdom and people, is sinful, it is to be destroyed from off the face of the earth. But there is always a divine kernel in the nation, by virtue of its divine election, a holy seed out of which the Lord will form a new and holy people and kingdom of God. [^24]

1 The prosperity was very similar to that in America during and after the first World War.

2 Amos 7:14, 15.

3 John E. McFadyen, A Cry for Justice p. 2.

4 The student is advised to locate these countries in succession upon a map. Note the web Amos spins around Israel.

5 Amos 2:6-12.

6 Amos 2:13-16.

7 Amos 3:1-2.

8 See D&C 130:20-21; also 78:6.

9 McFadyen, op. cit., p. 23.

10 Amos 3:3-4, etc.

11 Amos 4:1, 2.

12 Amos 3:10.

13 McFadyen, op. cit., pp. 36 f.

14 Amos 5:2, 3. Note the tithe of Israel left. A rather grim figure!

15 Amos 5:4-7. Note the satirical word play on Bethel. Beth-el was the Israelite court and means "house of God".

16 G. L. Robinson, The Twelve Minor Prophets, pp. 91 f.

17 Amos 5:14, 15.

18 Amos 5:24.

19 Acts 10:34.

20 Amos 9:7.

21 Consider Amos 3:12; 5:3. A remnant to escape. These passages are in essential harmony with 9:8b.

22 Amos 9:8b-15.

23 Amos 9:14, 15.

24 C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament (The Twelve Minor Prophets), I, 328. For negative views see J. E. McFadyen, Introduction to the Old Testament, pp. 219 f.; Sir G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Revised Edition), I, 204 f.

---
Notas:
[^1] The coming judgment—Chapters 1 and 2.
[^2] The grounds for God's judgment—Chapters 3 to 6.
[^3] Visions of judgment and the dawn of a brighter day—Chapters 7 to 9.
[^4] There is a river, the streams whereof make glad the city of God, The holiest dwelling-place of the Most High. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help her, at the approach of morning. 6. Nations were in tumult, kingdoms were moved; He uttered His voice, the earth melted. 7. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah. 8. Come, behold the works of the Lord, Who hath made desolations in the earth. 9. He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; He burneth the chariots in the fire. 10. "Let be, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the earth." 11. The Lord of hosts is with us; The Lord of Jacob is our high tower. Selah.
[^5] The Hallelujah Psalms: 104-106, 111-113, 115-117, 135, 146-150. A total of 15. Thanksgiving of the individual. God is gone up amidst shouting,
[^6] Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of Thy hands; Thou hast put all things under his feet: 7. Sheep and oxen, all of them, Yea, and the beasts of the field; 8. The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea; Whatsoever passeth through the paths of the seas. 9. O Lord, our Lord, How glorious is Thy name in all the earth! When I remember Thee upon my couch, And meditate on Thee in the night-watches. 7. For Thou hast been my help, And in the shadow of Thy wings do I rejoice. 8. My soul cleaveth unto Thee; Thy right hand holdeth me fast. 9. But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, Shall go into the nethermost parts of the earth. 10. They shall be hurled to the power of the sword; They shall be a portion for foxes. 11. But the king shall rejoice in God; Every one that sweareth by Him shall glory; For the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
[^7] Pilgrim psalms. For God is the King of all the earth;
[^8] Thanksgiving of the Israelite nation. God reigneth over the nations;
[^9] Legends. Let the princes of the people be gathered together,
[^10] Psalms dealing with the Law.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; Then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
