Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XIX

ISAIAH—POET, PROPHET, STATESMAN (Cont'd)

The Mountain of the Lord's House. Isaiah saw clearly the wickedness and moral degeneration of his people, but as a seer he looked into the future and saw that in the latter days his people, the house of Jacob, would still be existent (probably a righteous remnant) and playing a glorious role in the world.

And it shall come to pass in the latter days, That the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, And shall be exalted above the hills; And all nations shall flow unto it. And many peoples shall go and say: 'Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, To the house of the God of Jacob; And He will teach us of His ways, And we will walk in His paths.' For out of Zion shall go forth the law, And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. [^1]

These verses give an exalted and idealized vision of Zion's future. Isaiah sees a great commonwealth to which all nations gather to be governed by the God of Jacob. This great religious commonwealth is composed of the people of Israel who have returned to their God and who have forsaken the evil ways of their fathers. Through them God will teach the peoples of all nations who flock to hear His word. The word "mountain" in the phrase, "the mountain of the Lord's house," would seem to be nearly equivalent to "dwelling place" or "abode". [^2] But the picture is not complete. Isaiah sees in this glorious vision that there shall be no more war.

Isaiah and the Crime of War. In the war-shattered world in which we live it seems strange to read Isaiah's intensely idealistic and beautiful word picture of a world in which there is no war. And yet, it has been about 2700 years since the Hebrew prophet wrote the vision. We sometimes wonder how far human beings have progressed in that time. Let us examine Isaiah's words as he continues the vision of which we have already read two verses.

And He shall judge among the nations, And shall rebuke many peoples; And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, And their spears into pruning-hooks; Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, Neither shall they learn war any more. [^3]

Wars are bred because men and nations seem never to learn how to get along with each other. Selfishness and greed for power are still rampant in the world. In the midst of it all, we are apt to conclude that Isaiah was an impractical dreamer. But was he? In the physical world we do not progress without much planning and toil. But in that field we are making progress. In the realm of the moral and spiritual, can we likewise expect to progress without effort and without setting up goals and ideals? Isaiah knew, as all men should know, that war is a crime against humanity. He knew, as few men have known before or since, the weaknesses and failings of mankind. But in spite of that knowledge he boldly writes that someday war shall cease. He doesn't argue the point. He writes as if it were certain of accomplishment. His faith is magnificent.

Speaking of the vision, Alexander R. Gordon has said:

The insight of this prophecy is as deep as its outlook is broad. War may have its place in the Divine drama of history; but the end towards which all move is peace. God is a God of peace, who desires that His children should live and work together in peace. And the way of peace is no base surrender of justice, but the carrying of its claims to the highest court of appeal—the mind and purpose of God—which is identical with the arbitrament of sound reason, trust and goodwill. "Peace on earth to men of goodwill." Won by this motive, peace transforms the very instruments of war. [^4]

In still another beautiful passage, Isaiah refers to the conditions that shall ensue in the earth when war has ceased and peace and happiness reign.

And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, And the leopard shall lie down with the kid; And the calf and the young lion and fatling together; And a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; Their young ones shall lie down together; And the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, And the weaned child shall put his hand on the basilisk's [^5] den. They shall not hurt nor destroy In all My holy mountain; For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, As the waters cover the sea. [^6]

In Chapter 2:2-4 we read the description of peace among men and nations; here we have a description of peace as it will then exist among the brute creation,—And a little child shall lead them.

Note Isaiah's reference to knowledge. The narrow and particularistic has no place in it. He looked forward to the day when the knowledge of God should be over the earth as a sea covers the land. His statement is one of the glories of the Old Testament.

The Recovery of the Remnant of Israel. We have already seen how Isaiah's vision encompassed a glorious future of man and nature in which the arts of peace should be practiced. In the picture which Isaiah draws for us he sees the house of Jacob in a glorious position. But Isaiah has also foreseen Israel's dispersion among the nations. In order for Israel to be effective in teaching these nations she must be gathered, instructed, and prepared for her mission. The glorious age of peace cannot be ushered in until the chosen remnant has been gathered, prepared, and sent forth with the message of the God of Israel. Isaiah would not forget God's promise to Abraham, that all the nations of the earth should be blessed in him.

And it shall come to pass in that day, That the Lord will set His hand again the second time To recover the remnant of His people, That shall remain from Assyria, and from Egypt, And from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, And from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. And He will set up an ensign for the nations, And will assemble the dispersed of Israel, And gather together the scattered of Judah From the four corners of the earth. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, And they that harass Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, And Judah shall not vex Ephraim. [^7]

In the rest of the passage (verses 14-161, Isaiah shows that Israel's enemies shall be overcome and that by a miracle, a great highway shall be made for the remnant of his people like as there was when they came up out of Egypt.

The whole of this passage (verses 10-16) is usually denied to Isaiah and considered to be on a lower level than what precedes.

In passing from the second to the third part of this prophecy, we cannot but feel that we descend to a lower point of view and a less pure atmosphere of spiritual ambition. Isaiah has just declared peace between man and beast, but now we read that Judah must clear off certain scores against her neighbors before there can be peace between man and man. Were these verses also Isaiah's they would form an interesting psychological study. . . . He admits, indeed, the reconciliation of Ephraim and Judah; but the first act of the reconciled brethren, he prophesies with exultation will be to swoop down upon their cousins Edom, Moab, and Ammon, and their neighbors the Philistines. [^8]

In the opinion of the writer, those who adopt this view or others like it fail to do Isaiah justice. In the first place, they are loathe to accept the passage as the prophet's because it assumes a knowledge of the Exile and the Jewish Dispersion, hence, they assume it could only have been written after those events. As Professor G. B. Gray says:

Most of it is clearly post-exilic since it presupposes the Exile and the Dispersion of the Jews as existing facts. [^9]

In other words, the fact of prediction on the part of Isaiah is clearly denied. It is not convenient for us here to uphold the Isaianic authorship of the verses in view of the limitations of space. We merely point out that those who reject it do so without attempting to name the author or to explain satisfactorily how it got into the canon of scripture. [^10] We point out all these facts to the reader in order to show how differences in what the Germans call weltanschauung (conception of the world or world-philosophy) will cause variant interpretations of a given passage of scripture on the part of different individuals. We may also assume that differing parties are sincere and intellectually honest in coming to their various conclusions.

Then secondly, they think that the passage descends "to a lower point of view and a less pure atmosphere of spiritual ambition" than what goes before, hence Isaiah probably did not write it. But such a conclusion may be reached because the interpreter has failed to enter into the spirit of the prophet and misinterprets him. That is what the writer thinks has happened here. We believe that Isaiah was looking far down the stream of time to a day long after Edom, Moab, and Ammon (verse 14) had ceased to exist as nations and that consequently "to swoop down upon their cousins" is to misinterpret Isaiah's prophecy with respect to Israel's remnant. What did he mean, then, when he mentions the countries by name? Edom, Moab and Ammon were sworn enemies of Israel, often doing her great wrongs. Consequently, in Isaiah's time the Hebrews regarded them as synonymous with all that was evil. [^11] In his prophecy, therefore, they are symbols of wicked nations or forces working against God and His people in the "latter" days. These nations or forces, whatever they are, shall face a day of reckoning. Isaiah had nothing narrow or particularistic in mind when he uttered the prophecy. We accept it unreservedly as coming from his hand.

Isaiah and Predictions of the Coming of the Messiah. The Christian Church has held through the ages that Isaiah foresaw the coming of the Christ. The New Testament writers themselves saw in Christ's birth and life the fulfilment of certain of Isaiah's prophecies. We shall, therefore, examine a number of the latter.

In Isa. 7:14 there is the famous "Immanuel" passage.

Therefore the Lord Himself shall give you a sign: behold, the young woman shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

Matthew in speaking of Mary the mother of the Christ says:

And she will bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he is the One who will save his people from their sins. Now this has come to pass, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,

Behold, the virgin will be with child, And will bring forth a son, And they will call his name Immanuel; Which is being interpreted, God with us. [^12]

There is, therefore, no doubt that the early Christians viewed this prophecy of Isaiah's as being fulfilled in Christ and His mother. This may be correct, but a careful examination of the context of the verse will reveal many difficulties, and scholars have been at their wits' end to explain them. Our readers ought to examine carefully the relevant passages for themselves.

Isa. 9:1, 2 been claimed to have been fulfilled by Christ.

But there shall not always be gloom to her who is in anguish. In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, But in the latter time he makes glorious the way to the sea, Beyond Jordan, the district of the nations. The people who walked in darkness behold a great light: They who dwelt in the land of deep darkness, upon them the light shines.

The Gospel of Matthew refers to these verses as follows:

And leaving Nazareth, He [Christ] came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet. . . . [^13]

Strange as it may seem, the famous passage in Isa. 9:6-7 is apparently not referred to in the New Testament.

For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; And the government shall be upon his shoulder: And his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, [^14] The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of government and peace there is no end. Upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, To order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice. From henceforth even forever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this.

This scripture will be remembered by music-lovers for the use made of it in Handel's Messiah. Many scholars have either denied this passage to Isaiah or have denied its application to the Christ; nevertheless, it is not likely that the masses of Christian peoples will do so.

We should be remiss if we made no reference to Isa. 53. In it most Christian people through the ages have seen prophetically portrayed the sufferings and sorrows of the Christ. We reproduce herewith some of the most important verses, but advise our readers to study carefully the whole chapter.

He is despised, and rejected of men, A man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, And we hid as it were our faces from him: He was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; Yet we did esteem him stricken, Smitten of God, and afflicted. But he was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities; The chastisement of our peace was upon him, And with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, We have turned every one to his own way; And the Lord hath laid on him The iniquity of us all. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted Yet he opened not his mouth; He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, And as a sheep before her shearers is dumb; So he openeth not his mouth. He was taken from prison and from judgment, And who shall declare his generation? For he was cut off out of the land of the living, For the transgression of my people was he stricken. And he made his grave with the wicked, And with the rich in his death; Because he had done no violence, Neither was any deceit in his mouth. [^15]

The text above reproduces the Authorized Version rendering. Its beauty and musical quality in part make up for the few places where the translation could have been improved.

Practically the whole of Isa. 53 has been reproduced in the New Testament and applied to the Christ. This is a remarkable tribute to Isaiah's prophecy.

Part of the chapter is also used in Handel's Messiah. It will be remembered that the second part of his oratorio opens with Isa. 53:3. The story is told that at this point in the writing of the composition he was found with his head upon a table, weeping.

The Literary Problem of Isaiah. Before dealing with the prophecies of Israel's redemption in Chapters 40-66, a little should be said about the literary problem that centers around the Book of Isaiah. Most modern scholars deny that Isaiah wrote the bulk of the book that goes under his name and especially do they deny to him Chapters 40-66. Many deny the unity even of these and the names "Deutero-Isaiah" and "Trito-Isaiah" are applied to Chapters 40-55 and 56-66 respectively. Nor is Trito-Isaiah looked upon as the work of one writer. In fact, the Book of Isaiah has been chopped into what Professor Charles C. Torrey called "hopeless chunks". [^16] Much of Isaiah has been assigned to a later age than the prophet, to the days of the Exile and later.

Isaiah's authorship of many parts of the book is denied because of certain technical reasons such as differences in style, vocabulary, and theological outlook in its different parts, as well as presuppositions respecting the predictive element in prophecy with which the study of the book is approached.

However, some very able scholars through the years have maintained the Isaianic authorship of the book and by no means has such authorship been disproved. The writer believes that the evidence for Isaiah's authorship is very strong. He has presented this in some detail in another publication and the reader is referred to it. A selected bibliography will be found therein. [^17]

Prophecies of Israel's Redemption. The general theme of Isa. 40-66 is Israel's redemption. These chapters are to be accounted the most brilliant jewels of Old Testament prophetic literature. In masterful and beautiful language, Isaiah comforts his people and points to the time when they shall be redeemed and God's kingdom shall triumph over the earth. His first words form the beginning of Handel's Messiah, so much loved by cultured people.

Comfort ye, comfort ye My people, Saith your God. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, And cry unto her, That her warfare is accomplished, That her iniquity is pardoned; That she hath received of the Lord's hand Double for all her sins. [^18]

This passage has no reference at all to Israel's deliverance from the Babylonian Captivity as many have supposed, but applies to a day far more distant than that, to the latter days, to the time spoken of previously in Isa. 2:2-4. Isaiah has in mind the period at and just preceding the time when peace shall come to man and the brute creation (see Isa. 11:6-9). He sees that after Israel has paid the penalty for her sins, God will again choose her and remember His promise to Abraham.

But thou, Israel, My servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, The seed of Abraham My friend; Thou whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth, And called thee from the uttermost parts thereof, And said unto thee: `Thou art My servant, I have chosen thee and not cast thee away; Fear thou not, for I am with thee, Be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I strengthen thee, yea, I help thee; Yea, I uphold thee with My victorious right hand. [^19]

He then goes on to show that Israel's enemies shall come to nought [^20] and that God's sons and daughters shall return from the end of the earth. [^21]

Every one that is called by My name. [^22]

Then, taking a look a little nearer his own time, he sees the Babylonian Empire fall, [^23] describes the makers of idols and scorns them, [^24] then reverts back to the scenes of redemption again.

I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, And, as a cloud, thy sins; Return unto Me, for I have redeemed thee. Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it; Shout, ye lowest parts of the earth; Break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein; For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, And doth glorify Himself in Israel. [^25]

Isaiah then proceeds to take note of Israel's release from the Babylonian Captivity, even so far as to mention the Persian king, Cyrus, who is to be her deliverer. [^26] Chapter 47 is a wonderful poem depicting Babylon's fall and abject humiliation.

The reader's attention is especially called to the four famous "Servant Songs" in which Isaiah seems, according to many authorities, to personify righteous Israel or else refers to some unique person in Israel. These songs are as follows:

The reader must decide, of course, for himself who the suffering Servant is in these poems. Latter-day Saints know that he is the Savior. (See Mosiah 13:35-14:12

In Chapter 60 Isaiah draws a graphic and beautiful picture of the future Zion. Note verses 1-3.

Arise, shine, for thy light is come, And the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth, And gross darkness the peoples; But upon thee the Lord will arise, And His glory shall be seen upon thee. And nations shall walk at thy light, And kings at the brightness of thy rising.

Finally, Isaiah sees the climax of God's work and His triumph over wickedness in the earth.

For, behold, I create new heavens And a new earth; And the former things shall not be remembered, Nor come into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice for ever In that which I create; For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, And her people a joy. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, And joy in My people; And the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, Nor the voice of crying. [^30]

Truly "great are the words of Isaiah". [^31] He was a spiritual giant whose vision and intellect transcend that of ordinary men as the mountain peak overshadows the hills. His voice will continue to ring down through the centuries, bringing joy and happiness to those whose hearts and spirits are attuned to the same spiritual rock as his.

1 Isa. 2:2, 3: These verses and the one following are, with slight variations, like Micah 4:1-4. Many scholars are not certain which of the two prophets is the author of them or whether both quote from a still earlier prophet. Some regard the verses as a post-exilic insertion. The writer rejects the latter hypothesis.

2 See Ps. 68:16, 17; Isa. 8:18; 11:9; D&C 84:2-4; 133:12

3 Isa. 2:4.

4 Alexander R. Godon, The Faith of Isaiah , p. 248.

5 A small, very poisonous species of viper.

6 Isa. 11:6-9; cf. Rom. 8:18-22.

7 Isa. 11:11-13.

8 George A. Smith, The Book of Isaiah , I, 198.

9 Quoted by Smith, ibid., p. 184, note.

10 Furthermore, it is no exaggeration to say that the very essence of Isaiah's message is prediction. That is true regardless of what we think of it. This all brings up the literary problem of Isaiah which will be briefly treated a little later in the chapter.

11 See Amos 1:9-13; 2:1; Obad. 1:10-14.

12 Matt. 1:21-23.

13 Matt. 4:13, 14. See also verses 15 and 16.

14 Many scholars combine these as Wonderful-Counselor.

15 Isa. 53:3-9.

16 Charles C. Torrey, The Second Isaiah , p. 13.

17 See Sidney B. Sperry, "The Isaiah Problem in The Book of Mormon"; in the Improvement Era, XLII, No. 9, pp. 525, 526, 564-569 (September, 1939). See also Sperry, The Voice of Israel's Prophets, pp. 75-94.

18 Isa. 40:1, 2.

19 Isa. 41:8-10; note also Isa. 42:1-9.

20 Isa. 41:12.

21 Isa. 43:6.

22 Isa. 43:7.

23 Isa. 43:14.

24 Isa. 44:9-20.

25 Isa. 44:22, 23.

26 Isa. 44:28-45:13

27 See D&C 113:7-10.

28 As we have already seen, the New Testament considers Isa. 53 as applying to the Christ.

29 Adapted from George L. Robinson, The Book of Isaiah (First Edition), p. 141 f.

30 Isa. 65:17-19.

31 3 Ne. 23:1.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapter 42:1-9. The Servant's world-wide mission and gentle manner.
[^2] Chapter 49:1-13. The Servant's mission and spiritual success; followed by promises of comfort to Zion (49:14-50:3).
[^3] Chapter 50:4-11. The Servant's soliloquy concerning his perfection through suffering; followed again by messages of comfort and encouragement to the believers in Zion (51:1-52:12). [^27]
[^4] Chapters 52:13-53:12. The Servant's vicarious suffering and ultimate exaltion; [^28] followed by a vivid description of Zion's future prosperity and glory (chapter 54), and an urgent invitation to men immersed in business to accept of God's proffered salvation (chapter 55): even proselytes and eunuchs being allowed to share in the blessings of redemption (56:1-8); the section closing with a scathing rebuke to faithless shepherds and sensual idolaters (56:9-57:21). [^29]
[^5] Chapters 36-39, history, prophecy and song intermingled; serving both as an appendix to chapters 1-35, and as an introduction to chapters 40-66.
[^6] Chapters 40-66, prophecies of comfort, salvation, and of the future glory awaiting Israel. [^19]
[^7] Pilgrim psalms. For God is the King of all the earth;
[^8] Thanksgiving of the Israelite nation. God reigneth over the nations;
[^9] Legends. Let the princes of the people be gathered together,
[^10] Psalms dealing with the Law.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; Then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
[^25] 25 See W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1963).
[^26] 26 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 1.
[^30] 30 Prov. 11:22.
[^31] 31 Prov. 26:1, 3-12.
