Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XX

MICAH—PROPHET OF JUDGMENT, COMFORT, AND SALVATION

Some Facts About Micah. From the superscription of the Book of Micah it is apparent that the prophet preached during the reigns of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. We can therefore set a date for Micah of about 765 B.C. This means that he was a contemporary of Isaiah the Prophet.

Micah's name means "who is like unto Jehovah?" and that would seem to indicate that he was the offspring of parents who were zealous worshippers of the true God. The fact that the prophet is called the Morashtite would point strongly toward his being a native of Moresheth-Gath, which is mentioned in the text. [^1] The name of the town means Territory or Property of Gath, and seems to have been located in the Shephelah or low hill region some twenty miles southwest of Jerusalem. If our location of Moresheth is correct, the writer may claim to have walked all over the place which is located upon a relatively high (1000 feet) terrace. It commands a marvelous view of the surrounding country and anciently must have been of considerable importance. Micah was, therefore, a product of the open hills and valleys and would seem to have had no special love for the cities. [^2]

Since Micah was a contemporary of Isaiah, the problems he faced were much the same. In fact, he does portray the political, moral, and religious condition of Palestine in essentially the same colors as does Isaiah: he speaks of the corruption of the people's leaders, priests, law-givers, and prophets, and of the greediness and avaricious nature of the rich. But Micah was not a statesman like Isaiah, consequently, he was not so much concerned about his nation's political sins. Neither was he so much concerned about ritual as his Jerusalem contemporary. [^3] Micah was more like Amos in that his grievances were more social in character. Like others of the prophets, he envisioned the day when Israel would be redeemed and restored to her rightful inheritance.

Characteristics of the Book of Micah. The Book of Micah divides quite naturally into three sections. 1. Chapters 1 to 3 deal with the coming judgments because of Israel's sins, the destruction of Samaria, the devastation of Judah and deportation of her inhabitants, a threat to Jerusalem, and a brief promise of eventual restoration of the remnant of Israel. 2. Chapters 4 to 5 have to do with the glorification and blessing of Zion in the latter days, of the restoration to Israel of her former dominion, of the Babylonian captivity and subsequent rescue, of the birth of the Savior in Bethlehem and, finally, of the beneficent and terrible power of the remnant of Jacob among the nations. 3. Chapters 6 to 7. By the expedient of a very dramatic controversy, or law-suit, the Lord shows Israel the way to salvation, that she had repaid His loving care and benefits with ingratitude, that her worship is mistaken if not insincere, and that her social sins point to her doom. The Lord will again have compassion on His people and show forth His marvelous works to the nations, if Israel will but confess her sins and turn to Him. A beautiful prayer concludes the book.

The Pronouncement of Judgment Upon Israel. In vivid language reminding one of Isaiah's prophecies, Micah opens his discourse:

Hear, ye peoples, all of you; Hearken, O earth, and all that therein is; And let the Lord God be witness against you, The Lord from His holy temple. For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of His place, And will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth. [^4]

He then proceeds to show the reason for the Lord's actions:

For the rebellion [^5] of Jacob is all this, And for the sins of the house of Israel. [^6] What is the rebellion of Jacob? is it not Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem? [^7]

Micah identifies the source of apostasy or rebellion of Israel as the capital cities of the Northern and Southern kingdoms respectively. Samaria and Jerusalem are the centers of corruption from whence Israel's evil examples come. The reference to the "high places" in line six is an allusion to the sinister Canaanite religious practices adopted by Israel. The prophets can never forget them. And what will be God's judgment upon Samaria? The answer comes without equivocation:

Therefore I will make Samaria a heap in the field, A place for the planting of vineyards; And I will pour down the stones thereof unto the valley, And I will uncover the foundations thereof. [^8]

In the process of Samaria's destruction, the prophet is very careful to note the end of certain religious paraphernalia and practices taken over from the Canaanites.

And all her graven images shall be beaten to pieces, And all her harlot-gifts shall be burned with fire, And all her idols will I lay desolate; For of the hire of a harlot hath she gathered them, And unto the hire of a harlot shall they return. [^9]

How far Canaanite religion had penetrated Israel the reader can judge for himself. The lesson to modern Israel is apparent.

Nor does Micah spare Judah and Jerusalem. In an ominous series of puns or word plays on Judean towns, Micah warns them of their coming fate. Following is Moffatt's attempt to bring out the thought in English:

Weep tears at Teartown (Bochim), Grovel in the dust at Dusttown (Beth-ophrah) Fare forth stripped, O Fairtown (Saphir)! Stirtown (Zaanan) dare not stir, Beth-esel . . . and Moroth hopes in vain; for doom descends from the Eternal to the very gates of Jerusalem. Harness your steeds and away, O Horsetown (Lakhish) O source of Sion's sin, where the crimes of Israel centre! O maiden Sion, you must part with Moresheth of Gath; and Israel's kings are ever balked at Balkton (Achzib). I will march the conqueror on you yet, O men of Moreshah; and Israel's pomp shall perish utterly. Israel, shave your head and hair, in mourning for your children dear, shave it like a vulture's bare, for they are lost to you. [^10]

Micah Denounces Social Wrongs. We are today in the midst of a world revolution. It is due in part to social wrongs that have constantly beset the poor and innocent in every country. Micah keenly felt the social injustices that plagued Israel in his own day. Coming from the country as he did, he no doubt felt these wrongs more acutely than if he had come from the city. [^11] Micah could not help but cast his invective at the wealthy, greedy, land grabbers who descended upon the rural districts and made the poor their debtors. And even today, the agricultural communities in our own nation could well take a leaf from Micah's note book and beware letting their properties go into the hands of money lenders.

Woe to them that devise iniquity And work evil upon their beds! When the morning is light, they execute it, Because it is in the power of their hand. And they covet fields, and seize them; And houses, and take them away; Thus they oppress a man and his house, Even a man and his heritage. [^12]

Micah was not so much concerned about the taking of mere chattels. What ground his soul and made him righteously indignant was that unscrupulous men were allowed to commit wrongs so easily and put human beings in their power. Personal independence was lost, and the security of home and family was put in the hands of a few capricious men.

Micah feels that by themselves the economic wrongs explain and justify the doom impending on the nation. When this doom falls, by the Divine irony of God it shall take the form of a conquest of the land by the heathen, and the disposal of those great estates to the foreigner. [^13]

In the same indignant vein, Micah continues;

And I said: Hear, I pray you, ye heads of Jacob, And rulers of the house of Israel: Is it not for you to know justice? Who hate the good, and love the evil; Who rob their skin from off them, And their flesh from off their bones; Who also eat the flesh of my people, And flay their skin from off them, And break their bones; Yea, they chop them in pieces, as that which is in the pot, And as flesh within the caldron. [^14]

What Micah said in his day applies with equal force today. As Professor George A. Smith writes:

Is there nothing of the same with ourselves? While Micah spoke he had wasted lives and bent backs before him. Pinched peasant-faces peer between his words and fill the ellipses. Among the poor today are there not starved and bitten faces—bodies with the blood sucked from them with the Divine image crushed out? We cannot explain all of these by vice. Drunkenness and unthrift account for much; but how much more only the following facts! Men among us live in fashionable streets and keep their families comfortable by paying their employees a wage on which it is impossible for men to be strong or women to be virtuous. Are those not using these as their food? They say that if they gave higher wages they must close their business, and cease paying wages at all; and they are right if they continue to live on the scale they do. As long as any families are maintained in comfort by the profits of business in which some or all of the employees work for less than they can nourish their bodies upon, the fact is that the one set are feeding upon the others. [^15]

Micah Versus the Hireling Prophets. We have already noted that Amos the prophet was not a "prophet nor a son of a prophet". [^16] That is, he was not a professional or a hireling. Micah also makes reference to hireling prophets. It seems that in the generation of Amos and Micah the leaders—better tyrants—of Israel used professional prophets and seers to cloak their misdeeds. Religion, unfortunately, lends itself, or rather its cloak, very easily to the uses of the hypocrite. So the rich and unscrupulous leaders of Israel found it easy—for a price—to hire professional religionists to cover their actions by flattery and falsehood. The hireling prophet depended upon his rich clients for a living. He could not, therefore, be independent in his thinking and in his judgment. He was high-pressured into siding with the rich, and consequently shut his eyes to the real condition among the people. Naturally he could not attack the sins of the day that made it possible for his clients to exploit Israel's common people. Micah exposed the pseudo-prophet as follows:

Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people to err; That cry: `Peace,' when their teeth have anything to bite; [^17]

And whoso putteth not into their mouths, They even prepare war against him: Therefore it shall be night unto you, that ye shall have no vision; And it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine; And the sun shall go down upon the prophets, And the day shall be black over them. And the seers shall be put to shame, and the diviners confounded; Yea, they shall all cover their upper lips; For there shall be no answer of God. [^18]

On the other hand, Micah shows that the true prophet has the spirit of God and the necessary insight, vision, and courage to tell what was wrong among the people.

But I truly am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, And of justice, and of might, To declare unto Jacob his transgression, And to Israel his sin. [^19]

Because of the lack of justice on the part of Israel's leaders and the "prophets that divine for money," Micah goes on to emphasize Israel's doom:

Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, And Jerusalem shall become heaps, And the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest. [^20]

Micah's Vision of the Latter Days. In spite of Micah's pronouncement of doom upon the two kingdoms of Israel, he cannot help but give a ray of hope and comfort to that little remnant of Israel that has proved faithful to their prophetic leaders. Micah, like all of the prophets, remembered the promises God made to Abraham. Through Abraham's descendants should all nations be blessed. How could that promise be fulfilled if all Israel were destroyed? Micah knows that it will not be. Even in the midst of his predictions of woe he had quoted the Lord as saying:

I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will render them all as sheep in a fold; As a flock in the midst of their pasture. [^21]

Not only was the remnant of Israel to be assembled (he means in the latter days), but it would be glorified in the eyes of all nations. Micah had the same view as did Isaiah of its future. [^22] The mountain of the Lord's house was to be established on the tops of the mountains, and many nations and people should go up there to be taught in the ways of Jacob's God. As a result of Divine judgments, nations shall not learn war any more, and every man shall sit in the security of his own vine and fig-tree with none to make afraid. Finally, Micah sees God reigning over His people, Israel.

In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, And I will gather her that is driven away, And her that I have afflicted; And I will make her that halted a remnant, And her that was cast far off a mighty nation; And the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion from thenceforth even for ever. [^23]

The Prediction of the Coming of a Messiah. Micah now turns for a moment from his predictions concerning Israel in the latter days and turns back the wheel of time to the little village of Bethlehem. Out of this village, one of Judah's smallest, he sees coming one who is to be ruler over all Israel. This is to be the Messiah, or Savior of His people. His goings forth, Micah sees, reach back into eternity.

And thou, Bethlehem Ephratha, Too small to be among the thousands of Judah, Out of thee will He come forth to Me who will be Ruler over Israel; And His goings forth are from the olden time, from the days of eternity. [^24]

Many writers deny that this prophecy has reference to Christ or that it was written by Micah, but we think upon insufficient grounds. Even the Old Jewish synagogue unanimously regarded this passage as containing a prophecy of the birth of the Messiah in Bethlehem. [^25] But whatever the view now taken, certainly the writers of the Gospels of Matthew and John regarded the birth of the Christ in Bethlehem as the fulfilment of Micah's prophecy. [^26]

Micah Points the Way to Salvation. Having pointed out the judgment that shall burst upon Israel and the future glory awaiting the righteous remnant, Micah now proceeds to point out the true way of salvation, by showing that Israel only brings distress and punishment upon herself through ingratitude and resistance to God, and that only by true repentance can she participate in His promised blessings. In a mood reminiscent of court procedure, Micah asks.

For the Lord hath a controversy with His people, And He will plead with Israel. O My people, what have I done unto thee? And wherein have I wearied thee? Testify against Me. [^27]

The Lord then points out briefly how He brought up Israel from Egypt and performed other great deeds in her behalf, in order that she might know the righteous acts of God. [^28]

Because of these loving acts of God which cannot be questioned, the audience is made to reply (in the first person singular) in its sincere but mistaken way:

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, And bow myself before God on high? Shall I come before Him with burnt-offerings, With calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, With ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my first-born for my transgression, The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul. [^29]

The answer to this is of course obvious, God desires something more of His people than formalized worship. The above answer to God betrayed the darkened minds of His people.

Micah conveyed to the people the requirements of true salvation in an answer that is one of the noblest of all time.

It hath been told thee, O man, what is good, And what the Lord doth require of thee: Only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. [^30]

In these few lines, Micah has summed up the teachings of the prophets. They were, in our opinion, coined in the same Eternal Mint as the lines of Christ when he said:

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the great and first commandment. A second is like it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. [^31]

1 Micah 1:14.

2 Micah 1:5; 5:11; 6:9.

3 These statements are necessarily based on the short text at our disposal.

4 Micah 1:2, 3.

5 Meaning apostasy.

6 Note synonymous parallelism. The whole of Israel is meant as the following lines indicate.

7 Micah 1:5.

8 Micah 1:6.

9 Micah 1:7.

10 Micah 1:10-16.

11 "Social wrongs are felt most acutely, not in the town, but in the country. So in the days of Rome, whose earliest social revolts were agrarian. So in the Middle Ages . . ." G. A. Smith, The Book of the Twelve Prophets (New and Revised Edition, I, 413 f.

12 Micah 2:1, 2.

13 Smith, op. cit., I, 416. Micah is, after all, very modern.

14 Micah 3:1-3.

15 Smith, op. cit., I, 422 f. At the present writing (1969), it might be noted that many employees don't earn their pay. That is also wrong.

16 Amos 7:14.

17 That is, they preach if they receive something to bite (eat).

18 Micah 3:5-7.

19 Micah 3:8.

20 Micah 3:12. A very famous passage of scripture and one that was later to be instrumental in saving Jeremiah's life. See Jer. 26:18.

21 Micah 2:12.

22 Micah 4:1-3 and Isa. 2:2-4 are very nearly the same. Scholars differ in their opinions as to whether Isaiah copied from Micah and vice versa or whether both quote from a common earlier source.

23 Micah 4:6, 7. For certain powers granted Israel read Micah 4:11-14; 5:6 Read the Savior's interpretation in 3 Ne. 20:15-22; 21:12

24 Micah 5:2.

25 C. F. Keil and F. Delitzsch, Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament (The Twelve Minor Prophets), I, 481.

26 See Matt. 2:5, 6:1 John 7:42.

27 Micah 6:2, 3.

28 Micah 6:4, 5.

29 Micah 6:6, 7.

30 Micah 6:8. The student will do well to memorize this passage.

31 Matt. 22:37-39.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapter 1. Jeremiah's call.
[^2] Chapters 2-6. Judah's sins.
[^3] Chapters 7-10. Judah called to repentance.
[^4] Chapters 11-13. An appeal to the covenant between God and His people.
[^5] Chapters 14-22. The people do not heed Jeremiah; Judah's disaster and captivity foretold.
[^6] Chapters 23-29. Israel's eventual redemption; Jeremiah sees little present hope for his people; the seventy years of captivity and return; Jeremiah and the false prophets.
[^7] Chapters 30-33. Israel and Judah to be restored in latter days; Jeremiah buys a field.
[^8] Chapters 34-45. Incidents during and after the siege and destruction of Jerusalem. (Chapters 35, 36 out of place, belonging to Jehoiachim's reign. Chapter 45 a supplement to Chapter 36:1-8.)
[^9] Chapters 46-51. Jeremiah's prophecies concerning foreign nations.
[^10] Chapter 52. An excerpt, mainly from 2 Kgs. 24:18-25:30 An account of the capture of Jerusalem.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; Then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
[^23] 23 See editions as published by the Deseret Book Co., Salt Lake City; volumes of various dates.
[^24] 24 For a treatment of the Prophet's revision see the pamphlet by Robert J. Matthews, Joseph Smith's Revision of the Bible (Provo, 1969) and consult "Suggested Readings" on page 86 for other important references. Copies of the Inspired Revision of the scriptures may be secured from the Herald Publishing House, Independence, Missouri.
[^25] 25 See W. F. Albright, The Biblical Period From Abraham to Ezra (Harper Torchbooks, New York, 1963).
[^26] 26 Macdonald, op. cit., p. 1.
[^27] 27 Lods, op. cit., pp. 15f.
[^28] 28 1 Kgs. 4:29-32.
[^29] 29 Prov. 7:4, 5.
[^30] 30 Prov. 11:22.
[^31] 31 Prov. 26:1, 3-12.
