Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XXII

SOME LASTING CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE OLD TESTAMENT TO MANKIND

The Contribution of Hebrew Culture to the Western World. Before dealing with some specific contributions of the Old Testament to mankind, let us consider for a moment the general contribution of Hebrew culture to the West. Historically, our civilization rests back upon three great ancient civilizations, the Hebrew, the Greek and the Roman. From the Greeks we inherited science, philosophy, art, literature and many other things that we should be infinitely the poorer without. From the Romans we inherited much of law and the science of government, literature, and a language whose roots underly many of our Western tongues. But it is to the Hebrews that we owe so much in the realm of religion, and it is thought by many that their contribution is the greatest of the three. Not only did they contribute the magnificent volume of religious literature known to us as the Old Testament—incidentally one of the greatest single contributions from the ancient world—but they contributed Christianity and the New Testament, not to mention Judaism. The earliest Christians were Jews, and they came into the Church with a good knowledge of the Hebrew scriptures. The latter had a profound influence upon the writings that later formed the New Testament. It goes without saying that Christianity, Judaism, and the Old and New Testaments have had an enormous and far-reaching effect upon civilization.

The Old Testament Contribution to the Idea of God. One of the outstanding contributions of the Old Testament to mankind is the conception of the one true God to whom should go man's undivided allegiance. The pagan nations round about Israel had many gods and these they played off, one against another. Not so in Israel. The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob alone could answer prayers and grant men their needs. There was no conflict between the will of God and the will of other supernatural beings. One supreme law and one standard of righteousness determined for the man of Israel his course of action.

Not only that, but the Hebrew God taught men to strive for higher ideals of righteousness, even holiness.

You must be holy; for I, the Lord Your God, am holy. [^1]

The Hebrew people, instead of attributing vices and human weaknesses to many gods as did their pagan neighbors, had the training and advantage of ascribing all great qualities to the one true God. This developed within them great spiritual insight. They, as few other people, realized that God with all His marvelous attributes demanded similar personal qualities in those who worshiped Him.

It will be well to call attention to the fact that the Fatherhood and love of God is distinctly taught in the Old Testament; it belongs not alone to the New Testament. Hosea, [^2] Jonah, Isaiah, [^3] the Psalmist [^4] and many others make us distinctly aware of that fact. Along with this teaching, the Hebrews never lost sight of God's majesty and glory. This produced in them a sense of awe and reverence. Furthermore, to them He was a God of redemption. This was constantly borne home to them from the day He redeemed them from slavery and bondage in Egypt.

Israel's idea of God developed a great conception of man and the seriousness of sin. When men sinned, they were not only offending God, but were warping and breaking down the elements of godliness in themselves.

Finally, we may point out that to Israel God was not just a shadow or a figment of the imagination, but a sure and everlasting reality whose power and influence were abundantly manifested in the crucible of living experience.

The Contribution of the Old Testament to the New Testament. Some people have advocated the elimination of the Old Testament from religious teaching. We fear, however, that they know not what they do. In the first place, purely as literature, the Old Testament is highly superior to the New Testament, and secondly, the great essentials of true religion are to be found in it beautifully expressed. Furthermore, much of the New Testament is unintelligible without an understanding of the Old Testament. The very nerve-threads of Christian life in the first century of our Era lead back into the Old Testament. There is much in the idiom of the New Testament that strongly reflects the Aramaic and Hebrew idiom of the Jewish authors. The great use of the Old Testament by New Testament writers is a fact well known to Bible scholars. The scriptures (the Old Testament) were carefully searched by early Christians for proof texts illustrative of their claims. The Gospel of Matthew, for instance, quotes liberally from the Old Testament, and its aim is to show that the Christ is the true Messiah foreshadowed by the prophets of the Hebrew scriptures. In the two first chapters of the Gospel of Luke we are undeniably in an Old Testament atmosphere. Many other places in the Gospels give the same impression. In the Book of Revelation the Old Testament literary forms and religious conceptions are apparent throughout. The influence of the Old Testament upon Paul's epistles is of course widely acknowledged. Dr. Thackeray has truly said:

There is perhaps no aspect of the Pauline theology in which the influence of the Apostle's Rabbinic training is so clearly marked as the use which is made of the Old Testament. It appears at first sight paradoxical that whereas the Law is constantly spoken of as done away in Christ and as powerless to produce man's salvation, yet the Apostle as constantly bases his arguments for the truth of Christianity on the Law in the wider sense of the term. The Epistle which may be regarded as summing up the main ideas of St. Paul begins and ends with a reference to the "holy" and "prophetical" writings which foretold the coming of Christ (cf. Rom. 1:2; 16:26). The proof for his arguments is sought again and again in the Old Testament. He never for a moment thought of disparaging the Scriptures to which the Jew appealed, on the contrary he recognized that the chief privilege of his nation was the possession of the oracles of God; but he maintained that these oracles had been misinterpreted. . . . He met the Jew on his own ground and bade him search the Scriptures in the light of the coming of Christ. [^5]

This should emphasize the fact that the Old Testament is a book of supreme importance to us and instead of being read less should be read more.

The New Testament makes two hundred and eighty-three quotations from the Old Testament. These statistics reinforce the view that the connection between "the Old Testament and the New is of a vital and organic character. They stand in a single line of development." [^6]

The Old Testament Contribution to Worship. It is not generally realized how deeply indebted our civilization is to Hebrew methods of worship. The history of the Jewish synagogue would be intensely interesting if we knew the details of its centuries of pre-Christian development. At any rate, early Christianity fell heir to the methods of Jewish worship and with perhaps slight modifications adopted and used them. We use them in great measure today, though usually unconscious of our debt.

When the apostles of Christ and other early Christian missionaries went into the Mediterranean world to preach, they found Jewish synagogues in most of the principal cities and in many of the lesser ones. Into these they entered and often found opportunities to preach. The privilege of preaching or expounding a message can be appreciated better if we understand the worship of other peoples. Note the following by a British scholar, Professor H. H. Rowley:

I shall never forget the impression made upon me when I first stood in a pagan shrine in China. Within a large courtyard I found some tiny shrines, no larger than the rooms of an ordinary house, and each of these was more than half-filled with the table on which stood the idols. I realized, as I had never realized from anything I had read, that anything like worship in our sense of the word was impossible, and that worshippers must come singly to place their incense before the gods, do their obeisance, and leave their coin. On feast days, when numbers attended the shrine, there might be fellowship in the courtyard, but there could be none in the act of worship. I had been before into Mohammedan mosques, where the differences from our churches are less striking. But Islam is in some measure the heir of Judaism, and for her form of worship she, no less than Christianity, owes a debt to the Jews. For it was Judaism that created the form of worship which, in differing ways, has been adopted and adapted in Christianity and in Islam. [^7]

Nor should we forget that Hebrew worship developed as it did mainly because it provided the people with an opportunity to gather together where they could be instructed in their scriptures and the holy faith that it represented. Psalms were sung and a place was provided where a preacher could instruct and edify the people. Professor Rowley also writes: "And if Judaism had given us nothing but the Psalter, our debt would still have been inexpressibly great. But she contributed much more than that to our worship." [^8]

The Old Testament Contribution to Law. Hebrew law as reflected in the Old Testament has had tremendous influence upon our civilization. In the past seventy years, thanks to archaeological discoveries and linguistic studies, we have obtained a fairly clear picture of the laws of Israel's neighbors, the Assyrians, Babylonians, and Hittites. And it must be admitted in the light of these studies that Old Testament laws were generally much superior in spiritual and moral content. [^9] In the Mosaic era there was, to be sure, much of the spirit of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, but that is as far as retaliation could go. There could not be two eyes for an eye or two teeth for a tooth. Among the prophets the law relative to social justice, honesty, regard for the poor, and other important matters was on an exceedingly high plane and leaves little to be asked. But even if we consider only the contribution of the Decalogue to mankind what a magnificent thing it is! And what an incomparably better world we would be living in today if only it were reasonably lived up to. But the voice from Sinai has steadily thundered down the centuries and holds true today as then:

Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy. Honor thy father and thy mother. Thou shalt not kill. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Thou shalt not covet.

These laws would seem to be the very minimum necessary in a civilized society and the Old Testament supplied them in clear-cut language.

Then in the matter of sexual morality the Old Testament has made and still makes a great contribution to society. In making this statement we refer to the idealistic side of the Old Testament, Israel at its best. Neither should we forget the high standards of the prophets in the matter of divorce.

Take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth. For I hate putting away saith the Lord. [^10]

In these two matters the world has yet a long way to go before it reaches the Old Testament ideal.

The Contribution of the Old Testament to Education. With the contribution of the Old Testament to education there must of course be reckoned that of the New Testament. The two go together. The influence of these books is well nigh incalculable and it is possible only to tell of it here in general terms.

The history of England is replete with examples of the influence of the Bible on education. Think of the Venerable Bede with his knowledge of Latin, Hebrew and Greek, all so useful in his Bible studies. The Bible was the main inspiration of his scholarship. And think also of Alcuin (circa 600 A.D.) who was saturated with Bible knowledge.

The name Alcuin might well be inscribed over the doorway of every free school, every private school, every college and every university, yes, and every Sunday-school, too, of the entire English-speaking race, for he it was that started the movement that eventually led to their existence. [^11]

Alcuin's influence extended even into France.

We may also mention Caedmon and King Alfred who did so much for early English education by spreading abroad their knowledge of the Bible.

The great universities, Oxford and Cambridge, started as Bible schools. [^12] From these universities there came many other universities whose inspiration was the same book.

In America eight great and well-known universities were founded very early as a result of prayer over the Bible and for Bible continuance. They are Harvard, William and Mary, Yale, Princeton, Washington and Lee, Pennsylvania, Rutgers, and Dartmouth. [^13]

The famous old New England Primer for one hundred and fifty years or more had a tremendous effect on early American education. It had a sale of 3,000,000 copies, notwithstanding the sparse population. And it was essentially a Bible primer. [^14]

It is a fact that Bible-trained men planted colleges in the developing West and that the Bible school paved the way for public education in America.

Nor is it necessary to point out in detail the enormous effect the Old and New Testaments had on European education before and after the Reformation. Education centered in Bible studies and the student of art, music and literature is usually well aware of that fact. Such studies led to the freedom of speech and action that many of us still enjoy and the right to worship God according to the dictates of our own conscience. Let it never be forgotten that modern democracy owes a vast debt of gratitude to Bible studies and translations made by such men as Wyclif, Luther, Tyndale, Calvin, and many others. The common man as never before seized on and made use of the truth he was able to read in a Bible printed in his own language.

The greatest music, the greatest literature, and the greatest art that we enjoy today rests back on the marvelous religious influence exerted by the Old and New Testaments upon the hearts and minds of great geniuses.

Let us hope that the great heritage left us by the Old Testament and its companion volume will never be forgotten and that they will continue to inspire us in our attempts to make a better world in which to live.

1 Lev. 19:2.

2 Hos. 11:1.

3 Isa. 64:8.

4 Ps. 103:13.

5 St. John Thackeray, The Relation of St. Paul to Contemporary Jewish Thought, pp. 180 f. Quoted in The People and The Book (Edited by A. S. Peake), pp. 462 f.

6 Ibid. (Peake), p. 465.

7 H. H. Rowley, Israel's Mission to the World, p. 122.

8 Ibid.

9 See J. M. P. Smith, The Origin and History of Hebrew Law, p. 279.

10 Mal. 2:15, 16.

11 James G. K. McClure, The Supreme Book of Mankind, p. 90.

12 Ibid., p. 95.

13 Ibid., p. 102.

14 See P. Marion Simms, The Bible in America, pp. 43 f.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapter 1. Jeremiah's call.
[^2] Chapters 2-6. Judah's sins.
[^3] Chapters 7-10. Judah called to repentance.
[^4] Chapters 11-13. An appeal to the covenant between God and His people.
[^5] Chapters 14-22. The people do not heed Jeremiah; Judah's disaster and captivity foretold.
[^6] Chapters 23-29. Israel's eventual redemption; Jeremiah sees little present hope for his people; the seventy years of captivity and return; Jeremiah and the false prophets.
[^7] Chapters 30-33. Israel and Judah to be restored in latter days; Jeremiah buys a field.
[^8] Chapters 34-45. Incidents during and after the siege and destruction of Jerusalem. (Chapters 35, 36 out of place, belonging to Jehoiachim's reign. Chapter 45 a supplement to Chapter 36:1-8.)
[^9] Chapters 46-51. Jeremiah's prophecies concerning foreign nations.
[^10] Chapter 52. An excerpt, mainly from 2 Kgs. 24:18-25:30 An account of the capture of Jerusalem.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
