Sidney B. Sperry, Spirit of the Old Testament ( 1940)

Chapter XXIII

SOME LATTER-DAY SAINT VIEWS CONCERNING THE BIBLE

The Latter-day Saints are great believers in the Bible but they have never viewed it as the inerrant word of God, completely true (in its present form) from cover to cover. Indeed, in the early history of the Church, the Mormon Prophet, Joseph Smith, wrote as follows: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly." [^1] These words seem to be a clear enough statement of belief, but in reality they need some explanation. There are a number of passages in the Bible that are correctly translated from the texts that have been handed down to us that Latter-day Saints do not believe. It is a well-known fact that certain passages of the Bible contradict each other in a number of places. None of us denies that these passages are correctly translated. Yet who would presume to assert that all of them are correct in fact? Our point can be made clear by reference to a revelation given by the Lord through Joseph Smith in the year 1833. The revelation refers to the Apocrypha in the following language: "Verily, thus saith the Lord unto you concerning the Apocrypha—There are many things contained therein that are true, and it is mostly translated correctly; there are many things contained therein that are not true, which are interpolations by the hands of men." [^2] It will be noticed that in spite of the fact that the Apocrypha is "mostly translated correctly," it contains many things "that are not true." What is true of the Apocrypha is in a measure true of the Bible. Nor need we suppose that Joseph Smith was not aware of this fact. Between the years 1830 and 1833 the Prophet, at the Lord's command, made a revision of the Bible (Authorized Version) by the spirit of revelation. In many parts of it he made profound changes. The reader is invited to examine such passages as Gen. 1 (first portion); 50; Isa. 29; Matt. 4, etc. [^3] Many of the changes made go far beyond anything we understand at this day by a "correct" translation. What, then, did Joseph Smith mean when he said, "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly"? Let him give his own answer. "I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors. As it read, Gen. VI. 6, `It repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth;' also, Num. XXII. 19, `God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the Son of man, that he should repent;' which I do not believe. But it ought to read, `It repented Noah that God made man.' This I believe, and then the other quotation stands fair." [^4] It is plain that the Prophet's use of "translation" in the 8th Article of Faith is much broader than one may at first suppose.

Oliver Cowdery who was closely associated with Joseph Smith at the time the Church was first organized, pointed out that the scriptures were given through men and subject to men's limitations. "When looking over the sacred scriptures we seem to forget they were given through men of imperfections and subject to passion." [^5]

President Brigham Young during his long ministry said much about the Bible that reflects the views of the Church in his day about it. The great colonizer had come under the influence and tutelage of Joseph Smith in the so-called School of the Prophets in Kirtland, Ohio. In this school, the great Mormon Prophet impressed upon the body of men who were to become future leaders of the Church the necessity and importance of a knowledge of ancient Biblical languages. In his journal history for December 22, 1835, Joseph Smith wrote as follows: "At home. Continued my studies. O may God give me learning, even language; and endue me with qualifications to magnify His name while I live." The next day he wrote, "In the forenoon, at home, studying the Greek language." It is well known that the Prophet, along with his brethren, studied Hebrew under the direction of Prof. Joshua Seixas who was engaged from the Hudson seminary for that purpose. [^6] So enthused did the Prophet become over his studies that he wrote in his journal for Feb. 17, 1836, the following: "Attended the school and read and translated with my class as usual. My soul delights in reading the word of the Lord in the original, and I am determined to pursue the study of the languages, until I shall become master of them, if I am permitted to live long enough. At any rate, so long as I do live, I am determined to make this my object; and with the blessing of God, I shall succeed to my satisfaction." [^7]

It is not surprising, therefore, to find Brigham Young, years later, when he was president of the Church, saying, "Take the Bible just as it reads; and if it be translated incorrectly and there is a scholar on the earth who professes to be a Christian, and he can translate it any better than King James' translators did it, he is under obligation to do so. If I understood Greek and Hebrew as some may profess to do, and I knew the Bible was not correctly translated, I should feel myself bound by the law of justice to the inhabitants of the earth to translate that which is incorrect and give it just as it was spoken anciently. Is that proper? Yes, I would be under obligation to do it. But I think it is translated just as correctly as the scholars could get it, although it is not correct in a great many instances. But it is no matter about that. Read it and observe it and it will not hurt any person in the world." [^8]

On still another occasion President Young said, "I have heard ministers of the Gospel declare that they believed every word in the Bible was the word of God. I have said to them, `You believe more than I do.' I believe the words of God are there; I believe the words of the Devil are there; I believe that the words of men and the words of angels are there; and that is not all, —I believe that the words of a dumb brute are there. I recollect one of the prophets riding, and prophesying against Israel, and the animal he rode rebuked his madness." [^9]

Apparently following in part the lead of Brigham Young, Elder George Reynolds, a prominent writer and leader in the Church, wrote his views of the Bible in the following words, "There are in the Bible the words of God, the words of Angels, of men and of the devil. Some parts of the Bible are simply history written from the writer's standpoint and according to his knowledge. Then again all servants of the Lord were not equally inspired at all times and on all occasions, consequently we have in the sacred scriptures revelations which the Lord dictated word by word, revelations, equally binding, in which the will of the Lord is directly expressed, but clothed in the language of the prophet, who was for the occasion, His mouthpiece; and again, we have the divine word given under some general law of Heaven in which not only the words but the argument was that of the speaker, but the word of the Lord nevertheless." [^10]

President George Q. Cannon, speaking on the same subject, said, "A certain amount of reverence for it is good. It is good to read here of the holy and good. It is good to have confidence in goodness, in holiness, in good and pure men. But if we were to place all our confidence in this book, we should put something between us and that God, the light of whose wisdom illuminates its pages and gives it all its worth. To do this is to worship the book. I call it idolatry. . . . I would as soon worship Peter, or the Virgin Mary, or any other mortal, as to worship a book. . . . It is through the substitution of the book for God that confusion prevails through the religious world." [^11]

President Charles W. Penrose gave an interesting view of the translators of the King James Version. Incidentally, he gave us an insight into his views concerning how free the Bible is from error. "It is not claimed that the men who translated the Old and New Testaments, in the time of King James, were inspired of God. They were learned men, experienced men, educated men, and no doubt they did the best they could, and gave to the work committed to them the benefit of their erudition, their experience, and their research. . . . When you say that all scripture is given by inspiration of God, you say something that is not true." [^12]

The citations given above clearly reveal the fact that the Mormon Church leaders have never viewed the Bible as being completely correct, word for word. But it must not be supposed that because they did not believe everything written in it that they handled it loosely and carelessly. To the contrary. They knew that the gospel could not be well understood without a knowledge of the Bible. They clearly understood the extreme value of the Old Testament as well as the New Testament in the study of the plan of salvation. In accordance with this statement we find President Brigham Young saying, "By reading the Bible we find that the Gospel is contained not only in the New Testament, but also in the Old. Moses and the Prophets saw and predicted the apostasy of the Church. They saw that the Lord would strive with the children of men from time to time, that he would deliver to them the truth and the Priesthood; they also saw that through the wickedness of the people they would change his ordinances, break the covenants, and transgress his laws, until the Priesthood would be taken from the earth, and its inhabitants be left in apostasy and darkness." [^13] On another occasion, in speaking of the Bible, Brigham Young said, "I say we take this book for our guide, for our rule of action; we take it as the foundation of our faith. It points the way to salvation like a fingerboard pointing to a city, or a map which designates the locality of mountains, rivers, or the latitude and longitude of any place on the surface of the earth that we desire to find, and we have no better sense than to believe it; hence, I say that the Latter-day Saints have the most natural faith and belief of any people on the face of the Earth." [^14] Again, "I ask you, brother B, how I must believe the Bible, and how shall you and every other follower of the Lord Jesus Christ believe it? `Brother Mormon, how do you believe it?' I believe it just as it is. I do not believe in putting any man's interpretation upon it, whatever, unless it should be directed by the Lord himself in some way. I do not believe we need interpreters and expounders of the Scriptures, to wrest them from their literal, plain, simple meaning." [^15]

It may be of some interest to notice the views of certain Church authorities on problems in the Bible that have engaged the attention of many laymen and scholars alike. President Charles W. Penrose handled the famous problem of the Pentateuch as follows: "There is a great dispute as to whether Moses wrote the Pentateuch—the "five books of Moses," as they are called. What is the reason of so much contention? We say, in the first place, that Moses wrote the books. How do we know? Because the Lord has said so. He has said that He inspired Moses to write these books. But years after the time of Moses—in the time of Ezra—these books were revised; and there may have been other revisions; and the books as they have been handed down to us are not just as they were originally written. For instance . . . [Deut. 34:5-6 is quoted] Do you think God revealed that? I am satisfied He did not. The person who revised these books added that by way of explanation." [^16] It is seen that President Penrose accounted for the difficulties involved in the problem on the hypothesis that revisions and changes in the process of transmission altered the original text.

President Brigham Young dealt with the Creation and the Antediluvian world in the following words: "There are a great many people in the world who are so wise in their own eyes that they are not disposed to believe the account contained in the Bible of the Creation of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, the antediluvian world and other things; but we profess to believe, and we do or should believe these things." [^17] Many scholars have viewed the early accounts in Genesis as mere folklore of the Hebrew people.

Orson Pratt commented on systems of chronology as follows: "In this Alexandrian era, the time from the creation to the birth of Christ is set down as 5,500. Father Pezron makes it 5,873 years . . . Then you take the one who has given the chronology to the Bible, Archbishop Usher, and he makes it 4,004 years from the creation to Christ . . . We are no more sure that Archbishop Usher's chronology is correct, than we are to suppose that many of those others are correct." [^18]

Modern scholarship often attributes the authorship of few, if any, of the Psalms to David. Orson Pratt taught otherwise. He said, "These Psalms were written by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and most of them were prophetic in their nature. David was a man especially inspired of the Lord . . . to utter forth many predictions in the form of Psalms to be sung in the congregations of Israel." [^19]

The Mormon Church leaders have consistently preached and written about the predictive elements in the Bible. The two following citations may be regarded as typical. President Anthon H. Lund said, "The book [Bible] itself proves to us that it is genuine. Its own prophecies, fulfilled since it was written, prove to us that it is a book containing the word of God. Look at Daniel's prophecy. In what a nutshell is the history of the future portrayed there? We could not any better describe it to-day, after we have followed history down for more than two thousand years. Daniel's prophecies are like history written beforehand, showing that they were inspired." [^20]

President Wilford Woodruff said, "I testify . . . that God has set His hand to fulfil the word of the Lord as given in the Bible . . . the revelations of St. John, the predictions of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Joel, Micah, and others . . . who spoke of the great work of the last days; and I testify that the day has come which Daniel saw, the day referred to by him in his interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream, when the God of heaven would set up a kingdom which should never be destroyed." [^21] Those who are well acquainted with current scholarly views of the Bible will recognize at once how far the above sentiments differ from them.

The following quotation from the pen of the late Brigham H. Roberts probably voices as well as any the general sentiments of the Church leaders concerning the "Higher" criticism of the Bible: "You recognize, do you not, that the methods of higher criticism are legitimate, that is to say, it is right to consider the various books of the scriptures, the Old Testament and the New, as a body of literature, and to examine them internally, and go into the circumstances under which they were written, and the time at which they were written, and the purpose for which they were written? All that we recognize as legitimate, though I must say, in passing, that when one enters into the details of these methods, it is rather astonishing, at least it is to me, to see what heavy weights are hung upon very slender threads. The method, then, of higher criticism we recognize as proper; but we must disagree as to the correctness of many of the conclusions arrived at by that method." [^22]

The general views on the Bible as quoted above probably represent quite fairly those held in the Church today. If they do not altogether comport with the generally accepted ones in the field of biblical scholarship, it must be remembered that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has an exceptional message to proclaim to the world. The revelations of the Lord to the Church demand a somewhat distinctive approach to the Bible. It was part of our purpose in this book to portray that approach so far as it affects the Old Testament.

1 See The Articles of Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Article 8.

2 D&C 91:1, 2.

3 See Holy Scriptures as published by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

4 DHC, 6:57.

5 Times and Seasons, 2:212.

6 See DHC, 2:356-368, 376.

7 Ibid., 396.

8 Jour. Dis., 14:226.

9 Ibid., 12:280.

10 Mill. Star, 64:181.

11 Ibid., 23:513.

12 Ibid., 55:544.

13 Jour. Dis., 16:74.

14 Ibid., 13:236.

15 Ibid., 1:237.

16 Mill. Star, 55:558 f.

17 Jour. Dis., 13:313 f.

18 Ibid., 16:324.

19 Ibid., 14:138.

20 Mill. Star, 62:50.

21 Ibid., 51:788.

22 Improvement Era, 14:667.

---
Notas:
[^1] Chapter 1. Jeremiah's call.
[^2] Chapters 2-6. Judah's sins.
[^3] Chapters 7-10. Judah called to repentance.
[^4] Chapters 11-13. An appeal to the covenant between God and His people.
[^5] Chapters 14-22. The people do not heed Jeremiah; Judah's disaster and captivity foretold.
[^6] Chapters 23-29. Israel's eventual redemption; Jeremiah sees little present hope for his people; the seventy years of captivity and return; Jeremiah and the false prophets.
[^7] Chapters 30-33. Israel and Judah to be restored in latter days; Jeremiah buys a field.
[^8] Chapters 34-45. Incidents during and after the siege and destruction of Jerusalem. (Chapters 35, 36 out of place, belonging to Jehoiachim's reign. Chapter 45 a supplement to Chapter 36:1-8.)
[^9] Chapters 46-51. Jeremiah's prophecies concerning foreign nations.
[^10] Chapter 52. An excerpt, mainly from 2 Kgs. 24:18-25:30 An account of the capture of Jerusalem.
[^11] Prophetic psalms.
[^12] Wisdom psalms. [^7]
[^13] 13 H. E. Dana, New Testament Criticism (2nd Ed., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 106. For Jewish accounts of Josephus see Meyer Waxman, A History of Jewish Literature (3 vols. New York, 1930), I, 100-108; Norman Bentwich, Josephus (Phila., 1914). The student may also be referred to F. J. Foakes—Jackson, Josephus and the Jews (New York, 1930); H. St. J. Thackeray, Josephus, the Man and the Historian (New York, 1929).
[^14] 14 See J. Garrow Duncan, The Accuracy of the Old Testament, Introduction, X.
[^15] 15 See H. E. Dana, The New Testament World (2nd ed., rev., Forth Worth, 1928), p. 160; Waxman, op. cit., gives a good account of Philo and his work. Consult the index.
[^16] 16 A good discussion of this literature will be found in Waxman, op. cit., pp. 251ff.; G. F. Moore, Judaism (3 vols. Cambridge, 1927-30). Moore's work is very learned and critical, indeed, one of the greatest treatises on Jewish religion.
[^17] 17 Samuel A. B. Mercer's Extra-Biblical Sources for Hebrew and Jewish History (New York, 1913) contains a handy compilation of Greek and Latin sources.
[^18] 18 The Hebrew Literary Genius (Princeton, 1935), pp. If.
[^19] Then wilt Thou delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt-offering and whole offering; Then will they offer bullocks upon Thine altar.
[^20] 20 For study of the Nephite record see S. B. Sperry, Our Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1963); Book of Mormon Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1968); Answers to Book of Mormon Problems (Salt Lake City, 1967); Hugh Nibley, An Approach to the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1957); Since Cumorah (Salt Lake City, 1967); F. W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America (Independence, 1951); W. E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City, 1962); Eldin Ricks, The Case of the Book of Mormon Witnesses (Salt Lake City, 1961.)
[^21] 21 See S. B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium (Salt Lake City, 1960). See bibliography on pages 768-769. See also Roy W. Doxey, The Latter-day Prophets and the Doctrine and Covenants , 4 vols. (Salt Lake City; 1963).
[^22] 22 For works on the Pearl of Great Price or parts of it consult S. B. Sperry, Ancient Records Testify (Salt Lake City, 1938); J. R. Clark, The Story of the Pearl of Great Price (Salt Lake City, 1955); Milton R. Hunter, Pearl of Great Price Commentary (Salt Lake City, 1948). H. L. Andrus, Doctrinal Commentary on the Pearl of Great Price (Deseret Book, 1967). See also articles in "The Improvement Era," Volumes 71 and 72 (1968-69) by Hugh Nibley.
