THE MISSION TO THE LAMANITES.

The Book of Mormon, the coming forth of which has already been detailed, contains many promises to the Lamanites--that is, to the American Indians, whom it reveals to be the remnants of mighty nations that once inhabited the Americas, and also proclaims them to be descendants of the house of Israel. Their present fallen state arises from their departure from the ways of the Lord, and the instructions and doctrines of their ancient prophets; the very blackness of their skin is the result of God's curse upon them for their unrighteousness; yet are they promised that they shall know their origin--the favored race from which they are descended; it is promised that the gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them, and they shall regard it as a blessing from the hand of the Lord; "and their scales of darkness shall begin to fall from their eyes, and many generations shall not pass away among them save they shall be a white and delightsome people." [A] It is promised that Zion, the New Jerusalem, shall be built upon the land of their fathers--the Americas--which, according to the Book of Mormon, is a land especially dedicated to the seed of Joseph, of Egyptian fame, the son of Jacob, "and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh;" and in this great work of building up the Zion of God, the Lamanites are assigned a special part, which will be a manifestation of God's favor towards them.[B]

[Footnote B Book of Mormon, Ether 13, and III Nephi 20.]

Very naturally, of course, those who accepted the Book of Mormon as true, possessed a lively interest in this people, that is, in the Lamanites; and anxiously looked forward to the commencement of the fulfillment of the words of their ancient prophets concerning them; and hence at the close of a conference held in the last days of September, and which also extended into the early days of October, "a great desire," says the Prophet, "was manifested by several elders respecting the remnants of the house of Joseph--the Lamanites residing in the west--knowing that the purposes of the Lord were great to that people, and hoping that the time had come when the promises of the Almighty in regard to that people were about to be accomplished, and that they would receive the gospel and enjoy its blessings. The desire was so great that it was agreed upon that we should inquire of the Lord as to the propriety of sending some of the elders among them, which we accordingly did." [C]

[Footnote C Millennial Star, (Supplement), Vol. 14, p. 44.]

The result of this inquiry was a revelation in which Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson were called to go on a mission to the Lamanites who then inhabited the western states and the Indian Territory. On their journey westward the Indian missionaries stopped at Kirtland, Ohio, where they converted a number of people to the gospel, and organized a branch of The Church.

It was here that Sidney Rigdon, a somewhat noted Campbellite preacher, resided and had a large following. These Campbellites, or Disciples of Christ, as they preferred to be called, were reformed Baptists: that is, in addition to believing that immersion is the only acceptable mode of baptism, they also taught that baptism, when preceded by true faith in God and sincere repentance, was "for the remission of sins;" and that forgiveness of sins really followed every proper baptism. It was on the occasion of this visit of the Indian missionaries to Kirtland, that Sidney Rigdon first heard of Joseph Smith and Mormonism; and the first time he ever saw the Book of Mormon was when young Parley P. Pratt, himself formerly a Campbellite preacher, presented a copy of it to him to read. I think it important to make this statement here, because it has been asserted that Sidney Rigdon had much to do with producing the Book of Mormon; the theory of some being that it was he who stole from a printer in Pittsburg--a Mr. Patterson--a manuscript story written by a sort of harebrained, retired minister, of the name of Solomon Spaulding; and that, after making some changes in the text, he then connived with Joseph Smith to palm it off upon the world as a new revelation from God--a theory which, in addition to being absolutely untrue, always was inadequate as an explanation of the origin of the Book of Mormon, and is now quite generally abandoned, since the manuscript of Solomon Spaulding most unexpectedly came to light in 1884, verbatim copies of which have been widely published; the original now being in Oberlin College, in the State of Ohio. It needs only a perusal of the "Manuscript Found" to satisfy anyone that it never could in the remotest manner have suggested the Book of Mormon, or any part of it; while the fact that Sidney Rigdon knew nothing of the Book of Mormon until Parley P. Pratt presented it to him at Kirtland, Ohio, on the occasion above referred to, is a complete refutation of the idle stories that he was associated with Joseph Smith in writing the Book of Mormon.

Sidney S. Rigdon was born in St. Clair Township, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, on the 19th of February, 1793, and was the youngest son of William and Nancy Rigdon. On his father's side his forefathers were English; on his mother's, Irish. In his youth and early manhood he followed the vocation of a farmer and tanner. At the age of twenty-five he became associated with a Baptist society, and possessing a natural gift of oratory he drifted into the ministry of that society. He seems to have been much in doubt as to the Baptist church possessing the fullness of the truth, and he at last severed his connection with it and joined in the reform movement inaugurated by one Alexander Campbell, of Bethany, Virginia, founder of the church of the "Disciples," or "Christians." This new religious movement was very successful in what was called the Western Reserve, that region of country lying south of Lake Erie, and constituting the present State of Ohio. It derived its name, Western Reserve, from the fact that the State of Connecticut in ceding its claims upon western lands reserved to itself this magnificent tract for the purposes of a school fund. Among the settlers on this Western Reserve, I repeat, the doctrines of faith, repentance and baptism for the remission of sins, preached by Alexander Campbell, Sidney S. Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt and others, as the cardinal doctrines of Christianity, and the means provided in the gospel for man's salvation, had great success. Sidney Rigdon's labors in this new ministry led him to settle at Kirtland, where he had a large congregation, the members of which, in addition to accepting the primitive faith and ordinances referred to above, were also trying to carry out that order of things incidentally mentioned in the early Christian writings,[D] namely, none of them said that which he possessed was his own; but they had all things in common.

Such was the state of affairs in Kirtland, and with Sidney Rigdon, when Parley P. Pratt and his associates arrived there in the fall of 1830, and presented the Book of Mormon to him, and preached the gospel of the Dispensation of the Fullness of Times.

Here it may not be amiss to speak a word with reference to the character of Sidney Rigdon. His subsequent prominence in The Church, both the good and the injury he did it, warrant my doing so, and will doubtless be a key to his conduct. That he possessed talents of an extraordinary nature goes without saying, especially in the line of public speaking. Few men in The Church, perhaps none, have possessed the gift of oratory to an equal degree; spontaneous, fervid, rapid, brilliant, captivating; abounding in flights of fancy, rich in coloring and original in its wealth of historical illustration, which his wide and various reading made possible. It can well be imagined how one so gifted would be useful in the work just beginning to come forth through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith--what a welcome the young Prophet would give to such a help-meet, and what influence he would have in The Church then struggling into existence. The Prophet could receive the word of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and by the visitation of angels; but at that time he was evidently lacking in ability to expound it or show that what he brought forth was in harmony with the predictions of ancient prophets, a part of a great whole, and admirably dovetailed into the general purposes and designs of God. Neither his powers of expression nor his historical information fitted him for this task. Whatever his abilities in the later years of his ministry, in the earlier days of it he was somewhat slow of speech. He was as Moses waiting for Aaron, and that Aaron, that spokesman, he found in Sidney Rigdon, and bade him welcome.

But talented as Sidney Rigdon was, moral, too, and spiritually minded and sincere as we believe him to have been in these early days of his career, he possessed traits of character which neutralized to a very great extent his great abilities. He was vain of his talents; vainglorious of his importance; too proud of what he regarded as his sacrifices for the truth. The very qualities which made him brilliant prevented him from being profound. The fervid imagination which enabled him to clothe with such splendid imagery his speech, made him a dangerous man when called to act with reference to stern and often disagreeable and prosy realities. He was constitutionally unsound. Remarkably gifted in one or two directions, he was markedly deficient in others. He was wanting in soundness of judgment, steadiness of purpose, a high sense of honor. He was moody, petty, jealous, selfish; and in a word, lacked that mysterious quality so well expressed by the phrase, "weight of character." But with all his imperfections he was useful, and for many years was faithful and devoted to the Prophet and the work of God. He was an instrument in the hands of the Almighty through whom was accomplished much good. He endured much for the truth's sake--persecution, poverty, imprisonment, mob violence, almost death. For such men, whatever may be their defects of character,--especially when such defects are constitutional, the effect of temperament--we can have but the kindest sentiments; and only make mention of such defects as they may have possessed in order to bring to pass a proper understanding of events with which they were associated.

At Kirtland, Frederick G. Williams, who subsequently occupied an important station in The Church--counselor to the Prophet Joseph in the First Presidency--was also baptized. He volunteered to accompany the Indian missionaries on their journey westward.

The Indian missionaries arrived at Independence, Missouri, in midwinter. Independence was then a frontier town; one of the outposts of Anglo-American advancement westward. It was on the line that divided our frontier from the possessions of the red man west of the great Missouri River; and it can be very well understood that its civilization was not of the highest order. Here had drifted many outcasts from society, and there was, at the time of which we are writing, very little regard for God, religion, refinement, or for civilization. As the Indian missionaries were destitute and weary from the extended journey on foot through what, at that time, was at best but a sparsely-settled country, and very much of it wilderness--it was arranged that two of the company who had been tailors should obtain work at their trade in Independence, while the three others should cross the frontier line and enter the reservation occupied by the Shawnees and the Delaware Indians.

The chief of the Delawares, who is described by Elder Parley P. Pratt as a "venerable looking man," and the "sachem of ten nations or tribes," called together some forty chief men of his people, and to these Oliver Cowdery delivered, in substance, the following message:

Aged Chief and Venerable Council of the Delaware nation: We are glad  of this opportunity to address you as our red brethren and friends. We  have traveled a long distance from towards the rising sun to bring you  glad news; we have traveled the wilderness, crossed the deep and wide  rivers, and waded in the deep snows, and in the face of the storms of  winter, to communicate to you great knowledge which has lately come to  our ears and hearts; and which will do the red man good as well as the  pale face.

Once the red men were many; they occupied the country from sea to  sea--from the rising sun to the setting sun; the whole land was  theirs; the Great Spirit gave it to them, and no pale faces dwelt  among them. But now they are few in numbers; their possessions are  small, and the pale faces are many.

Thousands of moons ago, when the red man's forefathers dwelt in peace  and possessed this whole land, the Great Spirit talked with them and  revealed his law and his will, and much knowledge to their wise men  and prophets. This they wrote in a book; together with their history,  and the things which should befall their children in the latter days.

This book was written on plates of gold, and handed down from father  to son for many ages and generations.

It was then that the people prospered, and were strong and mighty;  they cultivated the earth; built buildings and cities, and abounded in  all good things, as the pale faces now do.

But they became wicked: they killed one another and shed much blood;  they killed their prophets and wise men, and sought to destroy the  book. The Great Spirit became angry, and would speak to them no more;  they had no good and wise dreams; no more visions; no more angels  sent among them by the Great Spirit; and the Lord commanded Mormon  and Moroni, their last wise men and prophets, to hide the book in the  earth that it might be preserved in safety, and be found and made  known in the latter day to the pale faces who should possess the  land; that they might again make it known to the red men; in order to  restore them to the knowledge of the will of the Great Spirit and to  his favor. And if the red men would then receive this book and learn  the things written in it, and do according thereunto, they should be  restored to all their rights and privileges; should cease to fight and  kill one another; should become one people: cultivate the earth in  peace, in common with the pale faces, who are willing to believe and  obey the same book, and be good men and live in peace. Then should the  red men become great, and have plenty to eat and good clothes to wear,  and should be in favor with the Great Spirit and be his children,  while he would be their Great Father, and talk with them, and raise up  prophets and wise and good men amongst them again, who should teach  them many things.

This book, which contained these things, was hid in the earth by  Moroni, in a hill called by him Cumorah, which hill is now in the  State of New York, near the village of Palmyra, in Ontario County.

In that neighborhood there lived a young man named Joseph Smith,  who prayed to the Great Spirit much, in order that he might know  the truth; and the Great Spirit sent an angel to him, and told him  where this book was hidden by Moroni; and commanded him to get it. He  accordingly went to the place, and dug in the earth, and found the  book written on gold plates.

But it was written in the language of the forefathers of the red men;  therefore this young man, being a pale face, could not understand it;  but the angel told him and showed him, and gave him knowledge of the  language and how to interpret the book. So he interpreted it into the  language of the pale faces, and wrote it on paper, and caused it to  be printed, and published thousands of copies of it among them; and  then sent us to the red men to bring some copies of it to them, and to  tell them this news. So we have now come from him, and here is a copy  of the book, which we now present to our red friend, the chief of the  Delawares, and which we hope he will cause to be read and known among  his tribe; it will do them good.

To these remarks the Indian chief made the following reply:

We feel truly thankful to our white friends who have come so far, and  been at such pains to tell us good news, and especially this news  concerning the book of our forefathers; it makes us glad in here,  [placing his hand on his heart]. It is now winter, we are new settlers  in this place; the snow is deep, our cattle and horses are dying, our  wigwams are poor; we have much to do in the spring--to build houses,  and fence and make farms; but we will build a council house, and meet  together, and you shall read to us and teach us more concerning the  book of our fathers and the will of the Great Spirit.[E]

The interest awakened among the Indians by the brethren aroused the  jealousy of sectarian missionaries who were also at work among this  tribe. They falsely charged the Elders with disturbing the peace, and  through their influence with the Indian agents, secured the banishment  of the Mormon mission from the reservation.

The Indian missionaries, after their banishment, met with their  brethren at Independence, on the 14th of February, 1831, for  consultation as to their future movements. It was finally agreed by  the meeting that Parley P. Pratt should return to Ohio, and report  their labors to the Prophet. Elder Pratt immediately set out upon this  long journey, and after enduring much fatigue and sickness, he arrived  early in the spring at Kirtland, where he found the Prophet Joseph  Smith, to whom he reported the labors of himself and companions.

How Joseph Smith came to be in Ohio at this particular time is  of some interest. After joining The Church at Kirtland under the  ministrations of Oliver Cowdery, Parley P. Pratt and others, Sidney  Rigdon, in company with Edward Partridge (who had not yet received  baptism), determined upon a personal visit to the Prophet in New York.  They arrived at Fayette, New York, early in the month of December,  and soon thereafter the Prophet received revelations which must have  been a source of great comfort to these brethren. Sidney Rigdon was  declared to have been inspired of God and sent forth to prepare the  way before the coming of the Lord and of Elijah, though he knew it  not. He had baptized by water unto repentance, but those who received  his ministrations did not receive the Holy Ghost; now he was called to  a greater work, and was promised that the baptism of the Holy Ghost,  under his hands, should follow the baptism of the water, even as was  the case with the apostles of old. He was commanded to tarry with  Joseph Smith and assist him in writing and in counseling with him in  relation to the great work that the Lord was bringing forth.

Edward Partridge, who is described by the Prophet as a pattern of  piety, one of the Lord's great men, and, like Nathaniel of old, a man  in whom there was no guile, after some investigation of the truth,  was baptized by the Prophet in Seneca Lake, and was also called by  revelation to the ministry.

The addition of these brethren to The Church greatly strengthened the  ministry; they preached almost daily, and were frequently engaged in  receiving the word of the Lord by revelation and through the revision  of the scriptures; for it had been made known that in consequence of  imperfections in translation in some instances, and the omission of  many plain and precious parts in other instances, the scriptures--the  Old and New Testaments--were imperfect, and hence the necessity for  the revision. Finally the brethren received a commandment that after  they had strengthened The Church in these parts, they should go to  Ohio. The Church in New York was also commanded to gather to Ohio,  which commandment, by the way, is the first one given to The Church to  gather together in this dispensation. Obedient to this commandment,  Joseph Smith, in company with Elders Rigdon and Partridge, and with  his family, about the latter part of January removed to Kirtland,  where he received a hearty welcome, and was there when Parley P. Pratt  arrived from the west with his report of the labors of the Indian  missionaries, as already stated.

What effect this Indian mission report had upon the mind of the  Prophet he has left no word to indicate; but that a deep impression  was made upon him, and that he attached much importance to that  mission, can scarcely be doubted, because of the mighty consequences  which subsequently grew out of it.

Since the departure of the Indian missionaries for the west a very  great amount of knowledge had been revealed concerning the work of  the Lord in the last days. Soon after the arrival of Sidney Rigdon at  Fayette, in New York, as already related, work upon the translation  of scripture was begun, and among the ancient scriptures that were  revealed in the course of this work, was "The Prophecy of Enoch,"  which is alluded to in the writings of Jude,[F] in the New Testament.  According to this "Prophecy of Enoch" the Lord revealed to that  patriarch very much that would take place in the last days, among  which is the following:

And righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with  a flood, to gather out mine own elect from the four quarters of the  earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, a holy city, that my  people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of  my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called  Zion, a New Jerusalem. And the Lord said unto Enoch, then shall you  and all your city meet them there, and we will receive them unto our  bosom, and they shall see us, and we shall fall upon their necks, and  they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other, and there  shall be my abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of  all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand  years shall the earth rest.[G]

This is the city also spoken of in the Book of Mormon, to which reference before has been made.[H]

Again, before the Prophet and his companions departed from Fayette, in the month of January, speaking of the provisions that he would make for the poor, the Lord said:

I have made the earth rich; and behold it is my footstool, wherefore,  again I will stand upon it; and I hold forth, and deign to give unto  you greater riches, even a land of promise, a land flowing with milk  and honey, upon which there shall be no curse when the Lord cometh:  and I will give it unto you for the land of your inheritance, if you  seek it with all your hearts. And this shall be my covenant with  you, ye shall have it for the land of your inheritance, and for the  inheritance of your children forever, while the earth shall stand, and  ye shall possess it again in eternity, no more to pass away.[I]

After the Prophet's arrival in Kirtland, the branch of The Church there in the meantime having increased to about one hundred members, the elders of The Church were sent out into the surrounding country, two and two, to preach the gospel; and a promise of a future mission was given to them in which it was said:

And from this place ye shall go forth into the regions westward; and  inasmuch as ye shall find them that will receive you, ye shall build  up my Church in every region, until the time shall come when it shall  be revealed unto you from on high, when the city of the New Jerusalem  shall be prepared, that ye may be gathered in one, that ye may be my  people and I will be your God.[J]

Moreover, in the same revelation, something of the law under which the holy city is to be built up unto the Lord was revealed, of which we shall say more in the course of this history.

In the latter part of February a brief revelation was given, making known that it was the will of the Lord that the elders who had been sent out to preach in the regions round about should be called together; and this led to the appointment of a somewhat notable conference of The Church that was called to meet on the sixth day of June ensuing. On the 7th of March (1831), the Lord gave a somewhat lengthy revelation setting forth the judgments that should come upon the generation in which this new dispensation of the gospel came forth, in the course of which it is said:

Wherefore I, the Lord, have said, gather ye out from the eastern  lands, assemble ye yourselves together ye elders of my Church; go  ye forth into the western countries, call upon the inhabitants to  repent, and inasmuch as they do repent, build up churches unto me; and  with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that ye may  purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed unto you,  and it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of  refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God; and the  glory of the Lord shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not  come unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

And it shall come to pass, among the wicked, that every man that will  not take his sword against his neighbor, must needs flee unto Zion for  safety. And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under  heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war one  with another. And it shall be said among the wicked, Let us not go  up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible;  wherefore we cannot stand.[K]

For a time, however, both the saints who had come from New York in obedience to the commandment from the Lord, and also the saints in Ohio, were commanded by revelation to remain in Ohio for the present, the saints in the latter State being called upon to share their lands with their eastern brethren. "It must needs be necessary," continues the revelation, "that ye save all the money that ye can, and that ye obtain all that ye can in righteousness, that in time ye may be enabled to purchase land for an inheritance, even the city. The place is not yet to be revealed, but after your brethren come from the east, there are to be certain men appointed, and to them it shall be given to know the place, or to them it shall be revealed. And they shall be appointed to purchase the lands, and to make a commencement to lay the foundation of the city." [L]

Thus it will be seen that considerable knowledge had been imparted to The Church concerning "Zion" during the absence of the Indian missionaries; and as all the revelations indicated that the location of Zion was in the west, very naturally the interest of The Church was intense concerning this Indian mission operating on the very western borders of American civilization.

This brings us to the before mentioned conference, appointed for the 6th of June, 1831.
