NEGOTIATIONS.

The day following this providential storm the camp moved out into the prairie some five miles, where there was a better chance to defend themselves. Here, the next day, Colonel Sconce and two other leading men from Ray County called upon the camp to learn what the intentions of the brethren were. Said the colonel: "I see there is an Almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond with a company of armed men having a full determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm, and was not able to reach you." Having said so much, he was seized with such excitement that he trembled from head to foot like an aspen-leaf, and had to take a seat in order to compose himself.

Joseph, in a lengthy speech, related the trials and persecutions of the saints, particularly the sufferings of those in Jackson County. He related the story of the travels of Zion's Camp, how they had come one thousand miles to assist their afflicted brethren by bringing them clothing, etc., and to aid them in returning to their homes and maintaining them, and denied the infamous reports circulated to arouse the anger of the people against the exiled saints. This speech was so simple, so pathetic, and yet so forcible that the strangers were melted by its spirit, so that they wept at the story of the persecutions of God's people. At the close of the speech they arose, and gave their hands to the youthful speaker; promising to use all their influence to allay the excitement and correct the false impressions that had gone out respecting the object of the expedition--a promise they faithfully kept.

It is said of the Prophet Joseph that if he could but once get the attention even of his most bitter enemies his native eloquence, inspired by the truth and the pathos of his people's sufferings, usually overwhelmed them; and in no instance was his triumph more marked than in the one just related.

The day after the visit of Colonel Sconce, Cornelius Gillium, the sheriff of Clay County, came into camp and desired a consultation. The company was marched into a grove adjacent and formed a large circle with Gillium in the center. "I have heard that Joseph Smith is in the camp, and if so, I should like to see him," commenced Gillium.

"I am the man," replied Joseph, as he rose to his feet. This was the first time Joseph was made known to strangers since leaving Kirtland, as he had gone by a fictitious name through the whole journey.

Gillium then proceeded to describe the character and disposition of the Missourians, and the course that ought to be pursued to secure their favor and protection; and concluded by requesting to know what the intentions of the company were. This brought out the statements we now give, which were published in the Missouri Enquirer of the first of July, 1834.

GILLIUM'S COMMUNICATION.

Being a citizen of Clay County, and knowing there is considerable  excitement amongst the people thereof, and also knowing that different  reports are arriving almost hourly; and being requested of the Hon.  J. F. Ryland to meet the "Mormons" under arms, and obtain from the  leaders thereof the correctness of the various reports in circulation,  the true intent and meaning of their present movements, and their  views generally regarding the difficulties existing between them and  Jackson County,--I did in company with other gentlemen, call upon the  said leaders of the "Mormons," at their camp in Clay County; and now  give to the people of Clay County their written statement, containing  the substance of what passed between us.

(Signed) CORNELIUS GILLIUM.

PROPOSITION, ETC., OF THE MORMONS.

Being called upon by the above named gentleman, at our camp in Clay  County, to ascertain from the leaders of our men, our intentions,  views, and designs, in approaching this county in the manner we have,  we therefore the more cheerfully comply with their request, because we  are called upon by gentlemen of good feelings, and who are disposed  for peace and an amicable adjustment of the difficulties existing  between us and the people of Jackson County. The reports of our  intentions are various, and have gone abroad in a light calculated to  arouse the feelings of almost every man. For instance, one report is,  that we intend to demolish the printing office in Liberty; another  report is, that we intend crossing the Missouri River on Sunday  next, and falling upon women and children, and slaying them; another  is, that our men were employed to perform this expedition, being  taken from manufacturing establishments in the east, that had closed  business; also that we carried a flag, bearing "peace" on one side,  and "war or blood" on the other, and various others too numerous to  mention, all of which a plain declaration of our intentions, from  under our own hands, will show are not correct.

In the first place it is not our intention to commit hostilities  against any man, or set of men; it is not our intention to injure any  man's person or property, except in defending ourselves. Our flag has  been exhibited to the above gentlemen, who will be able to describe  it. Our men were not taken from any manufacturing establishment. It  is our intention to go back upon our lands in Jackson County by order  of the executive of the State, if possible. We have brought our arms  with us for the purpose of self-defense, as it is well known to almost  every man of the State, that we have every reason to put ourselves  in an attitude of defense, considering the abuse we have suffered in  Jackson County. We are anxious for a settlement of the difficulties  existing between us, upon honorable and constitutional principles.

We are willing for twelve disinterested men, six to be chosen by each  party, and these shall say what the possessions of these men are worth  who cannot live with us in the county; and they shall have their money  in one year; and none of the "Mormons" shall enter that county to  reside until the money is paid. The damages that we have sustained  in consequence of being driven away, shall also be left to the above  twelve men, or they may all live in the county, if they choose, and we  will never molest them if they let us alone, and permit us to enjoy  our rights. We want to live in peace with all men; and equal rights  is all we ask. We wish to become permanent citizens of this State,  and wish to bear our proportion in support of the government, and  to be protected by its laws. If the above propositions are complied  with, we are willing to give security on our part, and we shall want  the same of the people of Jackson County, for the performance of this  agreement. We do not wish to settle down in a body, except where we  can purchase the land with money; for to take possession by conquest  or the shedding of blood, is entirely foreign to our feelings. The  shedding of blood we shall not be guilty of, until all just and  honorable means among men prove insufficient to restore peace.

(Signed) JOSEPH SMITH, JUN.,

F. G. WILLIAMS,

LYMAN WIGHT,

RODGER ORTON,

ORSON HYDE,

JOHN S. CARTER.

To John Lincoln, John Scone, George R. Morehead, Jas. H. Long, Jas.  Collins.

After the departure of Gillium a revelation was given.[A] The Lord in this revelation declared that Zion might have been redeemed by that time, had it not been for the transgressions of his saints. They had not been obedient to the requirements made of them. They had withheld their means, and in their hearts had said: "Where is their God? Behold he will deliver them in time of trouble, otherwise we will not go up unto Zion, and we will keep our monies."

Besides these evidences of a lack of faith, they were wanting in that unity required by the law of the celestial kingdom, and it is only through the observance of that law that Zion can be redeemed. The Lord, therefore, commanded the elders to wait a season for the redemption of Zion, until the saints should obtain more experience, learn obedience, and until means could be raised to purchase all the lands in Jackson County that could be purchased, and also in the surrounding counties; and until the Lord's army had become very great, and sanctified before him. And when this was done the Lord promised to hold his people guiltless in taking possession of that which was their own; and they should possess it forever. He had permitted the elders composing the camp to come thus far, for a trial of their faith; and now he had prepared a great endowment for them in the house which he had commanded to be built in Kirtland. Those who could stay in Missouri were to do so, but those who had left their families in the east, were at liberty to return.

The saints who had been driven from their lands in Jackson were instructed to carefully gather together in one region as much as could be, without exciting the fears of the people. They were to be very faithful and humble; boasting neither of faith nor judgments. By following this counsel, the Lord promised to give them favor in the eyes of the people, that they might rest in peace while they were saying to the people: "Execute judgment and justice for us according to the law, and redress us of our wrongs."
