Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 1

The Birth of Mormonism in Ohio

First Mission to the LamanitesHCIn the latter part of October 1830, four Latter-day Saint missionaries arrived in Mentor, Ohio, carrying, as one contemporary reported, carpet bags filled with copies of the Book of Mormon. The missionaries were Oliver Cowdery, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon; Peter Whitmer, one of the eight witnesses to the Book of Mormon; Ziba Peterson, an early convert; and Parley P. Pratt, a traveling preacher who was converted to the restored Church while preaching the need for a restoration. [^1]

First Mission to the LamanitesHCAt the home of Sidney Rigdon, one of the most influential restorationist preachers living in northeastern Ohio, the Mormon elders introduced the restored gospel and presented to the preacher a copy of the ancient record. Parley P. Pratt, who had known the preacher for several years, later recalled that his ministerial friend "was much surprised," adding that "it was with much persuasion and argument that he was prevailed on to read" the book. [^2] Mr. Rigdon's first reaction to the Book of Mormon was unfavorable; he had a Bible that he believed was a revelation from God, and he "had considerable doubt" concerning the divine events attested to by the missionaries. While the elders were attempting to explain their convictions, he interrupted, saying, "No, young gentlemen, you must not argue with me on the subject; but I will read your book, and see what claims it has upon my faith, and will endeavor to ascertain whether it be a revelation from God or not." [^3]

Oliver Cowdery

First Mission to the LamanitesHCSidney Rigdon granted the missionaries permission to preach in his church to members of his Reformed Baptist congregation. As the missionaries unfolded the message of the restoration to the large congregation, they explained why they themselves had embraced the restored gospel. Two of them, Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jr., were witnesses to the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Elder Cowdery also testified that he was present with Joseph Smith when an angel conferred upon them the lesser priesthood and again when holy angels restored to the earth the higher priesthood.

Parley P. Pratt

First Mission to the LamanitesHCAfter the missionaries spoke, Sidney Rigdon stood and addressed the congregation. He said that the message they had received that evening was "of an extraordinary character, and certainly demanded their most serious consideration." He further exhorted them to "give the matter a careful investigation, and not turn against it without being fully convinced of its being an imposition, lest they should, possibly, resist the truth." Quoting the admonition of Paul, he concluded, "Prove all things, and hold fast to that which is good." [^4]

First Mission to the LamanitesHCSidney Rigdon's original response to Mormonism was negative for several reasons. For years he had held the traditional Protestant view that the Bible was the sole standard of religious truth and that visions and revelations had ceased with the deaths of the early apostles. Now here were missionaries who informed him of new revelations from heaven and of a book other than the Bible that contained the words of God. [^5] The first published account of his conversion was given in the Painesville, Ohio, Telegraph. The writer, who signed his report with the initials "M. S. C." (probably Matthew S. Clapp, a restorationist minister of the Christian [Disciple] church in Painesville), stated that the elders told Sidney Rigdon that converts whom he had earlier immersed for the remission of sin should now be baptized by individuals who possessed God's authority. "Rigdon seemed much displeased" when he learned that seventeen of his followers were baptized one night by the Mormon elders, the writer noted. When Mr. Rigdon again conversed with the missionaries, the article continued, he requested "proof of the truth of their book and mission." Oliver Cowdery, speaking for the missionaries, responded by bearing witness that in response to his own sincere, prayerful petition to his "Heavenly Father . . . in the name of Jesus Christ," he had received an answer from an angel sent by God. [^6]

First Mission to the LamanitesHCFrom Mentor, the missionaries walked a few miles south to the outskirts of Kirtland, where they contacted some Reformed Baptists who had established a communal society on Isaac Morley's farm. One of the first individuals they met was Lyman Wight, then preparing to move seven miles from Kirtland to Mayfield, where he anticipated organizing five families into a branch of this society. "When I had my goods about half loaded," he recorded in his journal,

First Mission to the LamanitesHCthere came along four men, namely: P. Pratt, O. Cowdery, P. Whitmer, and Ziba Peterson and brought with them the Book of Mormon, which they wished to introduce to us. I desired they would hold on till I got away, as my business was of vital importance, and I did not wish to be troubled with romances, nor idle speculations. But nothing daunted, they were not to be put off, but were as good natured as you please. Curiosity got uppermost, and I concluded to stop for a short time. We called a meeting, and one testified that he had seen angels, and another that he had seen the plates, and that the gifts were back in the church again, etc. The meeting became so interesting that I did not get away till the sun was about an hour high at night, and it was dark before I arrived at my new home. [^7]

First Mission to the LamanitesHCThe success of the elders in Kirtland was immediate and remarkable. Soon news spread throughout the region that an unusual religious message was being expounded by missionaries from New York. On occasions, the roads were crowded with people traveling to Kirtland to hear the message of the restoration. Inquirers exhausted the elders with their constant questions. "The people thronged us night and day," Parley P. Pratt said, "insomuch that we had not time for rest or retirement." Some came "for curiosity, some to obey the gospel, and some to dispute or resist it." [^8]

Since not enough copies of the Book of Mormon were available for all who desired to read it, some people loaned their copies on a short-term basis. Before Isaac Morley had finished reading the book, Mary Rollins, a twelve-year-old girl living in Kirtland with her widowed mother in a house belonging to her uncle, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, requested an opportunity to examine it. "I plead[ed] so earnestly for it," she recalled, that Isaac Morley finally said, "Child, if you will bring this book home before breakfast tomorrow morning, you may take it." Hurrying home, she showed the work to others, and they also expressed a desire to learn of its message. Consequently, throughout the night she and her aunt and uncle read intently. The next morning, her narrative continues, she returned the book to Isaac Morley. Amazed that she had read and learned so much, he said, "Child, take this book home and finish it. I can wait." [^9]

John Murdock, a follower of Sidney Rigdon, first learned of the restoration on October 31, 1830, while he was traveling to a nearby community to deliver a Sabbath sermon. He had been associated with the Reformed Baptists for about three years and was concerned that many restorationist theologians of the day had rejected latter-day miracles, thereby denying the gift and power of the Holy Ghost. [^10] Shortly before the appearance of the Latter-day Saint elders in Ohio, an inquirer asked him, "Where is the man to commence the work of baptizing? or where shall he get his authority?" John Murdock replied that no one had the authority. "If they are out of the way as we believe," he said, "they have lost all authority. There is only one way in which the priesthood of God can be restored," he added. "The Lord must either send an angel to baptize the first man, or he must give a special command to some one man to baptize another." [^11]

Four days after he heard that the missionaries were in his area, John Murdock rode twenty miles to Kirtland to meet them. On two occasions during this journey he conversed with friends who tried to persuade him to return home. Undaunted by their skepticism, he continued on. He was introduced to the missionaries, who gave him a copy of the Book of Mormon and told him that it had come forth by the power of God. That night he attended a confirmation meeting at Isaac Morley's home—the first such meeting, he later said, to be conducted in Ohio. Staying overnight in the Morley home, he commenced reading the book, which was heralded as a new witness for Christ. He also conversed with Sidney Rigdon, who was still investigating the new faith. The next day he listened thoughtfully as the missionaries, led by Oliver Cowdery, responded to his questions. After being convinced that these men held the authority he had been seeking, he requested baptism. On Friday, November 5, just five days after he learned of the missionaries' presence in the area, John Murdock was baptized in the Chagrin River by Parley P. Pratt. Two days later he was confirmed by Oliver Cowdery and then ordained an elder. [^12]

By the middle of November 1830, Sidney Rigdon had resolved his problems concerning the Book of Mormon, latter-day revelation, and the elders' claim of authority. As he read the Book of Mormon, he became "fully convinced of the truth of the work, by a revelation from Jesus Christ." [^13] He also decided, according to a non-Mormon contemporary, that Oliver Cowdery had not been deceived by an angel of the devil but had truly been visited by an angel from God. [^14] Moreover, Sidney concurred that he had not previously been "legally baptized and ordained" and that he had "no authority to minister in the ordinances of God." [^15]

Sidney Rigdon

On Sunday, November 14, 1830, Sidney Rigdon gathered his neighbors and other friends and spoke to a large congregation in the Methodist meetinghouse in Kirtland. The Painesville Telegraph reported that when he addressed this group, he was "apparently much affected and deeply impressed," seemed "exceedingly humble," and "confessed the sins of his former life." Apparently describing the same sermon, Parley P. Pratt recalled that the new convert spoke for about two hours, "during most of which time both himself and nearly all the congregation were melted into tears." [^16] He was subsequently baptized, probably the following day. The Telegraph specified that on that occasion "he professed to be exceedingly joyful, and said he would not be where he was three days ago for the universe." Parley P. Pratt reported that after Sidney and his wife were baptized by Oliver Cowdery, they emerged from the water overwhelmed in tears. "It was," he observed, "a solemn scene." [^17]

By the middle of November 1830, many of Sidney Rigdon's followers in Kirtland were convinced that the gospel of Christ had been restored to the earth, and all of the approximately fifty members of the communal society, including Isaac Morley, Titus Billings, Lyman Wight, their wives, and many of their children, had been baptized. Within a few weeks Newel K. Whitney and Frederick G. Williams also joined the Church. [^18]

Many of the earliest converts in and around Kirtland in 1830 were restorationist followers of Sidney Rigdon, or Reformed Baptists. One who was not was Philo Dibble. Recently married, this twenty-four-year-old farmer had settled about five miles east of Kirtland. One morning he listened with unusual interest as two men told him about the arrival in Kirtland of four missionaries from New York. With derision, the informers explained that these peculiar preachers were carrying a "golden Bible" and that one claimed to have "seen an angel." Philo informed his bride of this report, and they drove to Kirtland. There they learned that the missionaries were in Mayfield but were expected to return the next day. The following day, Philo again hitched up his carriage and, accompanied by his wife and another family, rode to Kirtland. That evening, he attended a meeting at Isaac Morley's home. Oliver Cowdery bore witness concerning the "administration of an angel" and discussed the doctrines of repentance, baptism, and the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, promising a testimony to everyone who would embrace these principles with an honest heart. When the elder invited all who desired baptism to arise, Philo, along with William Cahoon, and three others, stood. His wife thought he was acting hastily and that further investigation was needed. "I paid no heed to her," he later recalled, "but went forth and was baptized by Parley P. Pratt. . . . When I came out of the water, I knew that I had been born of water and of the spirit, for my mind was illuminated with the Holy Ghost." [^19]

Some of the followers of Sidney Rigdon were at first vehemently opposed to Mormonism and refused to accept the Book of Mormon as scripture; but they eventually were converted to the belief that his work was indeed a new witness for Christ. One of them was Orson Hyde, who was born in Connecticut in 1805, the same year that Joseph Smith was born in Vermont. After the death of his parents, this fourteen-year-old farm boy moved to Kirtland with his guardian. Four years later he set out to carve out his "fortune and destiny." He secured employment at Grandison Newell's iron foundry and later became a clerk in the Gilbert and Whitney store. While living in Kirtland, he joined the Methodist church. He was subsequently converted to the teachings of Sidney Rigdon and moved to Mentor, where he lived temporarily with this restorationist preacher, studying English and grammar under his tutelage.

In about 1829, Orson Hyde accompanied Rigdon on an itinerant crusade that included visits to the cities of Elyria and Florence. The preacher's successes in these two communities led to the creation of several new congregations, and in 1830, while teaching school in Florence, Orson Hyde served as pastor of these reformers. Shortly after he learned of the publication of the Book of Mormon, he declared it to be a hoax. A year later, while still publicly denouncing the publication, he confessed in private that his conscience told him such repudiation was wrong. A reevaluation of the work led to a powerful conversion. On October 31, 1831, Orson Hyde was baptized into the new church by his former minister, Sidney Rigdon, and on the same day he was confirmed and ordained an elder by Joseph Smith. [^20]

Frederick G. Williams

Approximately one month after they arrived in northeastern Ohio, the four Mormon missionaries, accompanied by Frederick G. Williams, resumed their journey west, heading toward Missouri. During a period of about four weeks, they had preached frequently in Kirtland, Mentor, and Mayfield and had introduced the restored gospel in Euclid, Warrensville, North Union (now Cleveland's Shaker Heights), and Painesville. [^21] They had baptized about 130 persons; had confirmed and ordained a number of converts, conveying to them the right to preach and baptize; and had inspired the new members to testify to friends, relatives, and strangers of the reality of the restoration. The four elders had also organized a branch of the Church in Kirtland in November, leaving Isaac Morley in charge of the congregation. [^22]

Orson Hyde

A Distinct Quest for a Restoration

One reason for the remarkable growth of the Church in Ohio's Western Reserve in the fall of 1830 is that many persons living there were seeking a return to New Testament Christianity and held a number of beliefs that harmonized with doctrines taught by the Latter-day Saint missionaries. United under the leadership of Sidney Rigdon, they variously referred to themselves as Reformers, Reformed Baptists, and Reforming Baptists, but some of their critics called them Campbellites, because they endorsed sentiments popularized by a restorationist theologian named Alexander Campbell. [^23]

During the 1820s, Sidney Rigdon and Alexander Campbell had shared many views concerning the need for a restoration of the pure gospel of Christ, and Rigdon was undoubtedly influenced by Campbell during that period. Born in western Pennsylvania in 1793, Sidney Rigdon had been trained by a Baptist minister and was set apart and ordained in 1819 by members of the Beaver Baptist Association (an alliance of Calvinist Baptists). After his ordination he moved to Warren, Ohio, where he met and married Phebe Brook and helped baptize about fifty converts. He next served in Pittsburgh for almost two years. [^24] Meanwhile, through personal conversations with Alexander Campbell and through reading the Christian Baptist, a periodical published by Campbell in Bethany, West Virginia, he became acquainted with Campbell's views concerning the impropriety of creeds and the need to restore New Testament Christianity. These restorationist views conflicted with his orthodox Baptist beliefs, so he resigned from his ministerial position in the summer of 1823 and labored as a tanner for two years. [^25]

In 1826 Sidney Rigdon accepted a call to become minister of a Baptist congregation in Bainbridge, Geauga County, Ohio, about fifteen miles south of Kirtland. Though the congregation had adopted a Calvinistic creed that to him was unacceptable, he was nevertheless invited to serve them without being required to endorse their local articles of faith.

Within a year of his move to Bainbridge, Sidney was invited to serve members of another Calvinist Baptist congregation in Mentor, a few miles northeast of Kirtland Flats. [^26] The Baptists of Mentor were affiliated with the Grand River Association, and he was accepted as a representative at the annual deliberations of this convention. His popularity as a preacher and his recognized leadership abilities are evidenced in part by his being invited to preach in 1826 and 1827 to delegates of an alliance of Baptist societies, the Mahoning Baptist Association. [^27]

While serving as minister of the Regular Baptists in Mentor, Sidney Rigdon formally departed from the orthodox Baptist fold. Possibly his denunciation of the creeds of Christendom and his rejection of the five points of Calvinism would have been sufficient cause for members of the Grand River Association to expel him from their alliance. But his departure from traditional Baptist orthodoxy certainly advanced during the winter of 1827-28 when he began preaching that remission of sins and reception of the Holy Ghost would follow the immersion of a repentant believer. Most Baptists asserted that baptism, a symbol of acceptance of Christ, did not remit sins: such a remission was connected to faith alone. And Baptists, with few exceptions, contended that reception of the Holy Ghost did not come by repentance and baptism.

The person generally credited with being the first to popularize widely in eastern Ohio the concept that a remission of sins and the Holy Ghost follow baptism was Walter Scott, whom Sidney Rigdon had known earlier in Pittsburgh. In September 1827, Scott was called by the Mahoning Association to be a preacher, but he was not bound to creed or congregation. Shortly after this appointment, he began proclaiming six basic principles: faith, repentance, believer's baptism, remission of sins, reception of the Holy Ghost, and eternal life. [^28]

Prior to the summer of 1828, Sidney Rigdon was also effectively proclaiming this same message from Mentor in the north to Mantua in the south. According to Amos Hayden, another restorationist preacher, Rigdon and Scott discussed these principles in Warren in March 1828, after which Rigdon, accompanied by Adamson Bentley, rode to Mentor to proclaim this doctrine.

After converting more than fifty persons and baptizing more than twenty into the "scriptural order of the gospel," they rode to Kirtland and converted fifty more people. [^29] That summer, Alexander Campbell announced in the Christian Baptist that "Bishops Scott, Rigdon, and Bentley, in Ohio, within the last six months, have immersed about eight hundred persons." [^30]

Members of the Grand River Association, recognizing that Sidney Rigdon and most members of his congregation had departed from the Baptist tradition, voted in September 1828 "to withdraw fellowship from the Painesville and Mentor Church." Representatives from the seventeen congregations forming this alliance further resolved that since the "sentiments and practices propagated by the leading men in the Mahoning Association were derogatory to the doctrine of Christ," fellowship with that body was terminated. In 1829 two other churches southeast of Kirtland (one in Chardon, eight miles away, and the other in Huntsburg, nineteen miles distant) were also dismissed because they had "departed from the faith of the gospel, by embracing the novel notions of A. Campbell." [^31]

The Mahoning Association was dissolved in 1830 when delegates at the association's annual meeting agreed to sever all connections with the Baptist faith, to discontinue their yearly gatherings as an association, and to return to the primitive purity of the New Testament Christianity. [^32] Many historians date the rise of the new denomination, the Disciples of Christ, to this move.

Early in 1830 Alexander Campbell proclaimed in the Christian Baptist that groups had already commenced to restore the ancient gospel. He predicted that this blissful revolution would produce many more fruits of righteousness and more peace and joy than any previous religious revolt "since the great apostasy from Christian institutions." Campbell commenced publication of another periodical, the Millennial Harbinger, in January 1830. The first issue was headed by a quotation from his version of Revelation 14:6: "I saw another messenger flying through the midst of heaven, having everlasting good news to proclaim to the inhabitants of the earth." This scripture was printed on the covers of subsequent issues of the magazine, which soon replaced the Christian Baptist. [^33]

With the establishment of numerous independent congregations based on their versions of the New Testament church, Amos Hayden reported, many restorationist theologians in 1830 were proclaiming that "the millennium had now dawned, and that the long expected day of gospel glory would very soon be ushered in." This return to conditions existing in the primitive church was viewed as an initiatory movement preceding the gathering of the Jews to Jerusalem and the Second Coming of the Savior. [^34]

The Break with Alexander Campbell

As Reformed Baptists of the Western Reserve compared their interpretations of the New Testament with views espoused by Alexander Campbell and other restorationist preachers, some concluded that those restorationists were teaching incorrect doctrines. In an attempt to restore New Testament Christianity more fully, Isaac Morley persuaded some of Sidney Rigdon's followers to create a communitarian system, with all things held in common. Thus, about five families, including those of Lyman Wight and Titus Billings, pooled their property and established an order called the "Family" or the "Big Family." A few families living in Mayfield organized a similar society. While Sidney Rigdon apparently approved this action, Alexander Campbell denounced the system. [^35]

This was not the only issue keeping some of the followers of Sidney Rigdon from endorsing Campbell's efforts to restore New Testament Christianity. Significant disagreements also arose concerning gifts of the Holy Spirit and authority to perform ordinances. Alexander Campbell held that after individuals became the sons of God through faith and baptism, they would receive the spirit of Christ, which was the Holy Ghost. Such recipients, he taught, would be filled with peace and joy and become habitations of God. [^36] He insisted, however, that those who received the gift of the Holy Ghost would not receive some of the spiritual gifts manifested in the early church; rather, they would be blessed with the fruits of the spirit. Explaining this concept, he stated that miracles similar to those wrought by the Holy Spirit during the generation of the apostles (such as healing and speaking in tongues) would not reappear in the latter days. Miracles performed by the apostles, he contended, were to confirm the new religion and prove its divine origin. Such manifestations were for a limited time, and "this limited time" had "expired." [^37]

In contrast, some Reformed Baptists, especially those influenced by Sidney Rigdon, sought the same power described in the Holy Scriptures. Edward Partridge, a successful Painesville hatter, had concluded prior to the arrival of the Mormon missionaries that it was "absolutely necessary" for God to "again reveal himself to man and confer authority upon some one, or more, before his church could be built up in the last days, or any time after the apostasy." He further stated that he did not consider the subject of restoration of the priesthood until after he was convinced that God's true church was not upon the earth. Then he concluded that all men with whom he was acquainted "were without authority from God." [^38]

Newell Kimball Whitney also rejected Campbell's view concerning the permanent cessation of miracles. Shortly before the introduction of Mormonism into the Western Reserve, he and his wife prayed earnestly to the Lord, requesting to know how they might be endowed with the Holy Ghost. [^39]

Another settler of the Western Reserve who had been influenced by Sidney Rigdon and was seeking a restoration of the ancient gospel was Parley P. Pratt. After his marriage in New York to Thankful Halsey in September 1827, this twenty-one-year-old adventurer, accompanied by his bride, returned to a log cabin that he had built the previous winter in the wilderness of Lorain County, Ohio, about thirty miles west of Cleveland. There he erected another home, planted grain, and nurtured his young orchard of apple and peach trees. [^40]

Newel K. Whitney

Approximately eighteen months after his marriage, Parley heard Sidney Rigdon preach his restorationist views to the settlers in Lorain County. As a result of previous study of the New Testament, Parley had decided that faith, repentance, baptism by immersion for the remission of sins, and a promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost were basic principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and he therefore responded enthusiastically to the preacher's message. However, he also believed that one vital link was missing, a link essential to a restoration of primitive Christianity: "the authority to minister in holy things—the apostleship, the power which should accompany the form." [^41] He recognized that Alexander Campbell, Sidney Rigdon, Walter Scott, and other restorationsist theologians who were then preaching in that section of America made no claims to a new commission from the Lord through a heavenly vision. Despite this deficiency, he joined the society that had been organized under Sidney Rigdon's direction in the community where he lived. [^42]

In the summer of 1830, Parley P. Pratt announced that he had been called by the Holy Ghost to leave his home and preach the gospel of Christ. Since he believed that the fulness of the gospel was not upon the earth at that time, he intended to proclaim the need for a restoration of the ancient Christian order. After disposing of his property, he began to journey with his wife to their native home in Canaan, New York, near the Massachusetts border. As they traveled east along the Erie Canal near Rochester, New York, Parley felt impressed to commence preaching in that area. A few miles beyond the canal town of Palmyra, he disembarked at Newark, leaving his wife to continue the remainder of the journey alone. He walked about ten miles into a rural farming community, where he announced his intention to preach. While making the necessary arrangements, he met a Baptist deacon who informed him that a strange book had recently been published in Palmyra. He expressed a keen desire to examine the work and was told that if he returned the next day, he could secure a copy. Accordingly, the next morning he returned to the deacon's home and obtained a copy of the Book of Mormon. "I opened it with eagerness," Parley wrote in his autobiography,

and read its title page. I then read the testimony of several witnesses in relation to the manner of its being found and translated. After this I commenced its contents by course. I read all day; eating was a burden, I had no desire for food; sleep was a burden when the night came, for I preferred reading to sleep.

As I read, the spirit of the Lord was upon me, and I knew and comprehended that the book was true, as plainly and manifestly as a man comprehends and knows that he exists. [^43]

After reading the Book of Mormon, Parley walked to Palmyra in search of its translator and was informed that the Smith family lived several miles outside Manchester Township. Proceeding south, Parley learned that Joseph Smith himself was then living in Pennsylvania, but that his brother Hyrum, one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon plates, still lived in Manchester. He visited Hyrum Smith and listened as he explained many details concerning the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the organization of the new church. A few days later, accompanied by Hyrum Smith, Parley walked to the Peter Whitmer farm in Fayette, New York, and, about September 1, 1830, was baptized in Seneca Lake by Oliver Cowdery. On the day of his baptism, he was also ordained to the office of elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood, receiving, as he explained, "the authority to preach, baptize, administer the sacrament, administer the Holy Spirit by laying on of hands" and preside at "meetings of worship." [^44] After hastening to Canaan and telling his wife, parents, and friends of his recent spiritual experiences, he resumed his itinerant preaching. During the autumn of 1830, Parley P. Pratt not only introduced the restored gospel to a number of the inhabitants of New York, but he also baptized his brother Orson. He then returned to the area of Fayette. [^45]

In October 1830, Parley P. Pratt was called by revelation to accompany Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, and Ziba Peterson on a mission to Indians living on America's frontier. After arranging for his wife to live with the Peter Whitmer family in Fayette, he proceeded west with his companions. The four elders preached to the Indians of the Catteraugus tribe near Buffalo, New York, then traveled on to Ohio. [^46]

Since his conversion to the restored Church of Christ, Parley P. Pratt had not seen Sidney Rigdon. However, he sincerely believed that many in the Western Reserve would respond favorably to the message of the restoration. He knew that many of Sidney's followers had rejected the standard creeds of Christendom and sought a restoration of God's power and authority. Believing that the field was white already to harvest, Parley P. Pratt, with the assistance of three missionaries, thrust in his sickle with all his might—and reaped a fruitful harvest.

The Birth of Mormonism in Ohio

---
Notas:
[^1] U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1957, pp. 7, 16.
[^2] Francis P. Weisenburger, The Passing of the Frontier, pp. 3-4.
[^3] B. Drake and E. D. Mansfield, Cincinnati in 1826, p. 11.
[^4] Historical Statistics, p. 13.
[^5] Weisenburger, Passing of the Frontier, pp. 47-54.
[^6] John Struthers Stewart, History of Northeastern Ohio 1:68-78, 82, 97; Warren Jenkins, Ohio Gazetteer, p. 536.
[^7] Weisenburger, Passing of the Frontier, pp. 233-35, 269-70. Early in 1835 Latter-day Saints in Kirtland began publishing a newspaper, Northern Times, that supported candidates of the Democratic party. Painesville Telegraph, February 20, 1835, p. 3; Northern Times, August 7, 1835, and October 9, 1835.
[^8] Milton V. Backman, Jr., American Religions and the Rise of Mormonism, pp. 277, 283, 308-9.
[^9] Cleveland Herald, September 8, 1831.
[^10] Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, p. 95.
[^11] C. S. Griffin, The Ferment of Reform, 1830-1860, p. 1.
[^12] Merle Curti, The Growth of American Thought, pp. 365-66.
[^13] Painesville Telegraph, June 29, 1830, p. 2; October 11, 1831, p. 3; April 26, 1831, p. 1.
[^14] Loraine Gazette (Elyria, Ohio), March 5, 1830, p. 3. Before 1831 many Methodist, Presbyterian, and Baptist congregations agreed to support the temperance crusade, thereby becoming energetic temperance societies. Lewis Curtis, ed., The General Conferences of the Methodist Episcopal Church from 1792 to 1896, pp. 76, 82, 105; Records of the Presbytery of Geneva, Book C, p. 109; Minutes of the Presbytery of Grand River, 1829-1836, p. 79; Ohio Baptist Convention: Records of Annual Meetings, p. 16.
[^15] Cleveland Herald, January 21, 1830, p. 3; March 18, 1830, p. 3; April 8, 1830, p. 3.
[^16] "Extracts from a Brief History of the Congregational Church of Kirtland, Ohio," copied by Marion A. Crary, p. 2; Grand River Baptist Association Records, 1817-1842, pp. 94, 106; Geauga Gazzette, July 20, 1832, p. 1; Christopher G. Crary, Pioneer and Personal Reminiscences, p. 25.
[^17] "Intemperance—Insanity," Journal of Health 1 (1829): 13-14; "On the Use and Abuse of Ardent Spirits," ibid., 1 (1830): 157-59; ibid., 1 (1829): 96; ibid., 1 (1830): 153-55, 219-20, 297-99, 330-31; "Wines," ibid., 1 (1830): 136-38. See also Sylvester Graham, Lectures on the Science of Human Life, pp. i-iv.
[^18] Millennial Harbinger 1 (June 7, 1830): 281-83; Catholic Telegraph (Cincinnati), January 17, 1834, p. 112; June 20, 1834, p. 235; Chardon Spectator and Geauga Gazette, October 5, 1833, p. 1; Western Courier (Ravenna, Ohio), October 24, 1833, p. 2.
[^19] Griffin, Ferment of Reform, pp. 44-45.
[^20] George Rogers Taylor, The Transportation Revolution, 1815-1860, pp. 22-24; Harlan Hatcher, The Buckeye Country, pp. 132-40.
[^21] Taylor, Transportation Revolution, pp. 58, 65.
[^22] Brigham Young, "History of Brigham Young," Deseret News, February 10, 1858, p. 384. See also Elden Jay Watson, comp., Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 1801-1844, p. 18.
[^23] Taylor, Transportation Revolution, pp. 58-60, 138-42.
[^24] Ibid., pp. 32, 52, 79.
[^25] Harry N. Scheiber, Ohio Canal Era, pp. 28, 48, 50, 235-36.
[^26] Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate 2 (September 1836): 374.
[^27] 27. Record of the Mahoning Baptist Association, pp. 76-78, 80-82.
[^28] 28. Hayden, Early History of the Disciples, p. 71; Walter Scott, The Gospel Restored, p. vi. Scott claimed that he taught the concept of baptism for the remission of sins to Alexander Campbell and Sidney Rigdon and that Rigdon converted the Mormon missionaries to that belief. Although it appears that this doctrine was not emphasized in the preaching of most reformers before 1827, Campbell and Rigdon understood it before that date. This doctrine was also clearly enunciated in the Book of Mormon and in the instructions of John the Baptist to the Prophet Joseph Smith, and was thereby endorsed by Latter-day Saints before the Latter-day Saint missionaries arrived in Ohio. For the views of Scott on this subject, see Walter Scott to Br. Emmons, October 22, 1851, Disciples Historical Society, Nashville, Tennessee.
[^29] 29. Hayden, Early History of the Disciples, pp. 193-94.
[^30] 30. Campbell, The Christian Baptist, p. 452.
[^31] 31. Grand River Baptist Association Records, pp. 83, 86, 99.
[^32] 32. Mary A. Smith, "A History of the Mahoning Baptist Association," p. 93. The first church of the Campbell movement in the Mahoning Association area to reject its creed was the society in Mantua and Hiram, which was organized January 27, 1827. The following November, the Baptists in New Lisbon abandoned their articles of religion, and in 1828 a similar action was taken by the members of the Braceville church. Ibid., pp. 93-94.
[^33] 33. Campbell, The Christian Baptist, p. 664; Millennial Harbinger 1 (January 4, 1830): 1. Campbell also proclaimed in 1830 that "the American Revolution is but the precursor of a revolution of infinitely more importance to mankind. . . . A more glorious work is reserved for this generation—. . . the emancipation of the human mind from the shackles of superstition." Millennial Harbinger 1 (July 5, 1830): 307.
[^34] 34. Hayden, Early History of the Disciples, pp. 183-86.
[^35] 35. Journal of Lyman Wight, cit. in Heman C. Smith, ed. History of the Church 1:51-52; Williams, Mormonism Exposed, p. 2; Hayden, Early History of the Disciples, p. 209.
[^36] 36. Campbell, The Christian Baptist, pp. 454-55.
[^37] 37. Ibid., pp. 89-91, 95.
[^38] 38. Edward Partridge, Papers, May 26, 1839.
[^39] 39. Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:223.
[^40] 40. Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 27-32.
[^41] 41. Ibid., pp. 31-32.
[^42] 42. Ibid., p. 32.
[^43] 43. Ibid., pp. 35-37; Pratt, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 41.
[^44] 44. Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 37-42; Pratt, Mormonism Unveiled, p. 41.
[^45] 45. Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 42-45.
[^46] 46. HC 1:118-22. Prior to their departure, the four missionaries endorsed a covenant of cooperation dated "Manchester, October 17, 1830." In this covenant Oliver Cowdery promised that he would walk humbly before God, obeying the commandment that he should go forth "to proclaim glad tidings of great joy" to the Lamanites "by presenting unto them the fulness of the gospel." The three other elders covenanted that they would assist him faithfully in this work and would obey his "words and advice." Copies of this covenant along with some of the early revelations recorded by Joseph Smith were published by Ezra Booth, one of the early members who left the Church, in Ohio Star, December 8, 1831.
