Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 2

Ohio in the 1830s

In order to understand better the Ohio experience of the Latter-day Saints in the 1830s, one needs to examine social conditions and the setting of both the United States and the Western Reserve in that period. The rapid growth of the Church and the gathering of Latter-day Saints in northeastern Ohio during the 1830s, and the joys, struggles, and accomplishments they experienced there, coincided with a remarkable transformation in the young American republic. This was an era of significant increase, expansion, and concentration of the population. Modern political parties were taking shape. The Second Great Awakening, a powerful series of revivals in New England and frontier communities in Kentucky and Tennessee, was reaching a climax, and the religious vibrations of this revival combined with other forces to advance programs of humanitarian and moral reform. Meanwhile, a revolution in transportation was changing patterns of travel and communication, aiding the Latter-day Saint immigrants and missionaries.

An Era of Unusual Growth

During the threescore years preceding the American Civil War, the population of the United States almost doubled every twenty years. The five million in 1800 grew to more than nine million in 1820 and seventeen million in 1840. Although the number of immigrants arriving in the United States increased during the 1820s and 1830s, population growth during the first thirty years of the nineteenth century was due primarily to natural increase. Large families were common, and census reports of that period indicate that on the average, every household of free inhabitants had slightly more than five individuals. [^1]

While the growth along the eastern seaboard remained almost stationary, there was a remarkable increase in the land west of the Appalachians. During the first decade of the century the population of New York State had almost doubled, increasing from about one-half to one million inhabitants, with the most significant growth occurring in New York City and the western part of New York State. An almost identical increase occurred during the 1820s in Ohio, and between 1820 and 1830 there was almost a fourfold increase in Wisconsin, a threefold increase in Michigan, and a doubling of the population in Missouri, Indiana, Illinois, Alabama, Mississippi, and Arkansas.

One of the remarkable changes was the rapid transformation of Ohio from a land of forests, dotted with Indian villages, to a region of mushrooming settlements. In 1800, three years before the territory became the sixteenth state, the population was approximately 72,000. [^2] By 1826 it had grown to 800,000, an increase that observers noted was "perhaps without a parallel in the history of this or any other country." [^3]

During the 1830s, the period of Mormon migration to Ohio, the state's population increased 581,564. Ohio had advanced from the thirteenth most populous state in 1810 to fifth in 1820, fourth in 1830. In 1840, only New York and Pennsylvania had more inhabitants than Ohio, and there were now as many people in Ohio as in the other states of the old Northwest (Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin) combined. [^4]

Most of the pioneers who settled in Ohio emigrated from the eastern United States. Northeastern Ohio, the area where most Latter-day Saints settled, was colonized primarily by New Englanders, while large numbers from Virginia and Kentucky immigrated into southern Ohio, especially the area between the Scioto and Little Miami rivers. Pennsylvanians of Scotch-Irish and German ancestry were also attracted to this region, and during the 1830s many immigrants arrived from Ireland and Germany. The Irish tended to settle in the cities, while the Germans settled not only in Cincinnati, Cleveland, Columbus, and Toledo, but also in the rural sections of the vanishing frontier. [^5]

The Ohio wilderness was rapidly penetrated by the perennial march of pioneers. Throughout the first half of the nineteenth century the state remained predominantly agricultural. Extensive woodlands stretched across most of the state, these forests only slowly succumbing to the rising villages, towns, and cities.

The northeastern portion of Ohio had been known as Connecticut's Western Reserve. This area of four million acres extended north from the forty-first parallel (which included Akron) to the graceful curve of the Lake Erie shore, and stretched west 125 miles from the Pennsylvania border to about halfway across the state. Early in the colonial period the English king had given this land to Connecticut in a grant that extended from sea to sea. During and following the American Revolution, eastern states claiming western lands gradually relinquished their titles to the federal government; and by way of compromise, Connecticut retained the right to sell the northeastern section of this territory.

One group of land speculators who secured and then resold land in the Western Reserve formed the Connecticut Land Company. In 1796 directors of this joint stock company commissioned Moses Cleaveland, one of the original investors, to head an expedition and survey the land into five-mile townships. Two years later, Judge Turhand Kirtland, one of the land agents of the company, surveyed Poland and Burton townships in Geauga County, preliminary to the rapid sale of "New Connecticut." By 1800, settlements appeared along the Lake Erie shore near Cleveland—Mentor, Willoughby (known as Chagrin before 1834), and Painesville. Most of the early farms located near the lake were nestled a few miles inland in forests that gave protection from the biting winds blowing across Lake Erie. [^6] New England culture spread into the region, Congregational meetinghouses were erected throughout northeastern Ohio, and schools patterned after New England educational institutions appeared in Hudson and Oberlin.

The Era of the Common Man

A new interest in politics and an extension of political democracy in the early nineteenth century coincided with the shifts in the population of the United States. Political rights of the common man were expanded as property qualifications were abandoned and opportunities to serve in government increased. Pure democracy, however, was still not a reality. Women and blacks were denied the franchise, and men watching the polls could sometimes determine how people voted.

Two parties, the Democrats and the Whigs, dominated the American political scene during the 1830s. After his triumph in 1828, Democrat Andrew Jackson served as president for two terms. He was followed by another Democrat, Martin Van Buren. Meanwhile, the Whigs (who by 1834 had changed their name from National Republicans as a symbol against executive tyranny) tried to create an anti-Jacksonian party by uniting disgruntled Democrats, dissatisfied southerners, and anti-Masons. Political confrontations led to bitter mud-slinging campaigns and even violence.

During the 1830s, Jacksonian forces succeeded in gaining political control of Ohio. Robert Lucas became the first Jacksonian Democratic governor of Ohio in 1832, and in that year Democrats gained control of both houses of the state legislature. Although most Latter-day Saints were Democrats and supported Jackson, they lived in a county that supported Henry Clay, the National Republican candidate. All counties surrounding Geauga also favored Clay. [^7]

Man's Quest for Religious Truth

During the early nineteenth century, many Americans were searching for religious truth. The Second Great Awakening, a series of revivals that erupted in the late 1790s, reached its climax during the 1830s and 1840s. Methodist circuit riders, Baptist farm preachers, and traveling Presbyterian ministers were the most active and successful revivalists. Camp meetings, protracted meetings, and other unusual services were frequently held. During many of these gatherings, participants who were carried away by the intensity of their emotions exhibited their fervor through physical demonstrations, such as falling, fainting, barking, dancing, running, shouting, crying, singing, and laughing.

While the revivalist spirit was sweeping across the nation, church membership increased at a phenomenal pace. In 1800, organized religion was at a low ebb, with the ratio of ministers and church buildings to the American population standing lower than at any time since the initial English colonization of North America. But the powerful spiritual awakenings that erupted at the turn of the century prompted many persons to ask which church they should join. In 1800, only about 7 percent of the adult population in the country actively supported organized religion. The percentage of church membership increased to 13 percent by 1830, 14 percent in 1840, 17 percent in 1850, and 23 percent in 1860. As a consequence of this tremendous growth in church membership, organized religion was probably stronger, numerically speaking, in 1860 than it had been since the early days of the English colonization of America. [^8]

Churches with missionary programs grew rapidly during the Jacksonian era, while faiths that failed to reach out to the great numbers of families living on isolated farms did not keep pace with the evangelistic denominations. When the new nation was born in the 1770s, the Congregational Church ranked first in membership; the Church of England, reorganized shortly thereafter as the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States, also stood high in membership. The religious complexion in 1830 was very different, however. The Methodist and Baptist churches had become the dominant religions. According to a report in the Cleveland Herald, there were about twelve thousand meetinghouses in the United States in 1830, with more than one-third belonging to the combined Methodist and Baptist societies. Presbyterian congregations had 1,472 meetinghouses, followed by the Congregationalists with 1,381; Episcopalians, 922; Roman Catholics, 784; Dutch Reformed, 602; Friends, 462; Universalists, 293; Lutherans, 240; and Unitarians, 127. There were also 96 Jewish synagogues. [^9]

An Age of Reform

With unprecedented numbers of Americans affiliated with various religious communities in the 1830s, a powerful spirit of reform gripped the young nation. Alexis de Tocqueville observed in the early thirties that "in no country in the world has the principle of association been more successfully used, or applied to a greater multitude of objects, than in America." [^10] Ralph Waldo Emerson, the celebrated American author, remarked in 1841, "In the history of the world, the Doctrine of the Reform" had never had such "scope as at the present hour." [^11]

Through the 1830s, reformers attacked the sins, evils, and burdens afflicting mankind. Abolitionists made their views heard; temperance leaders waged war against drunkenness, the saloons, the breweries, and the drinking of all intoxicating beverages; and some extended their concern to include a major reform of the popular drinking, eating, and living habits of Americans. Other reformers led crusades to improve conditions in prisons, to help the mentally incompetent, to correct abuses of the Sabbath day, to provide Americans with Bibles and religious tracts, and to establish Sunday schools in every community.

During this period, a host of voluntary associations were formed, many of which were interdenominational, drawing their support from members of various churches rather than from any single denomination. Meetings were often held in churches or public buildings and were sometimes led by ministers who either resigned from parish responsibilities to assume leadership of the organization or devoted part of the week to concentrating on reforming society.

One of the most industrious and influential educators of the age was Josiah Holbrook (1788-1854), a New England farmer. Having developed a keen interest in natural science while attending Yale, he established a mutual improvement association in Millbury, Massachusetts, in 1826. This adult-education program, which consisted in part of self-improvement courses, proved so successful that he went on to establish similar lyceums over the entire state and then to many other sections of the new nation. Holbrook eventually devoted full time toward organizing the groups. One striking evidence of his influence was the creation of the National American Lyceum in New York City in 1831, a body that represented a thousand town lyceums. By the mid-1830s more than three thousand lyceums had been formed in at least fifteen states, including Ohio. [^12]

The most successful reform movement of the 1830s was the temperance crusade. Many newspapers, including some in the Western Reserve, labeled intemperance a national, social, and individual evil that corrupted the moral fiber of the country, impaired the intellect of the people, sapped the foundations of the moral and religious institutions, promoted disease and crime, and reduced the rich to poverty and the poor to wretchedness. Frequently citing observations of medical doctors, the press asserted that alcohol had an injurious effect on the brain, liver, and stomach and aggravated or produced almost every "morbid affliction to which the human body" was liable. [^13]

To coordinate the activities of the emerging temperance societies, a national organization, the American Temperance Union, was constituted in 1826. By 1830 more than one thousand societies with over 100,000 members had endorsed the basic resolutions of this body. Nearly all of these organizations were formed on the principle of total abstinence from alcoholic beverages except for medicinal purposes. [^14] Thirty temperance societies in Ohio were affiliated with the national union in 1830, and in January of that year, the Ohio State Temperance Society was formed in Columbus. [^15] Over the next two years temperance groups were formed in nine townships in Geauga County, and these were linked together in a county society. At the annual meeting of the Geauga County Temperance Society in the summer of 1832, membership of the town associations was estimated at more than seven hundred, with the largest society, located at Kirtland, numbering 160 members. The temperance movement was supported in Kirtland by all of the Protestant churches, including Methodists, Congregationalists, Presbyterians (who worshipped with the Congregationalists), and Baptists. [^16]

American newspapers and periodicals not only played a significant role in advancing the temperance crusade but also laid the foundation for a diet-reform movement that changed the eating, drinking, and chewing habits of many Americans. In 1830 the Journal of Health published a series of articles describing the injurious consequences of smoking and chewing tobacco and drinking tea and coffee. [^17] Similar accounts, based primarily on talks delivered by reformers, were republished during the 1830s in Alexander Campbell's Millennial Harbinger, in the Catholic Telegraph (published in Cincinnati), and in a number of Ohio newspapers. [^18]

One of the most controversial reform movements was the crusade for abolition of slavery. During or shortly following the American Revolution, all of the northern states acted to eradicate slavery either by immediate or by gradual emancipation. When southerners failed to take similar action, slavery became a deep wedge dividing the nation. A new antislavery movement emerged in the North about 1830, and during the thirties, the denunciation of slavery became more pronounced. [^19]

The Transportation Revolution

As Ohio passed through the final stages of a pioneer period, it participated in a transportation revolution and became one of the important crossroads of the nation. New advances in the speed of travel and reduced costs of transporting goods helped facilitate the western expansion. This movement would prove beneficial to Latter-day Saints who were gathering to Ohio and Missouri and to Mormon missionaries traveling to new fields of labor.

An energetic program of road construction, especially during the years following the War of 1812, resulted in new roads across New England, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and other sections of the country, thereby facilitating travel, especially by wagons, carriages, and stage coaches. Between 1811 and 1818 the Cumberland Road was built between Cumberland, Maryland, and Wheeling, West Virginia (then Virginia). The route then proceeded to Zanesville, Ohio, and on to Columbus in 1833; by 1840 it reached Indiana. By the standards of the day, this national highway was well built. A stone foundation was covered with gravel, and portions of the road crossing Ohio were covered with macadam seven to ten inches thick and thirty feet in width. Sturdy stone bridges with protective guard rails were erected across the rivers. To pay for the upkeep of this national pike, tolls were assessed at toll gates for nearly every object that moved on the pike, including horses, riders, coaches, cows, and hogs. Exemptions were made for preachers, soldiers, mailcoaches, and people traveling to church or school. [^20]

Coinciding with the flurry of road building in America was the golden age of river steamboats. Although Robert R. Livingston and Robert Fulton had conducted a successful experiment on the Hudson River with their steamer Clermont in 1807, steam navigation was not inaugurated on most major American rivers and the Great Lakes until after the War of 1812. By 1830, river steamboats were carrying passengers and goods along the Ohio, the Mississippi, the Missouri, and many other major waterways. [^21]

Because of the comfort and speed of steamboats, most travelers preferred them over other means of transportation. Brigham Young recalled one of his experiences while traveling by land in the spring of 1837. "We traveled by stagecoach through Ohio and Pennsylvania to Buffalo, New York, riding day and night over very rough roads." As a consequence of the swaying and jerking, he continued, "we became very weary and tarried a short time to rest ourselves." [^22] Those traveling by land stopped often to recuperate in camps or wayside inns. Although some travelers on water routes suffered from seasickness, most people who journeyed by river steamer enjoyed relaxing in their berths or comfortable staterooms. If the riverboat was large, passengers could eat in spacious dining halls and even preach on open decks.

The advantages of water transportation during the 1830s are further evident when one considers the average speed or distance covered by different means of travel. A person walking through snow or mud a foot deep might average only a few miles a day; under more favorable conditions, they might average two to three miles an hour, depending on their determination. Teams pulling loaded wagons averaged about two miles an hour, stagecoaches about six to eight miles an hour on good roads, and western steamers almost ten miles an hour. Some of the fastest boats cut through the water at better than twenty miles an hour—and these speeds on the water continued not only during the day but also throughout the night while passengers slept. Consequently, during a twenty-four-hour period a loaded wagon might travel twenty to thirty miles, a stagecoach eighty to one hundred miles, and a steamboat almost five hundred miles. [^23]

With the transportation revolution came a boom in canal building unparalleled in American history. There were only about 100 miles of canals in the nation in 1816. By 1830 there were 1,277 miles of canals, and by 1840 more than 3,326 miles had been dug—greater than the distance between New York City and Seattle. [^24]

In February 1825, Ohio launched a canal building program that eventually united the waters of Lake Erie and the Ohio River, thereby connecting the Hudson River (by means of the Erie and Ohio canals) with the Mississippi and creating America's greatest system of internal waterways.

The wooden freight vessels that plied the Ohio Canal during the 1830s were usually about seventy-five feet long and fourteen feet wide. Towed by horses or mules in teams of two or more, these ungainly barges traveled three miles per hour. Since most cargo was packed in small containers, such as baskets, sacks, barrels, or boxes, travelers were often delayed as the containers were slowly unloaded. Nevertheless, most tourists preferred canal travel to its alternative, a swaying stagecoach on rutted or muddy roads. [^25]

Since Kirtland was about twenty miles east of the Ohio Canal, it was generally more convenient for residents there to travel or to transport their crops and other goods northeast from Kirtland to Fairport Harbor, about ten miles distant; from Fairport, the goods could then be shipped along Lake Erie east to the Erie Canal or west to the Ohio Canal. Most of the Latter-day Saints who immigrated to Kirtland from New York in 1831 traveled west along the Erie Canal, and throughout the 1830s other Saints reported arriving at Fairport Harbor en route to the Church's headquarters in Ohio.

Before the canal boom reached its zenith, the railroad became a serious challenge to water transportation. Although the first American-built locomotive began regular service in the United States in 1830, the growth of railroads was slow in that decade. Most of the 3,328 miles of track that had been laid by 1840 were in unconnected segments east of the Appalachians. As train speeds increased and costs of transporting freight and passengers decreased, people came to recognize the advantages of the railroads over canals. The cost of constructing and maintaining railroads was less than that of canals, and trains could be operated throughout the year without being affected by most weather conditions.

One of the early leaders of the restored Church, Oliver Cowdery, reported his experience of riding on the initial run of a passenger car traveling between Utica and Schenectady, New York, in 1836. Delayed by ceremonies and confusion, he reported that the train traveled only eighty miles in six hours. Shortly after it arrived in Schenectady, he heard someone yell, "Albany baggage—the car starts in five minutes." He then witnessed a "scene of confusion, bustle and crowding." While he detected no crushed skulls or broken arms or legs, he observed a "good deal of complaining and many wry faces." Finally the trunks and people were ready for the departure, and the train proceeded slowly toward Albany. About one mile from the New York State capital, the engine was detached and pulled within one block of the statehouse by horses. After this experience, Oliver Cowdery recognized that there was a need for significant improvement in this new system of transportation. [^26]

Ohio in the 1830s

---
Notas:
[^1] U.S. Bureau of Census, Fourth Census: 1820, Microcopy no. 33, Roll no. 91, Ohio, pg. 105A; U.S. Bureau of Census, Fifth Census: 1830, Microcopy no. 19, Roll no. 131, pp. 267-73.
[^2] Since there is no complete Church membership record for the 1830s, the author with the assistance of various researchers, including Thomas Gregory and Rick Brown, prepared a list of members from various sources, including History of the Church; Kirtland Council Minute Book, Church Archives; Messenger and Advocate; a record of the First Quorum of Elders Belonging to the Church of Christ in Kirtland, Geauga County, Ohio, 1836-1870, Archives, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, Independence, Missouri; Far West, Kirtland, and Nauvoo Teachers Quorum Minutes, 1834-1845, Church Archives; Far West Record, Certificate Record Book, 1836-1838, Church Archives; and a Church membership file (located in the Church Genealogical Society and based on information taken from patriarchal blessing books, records kept by Seventies, and other records). Throughout this work this list has been employed to determine Church members and membership during the 1830s. A comparison of the names appearing in the Kirtland census of 1830 with known members of the Church indicates that eight men listed in that census joined the Church. These eight heads of families were John M. Burk, Reynolds Cahoon, Algernon S. Gilbert, Selah J. Griffin, Isaac Morley, Newel K. Whitney, Lyman Wight, and Frederick G. Williams. Calvin Beebe of Parkland owned land in Kirtland in 1830, and Mary Rollins was living with her uncle, A. S. Gilbert. Since several individuals living there had the same name, it is difficult to determine whether or not the name on one record refers to the same person as the same name on another record. Genealogical dates (births, deaths, marriages, etc.) and other information relating to members of the Kirtland Branch and participants in the march of Zion's Camp have been published in Milton V. Backman, Jr., Susan Easton, and Keith Perkins, comps., A Profile of Latter-day Saints of Kirtland, Ohio, and Members of Zion's Camp: 1830-1839.
[^3] History of Geauga and Lake Counties, Ohio, p. 246.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Lucy Diantha Allen, "Recollections of Her Ancestry Taken in 1901," pp. 2-3; Vera Morley Ipson, "History and Travels of the Life of Isaac Morley, Sr." (taken from histories written by his daughters Cordelia and Lucy), p. 1.
[^6] Allen, "Recollections," pp. 2-3; Ipson, "Life of Isaac Morley," pp. 1-2.
[^7] Kirtland Township Record Book 1:1.
[^8] Ibid.; Anne B. Prusha, "A History of Kirtland, Ohio," p. 47.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 58-62; Elizabeth G. Hitchcock, "Grandison Newell, A Born Trader," pp. 1-3.
[^10] History of Geauga and Lake Counties, p. 247.
[^11] Ibid., p. 246.
[^12] "Records of the Presbyterian Church of Kirtland," copied from the original by Lucy M. Morley; "Extracts from 'A Brief History of the Congregational Church of Kirtland, Ohio,'" p. 2; Mary B. Sim, "Old South Congregational Church," Historical Society Quarterly, Lake County, Ohio 2 (Summer 1960): 2.
[^13] Christopher G. Crary, Kirtland: Personal and Pioneer Reminiscences, p. 20; John Marshall Barker, History of Ohio Methodism, p. 109.
[^14] Grand River Baptist Association Records, 1817-1842, p. 81.
[^15] Extracts from the journal of Lydia Partridge, p. 5; "Philo Dibble's Narrative," in Early Scenes in Church History, p. 77. See also John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 2; John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, p. 17.
[^16] Larry C. Porter, "A Study of the Origins of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the States of New York and Pennsylvania, 1816-1831," pp. 269-73, 285; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 191-92. While the more popular edition published by Bookcraft has been cited, the references included in this work have been compared with the original publication, and any major changes in the editions are mentioned in the footnotes. The original publication of Lucy's biography was titled Biographical Sketches of Joseph Smith the Prophet, and His Progenitors for Many Generations (Liverpool, England: published for Orson Pratt by S. W. Richards, 1853).
[^17] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 192; Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:219.
[^18] D&C 35:4-9
[^19] D&C 36:1-6.
[^20] Painesville Telegraph, January 18, 1831, p. 3.
[^21] John Whitmer, History, p. 10.
[^22] Autobiography of John Murdock, pp. 8-9.
[^23] Journal History of the Church, December 31, 1830.
[^24] D&C 37; 38:31-32.
[^25] 3 Nephi 20:22; 21:23; 1 Nephi 13:37.
[^26] D&C 28:9.
