Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 3

Removal to OhioHCThe Gathering to Ohio

Removal to OhioHCWhile the young nation and the maturing state of Ohio changed rapidly, the lives of one group of Americans were transformed by the light of a new religion. Responding to the message of the restoration as unfolded by a latter-day prophet, Joseph Smith, these seekers after truth embraced a new guide to direct their lives. This influence was revelation; and at the beginning of the 1830s, this religious impact was most evident in Ohio and New York. Between the end of October 1830 and early June 1831, a period of less than eight months, this new religious movement was introduced into the Western Reserve; hundreds were converted to the faith; Kirtland, Ohio, became the headquarters of a church that was less than one year old; and, at the call of the prophet, several hundred settlers from New York gathered to Geauga County (which included the area now called Lake County) to help establish a new religious center in the United States.

The Transformation of a Community

Removal to OhioHCThe community where members of the newly restored Church settled, Kirtland, Ohio, had changed dramatically during the two decades preceding the introduction of the Church there. In 1820, nine years after the first permanent settlers constructed their log cabins in Kirtland, the population was enumerated at 481; during the next decade this number doubled to 1,018, consisting of 162 families, or an average of 6.3 individuals per family. [^1] Statistics, however, do not reflect the struggles and the satisfactions experienced by the pioneers as they built that community. Since much of the United States in the early nineteenth century was a vast untamed forest, many Americans gained practical experience and genuine dignity through hours of hard work, producing much of what they consumed. At least nine of the families who would join the Church in 1830 or early 1831 were among the pioneers who helped develop a civilization out of the Kirtland wilderness. [^2] The lessons that young and old alike learned while building homes, manufacturing household goods, planting and harvesting crops, and establishing local political institutions proved invaluable after these pioneers joined the Church and created new communities in Missouri, Illinois, and the Great Basin of western America.

A vivid description of the Kirtland wilderness was written by one of the first settlers of that region, Christopher Gore Crary, who arrived in Kirtland from Massachusetts in May 1811. "The forest-trees," he recalled, "were of endless variety and of the tallest kinds." Beneath the trees was a "thick growth of underbrush" interspersed with "flowers of rare beauty. . . . Birds of varied plumage filled the air with their music, and the air itself was fragrant and invigorating." For centuries, he added, this region had been the home of the Indians, "and surely their most vivid imagination could have portrayed nothing more desirable or delightful" than this "celestial" abode. [^3]

The Crary family guided their oxen along the narrow, winding forest paths to the homesite they had selected. While they rested during their first night in their crude home, a log cabin which they had built earlier (while staying in Mentor), they kept a bright fire burning to protect themselves from the bears and wolves. Their "beds consisted of hemlock boughs, which were," according to Crary, "perhaps better appreciated than beds of down might have been under other circumstances." [^4]

One year after the Crary family began farming in Kirtland, Isaac Morley settled there. Shortly after erecting a small cabin in Kirtland, he returned to his former home in Montague, Franklin County, Massachusetts, and married his childhood sweetheart, Lucy Gunn. Then the newlyweds traveled six hundred miles by team and wagon back to Kirtland. Shortly after they began developing the virgin land, Isaac left his wife to serve in the War of 1812. According to family histories, Lucy remained alone in the forest, seldom seeing another human, and lived in constant fear of attack by wild beasts or roaming Indians. No other settlers lived near the Morley cabin, and there were no stores, post offices, church buildings, or mills nearby. [^5]

After serving for forty-one days in this second war for independence, Isaac Morley returned home, ill with chills and fever. He soon recovered, and the young couple resumed their labors. As the years passed, they cultivated a large farm and built a more commodious frame home. They planted an orchard and a grove of maple trees, later called Morley's Grove, from which they tapped maple syrup. They harvested crops of wheat and rye, made their own molasses and vinegar, and extracted honey from their beehives. Isaac also made and sold barrels, produced a peppermint oil, and made lye from ashes, while Lucy spun and wove linen cloth from flax raised on their farm and made clothes for her family from cotton yarn purchased from others and from woolen cloth made from their own sheep's wool (the wool was processed in a local mill). During their first seventeen years of married life in Kirtland, Lucy Morley gave birth to nine children. Of the seven who grew to maturity, the first six were girls and the last was a boy named after his father. [^6]

Twelve years before the arrival of the first Latter-day Saint missionaries, a local government was constituted in Kirtland. In 1818, the electors of Kirtland selected their first township officials, including three trustees (one of whom was Isaac Morley), several overseers of the poor, appraisers of property, supervisors of highways, a constable, and a treasurer. The next year a justice of the peace was also elected. [^7]

One of the first leaders to serve as overseer of the poor was Peter French, whose responsibility was to prevent families from remaining in the community who might become wards of the town. Such individuals were reported to the constable, who sometimes forced them to leave. Not all persons who were unable to meet their financial obligations were expelled from Kirtland and other early American communities. A few received aid from the local government; the overseers of the poor had the responsibility to provide food and clothing and sometimes to pay the medical bills of those who needed temporary economic assistance. [^8]

Although Kirtland was primarily an agricultural community, stores, mills, and factories were erected in the town between 1819 and 1830. The center of the industrial and merchandising life of the township was in the eastern section, in an area known as Kirtland Flats, adjacent to the East Branch of Chagrin River. This meandering stream with its small tributaries provided the power necessary to operate the mills and factories. A sawmill was constructed near the river in 1819, and one year later a gristmill was built downstream. Shortly thereafter, a carding machine was located near the mills where settlers could take their wool for dressing. During the 1820s, Grandison Newell built a furnace in the township and added a lathe to his shop so that he could manufacture chairs, stands, beds, candle boxes, and other such wooden products. Also during these early years an ashery was constructed for turning ashes into black salts used in making soap. [^9]

The first store in Kirtland was built below the hill where the Latter-day Saints would later erect a temple. Newel K. Whitney, who had initially utilized his log cabin home as a store, erected a store on the flats in 1823. There he continued to sell and trade until he and his family moved from Kirtland in the late 1830s. The Whitney store was also used as a post office, and for many years Newel K. Whitney was the commissioned postmaster of Kirtland, or Kirtland Mills, as it then was called.

Shortly before the arrival of the Latter-day Saints, Peter French built the first brick building in Kirtland, a hotel across the street from the Whitney store. [^10]

Though the early settlers of Kirtland worked long hours to produce their goods, they were not too busy to construct schools and hire teachers to instruct their youth. As early as 1814, a small log cabin school was erected; five years later the first frame school was built on the flats. By 1830, Kirtland was divided into a number of school districts so that children living in different parts of the town could participate in an elementary educational program. [^11]

Newel K. Whitney's store in Hiram, Ohio

Early Churches of Kirtland

When the first Latter-day Saint missionaries arrived in the Western Reserve, four Protestant groups were worshipping in Kirtland. Two of them (the Congregationalists and Methodists) were holding services in meetinghouses, and the other two (the Baptists and Reformed Baptists) were meeting in the homes of settlers.

Since many of the original inhabitants of Kirtland were immigrants from New England, it is not surprising that the first body of Christians to unite in worship there were Congregationalists. In September 1819, ten settlers who endorsed the basic teachings of the reformer John Calvin gathered and endorsed an article of faith prepared by the Presbytery of Grand River for the regulation of churches under their care. This creed, patterned after the Westminster Confession of Faith, included the five points of Calvinism: total depravity of man, unconditional election or predestination, limited atonement, irresistibility of grace (man cannot reject the call), and perseverance of the saints (saved man cannot fall). Since the Presbyterians and Congregationalists agreed by the Plan of Union of 1801 to cooperate rather than compete in new settlements of America, members of both faiths worshipped together in this congregation and voted to unite under the supervision of the Presbytery of Grand River.

After meeting for three years in homes, members of the church constructed a log meetinghouse in 1822 on the site of the present old South Congregational Church, in the southern part of the town. A few years later, after the original church was destroyed by fire, the Calvinists constructed a larger frame building across the road, and there they worshipped throughout the 1830s. Although they were originally served by different ministers, the Reverend Truman Coe began a pastorale in 1833 that continued until his retirement in 1848. [^12]

Shortly after the Congregationalists of Kirtland united, Methodists commenced services in the community. About 1820 they erected a small church on the corner of the cemetery lot across the street from the future Kirtland Temple site. This Methodist congregation was originally included in the Grand Circuit, consisting of forty-four preaching stations in Ashtabula, Geauga, and Trumbull counties. Every four weeks, a Methodist circuit-rider preacher traveled about two hundred miles in this vast circuit to visit classes and congregations. [^13]

A Baptist society was also meeting in Kirtland in 1830. This congregation had been admitted into the 1828 alliance of closed-communion Calvinist Baptist churches called the Grand River Association; and since there was no settled minister to serve the needs of these twenty-two Protestants, they were, for almost five years, irregularly visited by elders assigned by that alliance. [^14]

The Quest for Additional Knowledge

Shortly after the four missionaries who had introduced the restored gospel in Ohio had left Geauga and Cuyahoga counties for western Missouri, two of the men who had been influenced by them traveled east to continue their investigation of the restored gospel. Though Sidney Rigdon had been baptized and ordained an elder, his traveling companion, Edward Partridge, had not yet joined the Church. Lydia Partridge recalled that when her husband commenced the journey, he was not fully convinced of the truth of the gospel taught by the elders. Philo Dibble noted that Edward Partridge not only undertook this investigation for himself, but, in a sense, traveled east as a representative for the other inquirers. Since he was known as a man of integrity, Dibble suggested, there were those who felt they could rely on his observations and who therefore awaited his investigation of Joseph Smith's integrity. [^15]

When they arrived in Manchester, New York, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge learned that Joseph Smith was visiting his parents, who had moved to a small community located near Waterloo. They therefore continued their journey east. According to Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet's mother, when the two men entered her home (which was probably located a few miles east of Waterloo at a place named Kingdon [^16]), a meeting was being conducted by her son Joseph. During this meeting, Edward Partridge heard Joseph himself testify concerning the restoration of the everlasting gospel. As the latter-day prophet spoke, Edward was convinced that he should join the Church immediately, but because of his apparent weariness due to the long journey, Joseph recommended that baptism be delayed until the next day. On December 11, 1830, Edward Partridge was baptized by Joseph Smith, Jr., in the Seneca River. Four days later, he was ordained to the office of elder by his former minister, Sidney Rigdon. [^17]

Shortly after Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge met Joseph Smith, the Prophet recorded a revelation addressed to Sidney and another counseling Edward. Sidney learned that he had been sent forth like John the Baptist to prepare the way for the coming of Christ. Before embracing the restored gospel, he had been preaching baptism for the remission of sins; now he was told he had been endowed with the power of God, which included the authority to heal, cast out devils, and bestow upon others the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^18] Edward Partridge learned that he too had been specially blessed by God. The revelation stated that his sins had been forgiven him, and that he should now preach the everlasting gospel to others, crying repentance to his generation. [^19]

Joseph Smith

After learning of the remarkable conversions in northeastern Ohio, Joseph Smith sent John Whitmer, one of the eight witnesses of the Book of Mormon, to Kirtland to preside over the branch that had been recently organized there. Carrying handwritten copies of many revelations received by the Prophet that were to guide and strengthen the Ohio converts, Elder Whitmer arrived in the Western Reserve in mid-January, 1831. [^20] There he assumed leadership of an estimated three hundred Latter-day Saints, more than twice the number reported only two months earlier. [^21]

After the four missionaries had left Ohio for Missouri in November 1830, proselyting activities had been continued by the Ohio converts. One of the most successful missionaries was the former restorationist preacher, John Murdock. Between November 1830 and March 1831, this young farmer baptized more than fifty-five settlers living primarily in Cuyahoga County (in the area of Orange and Warrensville, now included in the eastern section of Cleveland). [^22]

As the membership of the Church increased, the converts were organized into branches, and leaders were appointed to direct their religious life. By early 1831, there were probably four branches of the Church in Ohio—two in Geauga County and two in Cuyahoga County. John Whitmer presided over the Kirtland branch, while Sidney Rigdon led the branch in Mentor. In Cuyahoga County, John Murdock presided over the Warrensville branch; records do not reveal the name of the leader of the Mayfield branch. [^23]

Removal to OhioHCThe Call to Gather

Removal to OhioHCDuring a period when the Church was growing more rapidly in Ohio than anywhere else, Joseph Smith received two revelations directing that he and other members of the Church should gather to that state. The first of these revelations was recorded in the latter part of December 1830; the second, amplifying the first, was received January 2, 1831, during a conference held in Fayette, New York. "And that ye might escape the power of the enemy," this second commandment explained, "and be gathered unto me a righteous people, without spot and blameless—wherefore, for this cause I gave unto you the commandment that ye should go to the Ohio; and there I will give unto you my law; and there you shall be endowed with power from on high." [^24]

Removal to OhioHCThere were many advantages in gathering to Ohio. With members scattered in several states, it was impossible for the Prophet to give instructions to all, and the new converts were constantly asking questions concerning Church procedures and doctrines. Individuals who migrated to the headquarters of the Church were in a position to receive regular instructions from the man they respected as a special servant of the Lord. Consequently, this gathering helped establish and maintain doctrinal and organizational uniformity.

Removal to OhioHCIn many respects, the state of Ohio was a favorable location for the establishment of an ecclesiastical headquarters. As the year 1831 began, more members were in Ohio than in any other state, and Church membership was growing more rapidly in the Western Reserve than in any other area. Moreover, Ohio was centrally located. Missionaries could leave Kirtland and be in Pennsylvania or New York within a few days, and they could travel along the Erie Canal to eastern New York and from there penetrate New England. From the Western Reserve, missionaries could also skirt Lake Erie and within a few days be in eastern Canada; or they could follow the roads or canals south to the Ohio River, which bordered Kentucky and was a gateway to the South and West.

Removal to OhioHCTo move from New York to Ohio was also a step toward Zion. From the Book of Mormon, Latter-day Saints learned that a New Jerusalem would be built on the American continent, and that those who sought to bring forth Zion would be blessed with the gift and power of the Holy Ghost. [^25] When Oliver Cowdery was called in September 1830 to serve as a missionary among the Indians, the general location of this New Jerusalem was revealed: it was to be situated "on the borders by the Lamanites." [^26] This designation was a term commonly used to identify the edge of the white settlements in the United States, a frontier then located west of the Mississippi River. One of the communities on that frontier in 1830 was Independence, Missouri. After they left Ohio, the four missionaries who had introduced the gospel in the Western Reserve established a temporary residence in Independence and gathered information concerning conditions in that section of the West.

Removal to OhioHCAnother reason for the migration to Ohio was to "escape the power of the enemy," as expressed in the revelation. The emigration from New York was carried out in the midst of growing opposition in the form of harassment, social ostracism, threats of attack on persons and property, arrests of Joseph Smith, and a constant flood of libelous charges aimed at disrupting the missionary activities of the Prophet in the area of Colesville, New York. [^27]

Removal to OhioHCAlthough most members of the Church who attended the January conference in Fayette, New York, accepted the instructions to move to Ohio as the word of God, a few grumbled and complained, asserting that the proposed migration was formulated by Joseph Smith for his own personal well-being. In the view of John Whitmer, such thinking was evidence that the hearts of some of the converts were not in tune with the Spirit of the Lord. With very few exceptions, however, nearly every member of the Church in New York heeded the commandment and commenced preparations for the first exodus west. [^28]

Removal to OhioHCBetween the end of January and the last part of April, most of the New York Saints sold their homes, barns, lands, cattle, and many other possessions; packed their most precious material goods; and migrated to Geauga County, Ohio. Probably about two hundred immigrants participated in this move. A few of the men preceded their families, including Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, Samuel Smith, and Newell Knight; most, however, traveled with their wives and children. Some walked; others traveled by sleigh or stagecoach. A few loaded their clothes and furniture in wagons and drove their teams to Kirtland. The majority of the Saints, however, traveled most of the way on canal barges and on the steamboats or sailing vessels that plied the shores of Lake Erie. [^29]

Removal to OhioHCThe migration to Ohio was led by Joseph Smith, accompanied by his wife, Emma; Edward Partridge; and, during part of the journey, by Sidney Rigdon and possibly Joseph Knight. Leaving the Finger Lakes country, the twenty-five-year-old Prophet traveled overland by sleigh, arriving in Kirtland on or about February 1, 1831. According to an account preserved by the Newel K. Whitney family, Joseph sprang from the sleigh and entered the Gilbert Whitney store. Extending his hand to the junior partner as though he were a familiar acquaintance, Joseph said, "Newel K. Whitney! Thou art the man!"

Removal to OhioHCNewel was astonished, for he could not recall having seen this person before. "Stranger," he replied, "you have the advantage of me. I could not call you by name, as you have me."

Removal to OhioHC"I am Joseph the Prophet," the stranger declared. "You've prayed me here. Now what do you want of me?" [^30]

Removal to OhioHCSome time after Joseph Smith had learned about the remarkable conversions in the Western Reserve, he had seen in vision Newel K. Whitney praying for him to come to Kirtland. Consequently, the family records state that Joseph Smith recognized Newel when the two men met in the store; and, as Elizabeth Whitney recalled, the Prophet's arrival in Ohio was indeed an answer to her and her husband's prayers. [^31]

This encounter with Joseph Smith was not the first occasion when the Whitneys had experienced the efficacy of prayer. Before Newel K. Whitney and his wife had joined the Church of Christ, they had prayed that they might receive knowledge concerning the authority necessary to obtain the gift of the Holy Ghost. In response to this petition, Elizabeth testified, she and her husband were enwrapped in what seemed to be a cloud and felt the Spirit of the Lord. Then they heard a voice that said, "Prepare to receive the word of the Lord, for it is coming." Shortly thereafter, this couple met Latter-day Saint missionaries, and within a few weeks they joined the Church. [^32]

Joseph Smith and his wife were received with kindness by the Whitneys and were invited to live temporarily with them. Joseph wrote that he and Emma lived with the Whitney family for several weeks and "received every kindness and attention which could be expected, and especially from Sister Whitney." [^33]

Emma Smith Edward Partridge

Although Joseph Smith and a few other Saints settled in Kirtland in February, most of the members from New York were not prepared to migrate until the canal system was opened in the spring. The majority of these members immigrated to Ohio in one of two main bodies. [^34] In April 1831, approximately sixty members of the Colesville branch, representing about fifteen families, traveled by wagon to Ithaca, New York, on the southern shore of the Cayuga Lake. One observer said that as some of the group passed by her father's farm with their ox-driven covered wagons, she was reminded of a western immigrant train. [^35] Another contemporary, a teamster who had been hired by these immigrants, recalled that in the train he accompanied to Ithaca were three baggage and eleven passenger wagons. [^36] After congregating near the lake, the Colesville Saints traveled via the Cayuga and Seneca canals to the Erie Canal, then along this major canal to Buffalo. Because bitter winds off Lake Erie had prevented the winter ice in Buffalo's harbor from thawing, most of the Colesville Saints were delayed for several weeks. Though a few proceeded overland to Dunkirk and then took a steamer to Fairport, Ohio, most waited until a schooner was able to leave the harbor. These Saints then proceeded southwest to Fairport, arriving May 14. When they reached Kirtland, they were instructed to settle in Thompson, about sixteen miles northeast of Kirtland, on land owned by Leman Copley, a recent convert. [^37]

While the Colesville Saints were migrating from eastern New York to the Western Reserve, other members residing in the area of Fayette gathered at Kingdon, near the Seneca River, at the home where Lucy Mack Smith was living. This group then boarded two canal boats, with Lucy Smith directing the activities of about fifty individuals (twenty adults and thirty children, according to her account) on the first boat, and Thomas B. Marsh leading about thirty others on the second barge. After traversing the Cayuga and Seneca canals, these Saints continued along the Erie Canal toward Lake Erie. When they arrived in Buffalo, they met the Colesville Saints, who had been there about a week. [^38] Sister Smith's group boarded a different ship from that chartered by the Colesville members. While waiting for the ice to thaw, she asked the Saints to exercise their faith, that they might continue their journey. After the group petitioned God to break the twenty-foot clogs of ice that were jamming the harbor, she testified, "a noise was heard, like bursting thunder. The captain cried, 'Every man to his post.' The ice parted, leaving barely a passage for the boat, and so narrow that as the boat passed through the buckets of the waterwheel were born off with a crash. . . . We had barely passed through the avenue when the ice closed again, and the Colesville brethren were left in Buffalo, unable to follow us." [^39]

One contemporary who described the movement of Saints into Geauga County in 1831 wrote that it seemed that the "whole world" was centering in Kirtland. "They came," he continued, "men, women, and children, in every conceivable manner, some with horses, oxen, and vehicles rough and rude, while others had walked all or part of the distance. The future 'City of the Saints' appeared like one besieged. Every available house, shop, hut, or barn was filled to its utmost capacity. Even boxes were roughly extemporized and used for shelter until something more permanent could be secured." [^40]

Both companies of New York Saints arrived in the Western Reserve during the middle of May, completing the first phase of the westward movement of Latter-day Saints. Most Americans who pushed westward in the nineteenth century were searching for free or inexpensive land, seeking adventure, or escaping creditors, or were involved in a variety of economic pursuits. But this particular migration was an unusual one in that it took place in response to what the participants believed to be a commandment from God. Commenting on this relocation of people at the call of a prophet, the Painesville Telegraph reported on May 17, 1831, that during the preceding week, some two hundred men, women, and children from New York had settled in Geauga County. This paper noted that these immigrants had submitted to the "spiritual and temporal" instructions of Joseph Smith, and regarded Geauga County as their "promised land." [^41] Unless others arrived at the same time as the two companies, this estimate of two hundred was probably high, but it is a fairly accurate count of the total number of Latter-day Saints who emigrated from New York to Ohio between the middle of January and early June of 1831.

Although most of the New York Saints had reached Ohio by mid-May, Martin Harris, one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon plates, did not leave Palmyra until the end of May. Shortly after Joseph Smith had arrived in Kirtland, he wrote to Martin Harris personally, instructing him to move the Saints of Palmyra, to bring with him copies of the Book of Mormon, and to use his influence to encourage others to migrate to the new headquarters of the Church. [^42] Reporting on the departure of Martin Harris from Palmyra, the Wayne Sentinel specified that he had been among the early settlers of that town and had "ever borne the character of an honorable and upright man." He was further regarded as a "benevolent neighbor" who had a "respectable fortune." While expressing regret that Martin Harris had united with an unpopular religious community, the paper noted that he was leaving "a large circle of acquaintances and friends" to settle in a "promised land." [^43] He probably arrived in Kirtland in June, accompanied by several families.

Since there are no Church membership records dating back to the 1830s, historians of today can only estimate the number of people who, in 1830 and 1831, were influenced directly by the message of the restoration. In the spring of 1831, one year after the Church of Christ had been organized, more than six hundred individuals had embraced the gospel, and many of these converts were then living in the Western Reserve. [^44] While the actual membership in 1831 is unknown, the diaries, autobiographies, and letters of those who joined the Church during the first year of its history clearly indicate that major changes occurred in the lives of those who embraced the restored gospel. As people were caught in the gospel net, their beliefs, attitudes, goals, and aspirations changed. Many of their most important decisions were now governed by a new force: divine messages unfolded by a latter-day prophet. [^45]

The Gathering to Ohio

---
Notas:
[^1] HC 1:158.
[^2] E. D. Howe, Autobiography and Recollections of a Pioneer Printer, pp. 1, 4, 21, 46; History of Geauga and Lake Counties, Ohio, pp. 29, 223-24. After Howe retired, his younger brother, Asahel Howe, became publisher with M. G. Lewis acting as editor.
[^3] See Milton V. Backman, Jr., "Contemporary Accounts of the Latter-day Saints and Their Leaders Appearing in Early Ohio Newspapers."
[^4] Painesville Telegraph, January 5, 1830, p. 2.
[^5] Ibid., December 27, 1831, p. 3.
[^6] Painesville Telegraph, March 22, 1831, p. 2; March 29, 1831, p. 2; August 9, 1832, p. 1; Ohio Repository (Canton), August 30, 1833, p. 2; September 1, 1836, p. 2.
[^7] Painesville Telegraph, March 8, 1831, p. 3; March 22, 1831, p. 2; May 9, 1834, p. 3; November 20, 1835, p. 3.
[^8] Ibid., March 22, 1831, p. 2; March 29, 1831, p. 2.
[^9] Ibid., March 29, 1831, p. 2.
[^10] Ibid., September 13, 1831, p. 1.
[^11] Ibid., March 1, 1831, p. 3; Francis W. Kirkham, A New Witness for Christ in America 2:89-96.
[^12] Joseph Smith, "To the Editor," Times and Seasons 4 (May 15, 1843): 194.
[^13] Cleveland Herald, November 25, 1830, p. 3; Ashtabula Journal, December 4, 1830, p. 2; Western Reserve Chronicle (Warren, Ohio), December 9, 1830, p. 1.
[^14] Painesville Telegraph, March 15, 1831, p. 1.
[^15] Ibid., September 22, 1829, p. 3; American Friend and Marietta Gazette, January 15, 1831, p. 4.
[^16] Ohio Star, December 9, 1830, p. 2.
[^17] Painesville Telegraph, March 8, 1831, p. 3.
[^18] HC 1:158.
[^19] Painesville Telegraph, April 5, 1831, p. 3.
[^20] Ibid., January 18, 1831, p. 3.
[^21] Ibid., September 13, 1831, p. 1.
[^22] Ibid., March 13, 1832, p. 3.
[^23] HC 1:158.
[^24] Ohio Star, December 8, 1831, p. 1; December 29, 1831, p. 3; Painesville Telegraph, January 17, 1832, p. 1. D&C 78, received in March 1832, was the first revelation in which fictitious names were inserted in the printed account. When the reason for this concealment was no longer necessary, the real names of those addressed in the revelation were added in parentheses. The 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants discontinued use of the code names, noting that "since there exists no vital need today to continue the code names, the real names only are now used herein, as given in the original manuscripts." See heading to section 78.
[^25] Joseph Smith, "To the Elders of the Church of Latter Day Saints," Messenger and Advocate 1 (September 1835): 180.
[^26] Painesville Telegraph, November 16, 1830, p. 3; Ohio Star, December 9, 1830, p. 2; Milton V. Backman, Jr., Christian Churches of America: Origins and Beliefs, pp. 143-45, 163-66.
[^27] John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 22.
[^28] Joseph Smith, "Try the Spirits," Times and Seasons 3 (April 1, 1842): 747.
[^29] Autobiography of Levi Hancock, p. 41.
[^30] George A. Smith in Journal of Discourses 11:3-4 (hereafter cited as JD).
[^31] John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," pp. 18-19.
[^32] D&C 43:1-7. This concept had also been enunciated in an earlier revelation. See D&C 28:1-7.
[^33] Joseph Smith, "Try the Spirits"; Pratt, Autobiography, p. 61; John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church, p. 16; Painesville Telegraph, February 15, 1831, p. 1.
[^34] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 61.
[^35] Ibid., pp. 61-62.
[^36] D&C 50:23-24, 31.
[^37] Autobiography of Jared Carter, pp. 4-5.
[^38] HC 2:33-34; Joseph Smith, "Try the Spirits." For additional information on the abnormal spiritual exercises and apostasy of early converts, see Max H. Parkin, "The Nature and Cause of Internal and External Conflict of the Mormons in Ohio Between 1830 and 1838," chapters 3, 4.
[^39] See D&C 93:36.
[^40] History of Geauga and Lake Counties, Ohio, p. 248.
[^41] Painesville Telegraph, May 17, 1831, p. 3.
[^42] Journal History, February 22, 1831; Joseph Smith to Martin Harris, February 22, 1831, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives.
[^43] Wayne Sentinel (Palmyra, New York), May 27, 1831.
[^44] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 61; Mormonism Unveiled, p. 41. Pratt's estimates are probably excessive for the first half of 1831. See Samuel George Ellsworth, "A History of Mormon Missions in the United States and Canada, 1830-1860," p. 90.
[^45] Based on a study by Mark Grandstaff, approximately 78 percent of the Latter-day Saints who settled in Kirtland were born in New England or New York. Prior to their conversions, they were not transients, but were stable residents of their communities. The median years in which pre-Mormon emigrants to Ohio lived in a community prior to their move to the Western Reserve was 11.7. Their migration pattern was generally one long move from New England to Ohio or from New England to New York and then to Ohio, where they located in a previously settled area rather than in the frontier. See Table 1. Backman, Easton, and Perkins, A Profile of Latter-day Saints of Kirtland, Ohio, pp. 85-87.
