Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 4

The Critics Respond

Persecution in OhioHCAs Joseph Smith and his followers arrived in the Western Reserve and started to establish the Church's headquarters there, many non-Mormons began to respond negatively and even aggressively to the growth of this new faith. Newspaper articles generally misrepresented the history, beliefs, ambitions, and goals of the Saints, as reporters often confused improper beliefs and conduct with orthodox doctrines and behavior.

Persecution in OhioHCAlarmed by the spirited anti-Mormon campaign, Joseph Smith recorded in his history that in the spring of 1831, "many false reports, lies, and foolish stories, were published in the newspapers, and circulated in every direction, to prevent people from investigating the work, or embracing the faith." [^1]

Persecution in OhioHCReports on the Church printed in the Ohio papers before the first missionaries arrived in the Western Reserve were more favorable and unbiased than those published during the 1830s, the period of the gathering in the state. Initially the religion was more a topic of curiosity than of scorn. But after the missionaries baptized some 130 converts in Kirtland and vicinity, the number of articles relating to the Church multiplied rapidly (in fact, more articles appeared in Ohio papers between November 1830 and December 1831 than during any other period), and most of them contained derogatory statements about the Latter-day Saints, setting the tone for a propaganda offensive that continued for a number of years.

Persecution in OhioHCThe editor who, more than any other, planted the seeds for Mormon persecution in Geauga County was Eber D. Howe, who was born in Saratoga County, New York, in 1798. Following the War of 1812, Howe was apprenticed to the publisher of the Buffalo Gazette. He later moved to Cleveland, Ohio, and helped establish the Cleveland Herald in 1818. In 1822 he moved to Painesville, where he founded the Painesville Telegraph. He was editor of that paper (sometimes working alone, sometimes with the help of a partner) until January 1835. [^2]

Persecution in OhioHCDuring the years that E. D. Howe was editor of the Telegraph, more disparaging articles on Mormonism appeared in that publication than in any other Ohio newspaper. He personally wrote only a few of the articles, but he also accepted for publication many critical accounts (with truth and error garbled together) about the restored Church. Some of the articles were reproduced in other Ohio publications. [^3]

Persecution in OhioHCLatter-day Saints were not the only targets of Howe's denunciations. He also brought his profusely slanderous language to bear against the Masons and members of various dissident or unorthodox religious societies. He opposed all secret societies in which men "swear to extricate each other . . . whether right or wrong." [^4] He characterized members of one group as "deluded fanatics," "monsters," "demons," "serpents," "horned beasts," "kidnappers," "arsonists" and "murderers." [^5]

Persecution in OhioHCAdopting the same approach, Howe and many other journalists of Ohio used discrediting terms to describe the rise of Mormonism. They referred to members of the restored Church as "fanatics," "a gang of deluded mortals," "deluded beings," the "dregs of this community," "profound believers in witchcraft, ghosts, goblins," and "inferior satellites." [^6] Seldom was Joseph Smith called by his full name or even referred to as Joseph; instead, he was disparagingly called "Jo," "Joe," or "Joey." [^7] The papers of Ohio branded the Book of Mormon as the "golden bible"; Joseph Smith's family as a "gang of money diggers"; [^8] witnesses to the Book of Mormon as "pious reprobates"; [^9] and the revelations recorded by Joseph Smith as "volumes of . . . trash." [^10]

Persecution in OhioHCWhile engaged in this relentless attack on the Latter-day Saints, critics not only concocted the term "Mormonites," but they also formulated a derogatory definition of the word "Mormon." Quoting from a letter of "Obadiah Dogberry" (an alias of Abner Cole) in the Palmyra Reflector, the Painesville Telegraph repeated Dogberry's alleged discovery that the word "Mormon" came from the Greek word "mormoo." According to Bailey's Dictionary, "mormoo" meant "bugbear, hobgoblin, raw head, and bloody bones." Commenting on this definition, Howe announced that the Book of Mormon was "a fiction of hobgoblins and bug-bears." [^11] To correct this absurd definition of "Mormon," Joseph Smith announced that the word had not been derived from the Greek word "mormoo," but was a word that meant, literally, "more good." [^12]

Speculations on the Origin of Mormonism

Numerous accounts of the rise of Mormonism appeared in the 1830s in Ohio newspapers. After publication of the Book of Mormon, several editors published descriptions of it, often accompanied by various conflicting accounts of the rise of the Church.

The author of an article entitled "The Golden Bible" in the November 25, 1830, issue of the Cleveland Herald (subsequently reprinted in the Ashtabula Journal and in the Western Reserve Chronicle) admitted that he had not read the book but had "perused it sufficiently to be convinced" that it was "one of the veriest impositions" of that age. The purpose of the publication, this writer concluded, was financial gain. Joseph Smith had sent forth his "twelve Apostles" to sell the book. All this was "new proof that all fools are not dead, and knavery in any garb may yet find votaries [adherents]." [^13]

In another article circulated in the Western Reserve in the spring of 1831, Alexander Campbell stated that the Book of Mormon was a composite of "every error and almost every truth discussed in New York for the last ten years. He [Joseph Smith] decides all the great controversies: infant baptism, ordination, the trinity, regeneration, repentance, justification, the fall of man, the atonement, transubstantiation, fasting, penance, church government, religious experience, the call of the ministry, the general resurrection, eternal punishment, who may baptize, and even the question of free masonry, republican government, and the rights of men. All these topics are repeatedly alluded to." [^14]

Many non-Mormon historians even in the twentieth century continue to publish this excerpt from Campbell's analysis. They have evidently failed to make a serious study of the Book of Mormon or even of religious history in general. They seem not to recognize that during the apostolic era, the Middle Ages, the era of the Reformation, and the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, men debated most of the subjects enumerated by Campbell. Consequently, it is not surprising that these topics were also discussed in New York and other parts of America at the time of the publication of the Book of Mormon. In other words, even if Joseph Smith had written the kind of book that Campbell described, it would have been no indication that the book was a product of the controversial subjects "discussed in New York for the past ten years" (1820-1830). Moreover, those who have studied the book recognize that it does not contain precise answers to many of the topics mentioned by Campbell, such as the pattern of church government, free masonry, republican government, and how one receives authority (including the call to the ministry).

One of the first descriptions of the origins of the Church appeared in the Painesville Telegraph on September 22, 1829. This article, which had been originally printed in the Palmyra Freeman, alleged that Joseph Smith was visited by "the spirit of the Almighty," who informed him that an ancient record lay buried in a hill located in the town where he lived. The record had been secured and translated and was being published in Palmyra. [^15] The Ohio Star in Ravenna, Ohio, reported on December 9, 1830, that Joseph Smith claimed to have been visited three times in a dream by the "spirit of the Almighty," which eventually led to the coming forth of the "Golden Bible." [^16]

Another account of the origin of Mormonism that was originally published in the Palmyra Reflector and was republished in Ohio in the spring of 1831 connected the birth of the restored Church with a man named Walters. According to this story, Walters was a convicted criminal and "vagabond fortuneteller" who became a close associate of Joseph Smith. Walters, the report continued, was the instrument who persuaded the Smith family to pretend visitations and to bring forth a new book. The tale reached a crescendo with a description of the religious exercises initiated by Walters and observed by his followers, which included the Smith family. After gathering his disciples, the story read, Walters and his "money-digging impostors" carried out a ritual sacrifice of a rooster to a "foul spirit" who was supposedly the "guardian of hidden wealth." [^17]

Not only did Ohio journalists of the early 1830s publish diverse and false accounts of the origin of Mormonism; they also ascribed to Mormonism various instances of unusual behavior that transpired in different parts of the world. The Painesville Telegraph, for example, published in 1831 a report that had appeared in the New York Journal of Commerce. It had no connection with the restored Church, yet was entitled "Mormonism in China." This account, which elicited complaints from Joseph Smith, [^18] asserted that "a sort of revelation from the gods" had been published in China, disclosing that during the year a great pestilence would erupt. The virtuous, this bulletin added, would be spared, but the wicked would not escape; and the ground would be covered with the bodies of those stricken by the epidemic. [^19]

Persecution in OhioHCMormon Doctrines Denounced

Persecution in OhioHCWriters of the 1830s were quick to criticize the doctrines of the Latter-day Saints, especially those that differed most markedly from popular beliefs espoused by the major Protestant faiths. Most Protestants of that period believed that the Bible was the sole guide of faith; that visions, revelations, and gifts of the spirit, such as prophecy, speaking in tongues, and interpretation of tongues, had ceased with the death of the apostles; that all believers were priesthood bearers; and that anyone who received an internal call and was called by a congregation had the authority to preach and to administer the sacraments. Many further believed that since men were saved by the grace of God and the church was a congregation of believers, it was improper to say that any one particular faith was the only way leading to eternal life with God. According to the needs of the major Protestant denominations, all believers who were either elected by God or who did not fall would enter heaven, while the unregenerates, or those who fell, would suffer everlasting damnation.

Persecution in OhioHCIt is not surprising, therefore, that the doctrines most frequently denounced by the critics related to the Church's beliefs concerning the Book of Mormon, the visions and revelations of Joseph Smith, the restoration of the priesthood, gifts of the spirit, and the reestablishment of the one and only true church of Christ on the earth. These teachings were perceived as a threat to all other religious institutions. Even though Protestants quarreled among themselves concerning some interpretations of the Bible, many united in opposition to this new faith, which, in their minds, was an unacceptable form of religious exclusiveness.

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsPersecution in OhioHCAn example of the critics' response to Mormon belief was the sharp and constant criticism of the doctrine of continual revelation. When John Whitmer arrived in Kirtland in January 1831, the Painesville Telegraph announced that he was carrying a "new batch of revelations from God" that he pretended had "just been communicated to Joseph Smith." [^20] In subsequent issues, E. D. Howe maintained that the Saints were not permitted to question "the infallibility" of Joseph Smith or of anything he might declare to be a commandment of God. All members who dared question or express doubts concerning these messages, Howe claimed, were "immediately expelled as heretics." Moreover, he insisted, many of the revelations were kept secret, not being shown to the "weaker" members. [^21] After Joseph Smith moved to Hiram in September 1831, the Telegraph continued its barrage. It announced that he had moved to Portage County so he could manufacture additional "revelations" and could remodel the New Testament by pretending to translate it through inspiration from heaven. [^22] Such comments inflamed the minds of many readers—preventing them, as Joseph Smith wrote, from gaining a correct understanding of the restoration. [^23]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsPersecution in OhioHCJournalists not only criticized the doctrinal contents of the revelations, but also ridiculed individuals whose names appeared in them, especially condemning those who complied with the commandments. Such ridicule of Church leaders was initiated during the winter of 1831-32 by the Ohio Star and the Painesville Telegraph. In March 1832, shortly after the denunciations were printed, Joseph Smith began to identify certain persons in the revelations by code names, such as "Enoch" for Joseph Smith, "Ahashdah" for Newel K. Whitney, and "Pelegoram" for Sidney Rigdon. The code names were probably used so members of the Church might avoid public ridicule. [^24]

Another example of critics' responses to Latter-day Saint beliefs was their treatment of the concept of gifts of the spirit. Members of the restored Church frequently recorded in their diaries and journals experiences with such spiritual blessings as speaking in tongues, the gift of prophecy, and miraculous healings through the power of God. Editors seldom reported the miracles experienced by the Latter-day Saints, but they were quite ready to cite instances in which persons were not immediately healed following an administration by one of the elders of the Church.

Some of the misunderstandings were due to poor communication by the Saints or extravagant claims by individual Mormons. Since the Church did not operate a press in Kirtland prior to 1834, most nonmembers derived their views of the Church from members, from rumor, or from reports in local newspapers. Failings of individual Saints were sometimes cited as evidence that Mormonism was a "deluded" sect. Realizing that some members were, in fact, teaching incorrect principles and were engaged in misguided enthusiasm detrimental to the growth of the Church, Joseph Smith warned the Saints to discontinue such action. "We have reason to fear," he wrote, that many "having a zeal not according to knowledge," and "not understanding the pure principle of the doctrines of the Church, have no doubt, in the heat of enthusiasm, taught and said many things which are derogatory to the genuine character and principles of the church, and for these things we are heartily sorry, and would apologize if an apology would do any good." [^25]

Yet another area of misunderstanding developed in relation to Latter-day Saint teachings concerning the Second Coming of Christ and the Millennium. Before the restored Church was introduced in the Western Reserve, Joseph Smith had taught the reality of the Second Coming of the Savior and His millennial reign. These concepts were not peculiar to the Latter-day Saints. The approach of the millennial era was a frequent topic in Alexander Campbell's Millennial Harbinger. Many pamphleteers in New England also discussed this subject throughout the 1830s. These facts did not, however, temper the critics' denunciations of members of the restored Church who predicted that Christ would return within a few decades or during their mortal life on earth. Shortly after the first missionaries arrived in Ohio, the Painesville Telegraph stated that Oliver Cowdery had predicted that the world would be destroyed "within a few years," while the Ohio Star reported that some Mormon elders were teaching that the world would end in fifteen years. [^26]

Although newspaper reporters asserted that Latter-day Saints were predicting the destruction of the world within four to fifteen years, Joseph Smith never predicted a date for the advent of the Millennium. Nevertheless, some overly enthusiastic members evidently did express opinions contrary to the official doctrines of the Church. John Whitmer, for example, taught that "there was a tradition among some of the disciples, that those who obeyed the covenant in the last days, would never die." [^27]

Spurious revelations and visions claimed by early converts of the Church provided critics with further fuel for inflammatory articles designed to cast doubt on the unusual beliefs of the Latter-day Saints. According to Joseph Smith, shortly after the first missionaries left Ohio for Missouri, "many false spirits were introduced" and "many strange visions were seen" by some of the early converts. [^28] Levi Hancock recalled that one of the early converts, Heman Basset, claimed to have received a revelation in Kirtland from an angel. After reading this revelation to others, Basset would show them a picture of what he claimed to be a group of angels. [^29]

George A. Smith, an early Latter-day Saint historian, reported that some of the Saints living on the Morley farm did not understand correctly the doctrine of revelation. "A false spirit," he asserted, engulfed the Saints and led to "extravagant and wild ideas." One person known as Black Pete claimed to have received messages from heaven in the form of letters floating across the sky. While seeking to obtain a closer look at one of the traveling messages, he "ran off a steep wash bank twenty-five feet high, passed through a tree top" growing parallel with the water below, and fell into the Chagrin River. George A. Smith said in conclusion that Black Pete emerged from the stream with only a few scratches, but "his ardor" was "somewhat cooled." [^30]

Other persons claimed revelations that were not considered in harmony with the doctrines of the Church. John Whitmer recorded in his history that one of the early converts, "a woman by the name of Hubble," professed to be a "prophetess of the Lord" and to have received many revelations. She further insisted that she be called to serve as a "teacher in the Church of Christ." [^31]

After he arrived in Kirtland and learned of these unusual claims, Joseph Smith took steps to extinguish such dangerous errors of the Saints and to teach them the correct principle of revelation. In February 1831, he received a revelation that warned the elders against the counterfeit claims and false teachings of others. This revelation emphasized that the Lord had appointed only one person, Joseph Smith, to receive revelations and commandments for the Church. Other members might receive revelation for their own needs, stewardships, and specific callings, but they did not have authority to receive revelation for the Church. [^32]

Many misconceptions entertained by some of the early Latter-day Saints provided enemies with information used to malign the Church. One was the belief that physical demonstrations were proper reflections of the gifts of the spirit. In many sections of the country, settlers exhibited their religious feelings through various physical gyrations, especially at camp meetings and other revivals conducted by ministers of the Second Great Awakening. Some of the early converts to the restored Church expressed their convictions by engaging in spiritual exercises and were reported to have been seen falling to the ground and sliding around "like serpents." Others, it was reported, would jump, leap, and wave their arms as though they were engaged in a scalping exercise, run into the fields, climb on tree stumps, and commence preaching as though they were surrounded by a large congregation, seemingly oblivious to reality. [^33]

Spiritual abnormalities were evident not only when Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, but continued in sections of Ohio into the spring of 1831. When Parley P. Pratt returned from his mission in Missouri, he observed the strange operations manifest in a number of the branches of the Church in Ohio. "Some persons," he lamented, "would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstasies, and be drawn into contortions, which were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the doctrine and spirit of the gospel." [^34]

Concerned by such spiritual excesses, Parley P. Pratt, John Murdock, and other elders in May 1831 asked Joseph Smith to seek an answer from God concerning the propriety of such behavior. [^35] The Prophet responded by dictating a revelation in their presence. "There are many spirits which are false spirits," this revelation read. And "Satan hath sought to deceive you, that he might overthrow you." The means by which false spirits could be detected was then disclosed:

That which doth not edify is not of God, and is darkness. That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day. . . . If you behold a spirit manifested that you cannot understand, and you receive not that spirit, ye shall ask of the Father in the name of Jesus; and if he give not unto you that spirit, then you may know that it is not of God. [^36]

Although the Prophet declared that the strange extravagances brought disgrace to the Church and caused the Spirit of the Lord to withdraw from individuals, some persons insisted that the ecstasies in which they were engaged were edifying. During the summer of 1831, missionaries Jared Carter and Sylvester Smith encountered members in Amherst, Ohio, who were participating in exercises that they called "visions." At a meeting in Amherst, Elder Carter observed a woman fall to the ground. Believing that such behavior was contrary to the counsel given in the May 1831 revelation, he suggested to Sylvester Smith that they inquire of the Lord concerning the propriety of her actions. After praying, both elders concluded that the members should desist from their spiritual excesses, but some in this congregation were still unconvinced that these instructions were correct. [^37]

The process of correcting the improper behavior of the early converts was difficult. On February 17, 1834, the Kirtland high council was permanently organized, and two days later, this body tried and rebuked Elder Curtis Hodge, Sr., for engaging in a "spasm" that included shouting and screaming. Commenting on the problem, the Prophet wrote that members who refused to comply with the instructions of the authorities regarding visions and "wild, enthusiastic notions" and actions would be "tried for their fellowship," and those who did not repent and forsake their errors would be "cut off" from the Church. [^38]

Despite the unseemly behavior of some members and the deliberate distortions of hostile "outsiders," however, the Church continued to grow and prosper. "The glory of God is intelligence, light, and truth," said Joseph Smith, and this influence tended to prevail. [^39]

The Critics Respond

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 38:24, 36. This revelation was initially published in the Book of Commandments for the Government of the Church of Christ 40 (Zion [Independence] Missouri, 1833): 21-22. There are some differences in the wording in these published editions. Believing in the principle of continual revelation, Latter-day Saints hold that authorized leaders have the authority to edit (in the form of additions or explanations) the revelations. Joseph Smith, who recorded the original revelations, supervised the editing and publication of these writings when they were printed in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.
[^2] John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 11.
[^3] HC 1:146-47
[^4] Leonard J. Arrington, "Early Mormon Communitarianism: The Law of Consecration and Stewardship," Western Humanities Review 7 (Autumn 1953): 346-50.
[^5] For additional information on the Shakers, see Edward Andrews, The People Called Shakers, and for general information on utopian societies of early America, see Arthur Eugene Bestor, Jr., Backwoods Utopias.
[^6] D&C 41:9-11.
[^7] D&C 42:30-35. The basic ideas included in this revelation were initially published by Latter-day Saints in the July 1832 issue of the Evening and the Morning Star under the title "Extracts from the Laws for the Government of the Church of Christ." This information was later included in the Book of Commandments, chapter 44, and in a more expanded version in a reprint in the Evening and Morning Star issued at Kirtland. It was originally printed in the Doctrine and Covenants (1835 edition) as section 13.
[^8] D&C 51:2-3.
[^9] John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," pp. 29-30; HC 1:180; "Newel Knight's Journal," Scraps of Biography, pp. 69-70; autobiography of Jared Carter, p. 3. Copley's given name is spelled Leman and Lemon in various records.
[^10] D&C 54.
[^11] The names of these emigrants are included in Porter, "A Study of the Origins of the Church," pp. 299-303.
[^12] D&C 52:2-3, 7-12, 22-32. These missionaries were told to travel in pairs or small groups, to take different routes, and to preach and baptize while traveling west.
[^13] D&C 53:1-5; 55:1-6.
[^14] HC 1:188-89. See also "History of Orson Pratt," Deseret News, June 2, 1858, and published in Elden J. Watson, comp. , The Orson Pratt Journals, p. 11. Pratt wrote that while traveling to Missouri, he and his brother Parley held about fifty meetings and baptized eleven converts. Meanwhile, Joseph Smith discussed gospel principles in Cincinnati with Walter Scott, one of the leaders of the restorationist movement and an early associate of Sidney Rigdon.
[^15] HC 1:189.
[^16] HC 1:189-202; D&C 57, 58, 59, 60.
[^17] HC 58:35-38.
[^18] HC 1:196-99.
[^19] D&C 61:9, 22-23.
[^20] HC 1:206.
[^21] D&C 63:39; 64:20.
[^22] D&C 64:21, 26.
[^23] D&C 63:42-46;John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 37.
[^24] Geauga County, Ohio, Deed Records, Book 15, pp. 490-92 (hereafter cited as Geauga Deed Records); Book 17, p. 32, microfilm copy, BYU and Church Genealogical Department; Geauga County, Ohio, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1830-1833, microfilm copy, BYU and Church Genealogical Department.
[^25] D&C 70:1-3, 7, 14; Far West Record, p. 31; Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 108.
[^26] D&C 72:7-8; 84:112; 104:40-42. Bishop Whitney's mercantile establishment was called Newel K. Whitney and Company and served as an agency to distribute goods to the needy. A similar storehouse, called Gilbert, Whitney and Company, was located in Missouri. Leonard J. Arrington, Feramorz Y. Fox, and Dean L. May, Building the City of God, pp. 31, 435.
[^27] D&C 96:1-8; 104:20-50; HC 1:353, 363; Far West Record, p. 32; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 13, 24; Arrington, Fox, and May, Building the City of God, pp. 31, 435.
[^28] Feramorz Y. Fox, "United Order: Discrimination in the Use of Terms," Improvement Era 47 (July 1944): 432. One of the bases from which the United Firm grew was the Gilbert-Whitney store in Kirtland; after A. Sidney Gilbert was called by revelation to settle in Missouri, this business was expanded to two mercantile establishments. D&C 57:6, 9; 63:42-45.
[^29] This land was purchased by Frederick G. Williams from Isaac Moore, who was one of the first land speculators to benefit from the arrival of the Saints in Kirtland. Moore had purchased seventy acres for $200 and seventy-five acres for $360, after which he sold most of his land to Latter-day Saints for $2, 000. Geauga Deed Records, Book 15, pp. 425-26; Book 16, pp. 22-23. See also Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records for the 1830s. Frederick G. Williams, "Frederick Granger Williams of the First Presidency of the Church," BYU Studies 12 (spring 1972): 247; F. G. Williams, "Statement of Facts Relative to Joseph Smith and Myself," Church Archives.
[^30] Geauga Deed Records, Book 17, p. 359; Book 18, pp. 480-81; Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1834, 1835.
[^31] Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1830-1839.
[^32] D&C 104:47-53.
[^33] Geauga Deed Records, Book 18, pp. 487-88; D&C 104:20.
[^34] Geauga Deed Records, Book 18, p. 479; D&C 104:27-30.
[^35] Geauga Deed Records, Book 18, pp. 478-80; D&C 104:24-26, 43-46.
[^36] D&C 104:34, 39-41. Property taxes for most of the French farm (approximately one hundred acres in lot 17) were paid from 1834 to 1836 by the Whitney Company and in 1837 by John Johnson.
[^37] D&C 58:27-28.
[^38] HC 1:365-67. Copies of some of these contracts are located in the Church Archives. See Edward Partridge papers.
[^39] Joseph Smith to William W. Phelps, November 27, 1832, cited in HC 1:297-99.
