Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 5

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCThe Law of Consecration

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCWhile the Ohio press was engaged in an aggressive campaign aimed at thwarting the growth of the restored Church, some Ohio editors and other critics were also denouncing the economic policies unfolded by Joseph Smith. Some of the opposition emerged because of misunderstanding of the economic reform program that the Prophet revealed; critics associated it with communistic systems established by various other religious communities in early America.

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCPrior to his arrival in Kirtland, the Prophet had informed members of the Church that a new economic system would be instituted. The revelation given in New York on January 2, 1831, instructing the Saints to gather in Ohio, also indicated that after the members settled in that state, they would receive the law of the Lord and would be endowed with power from on high. The law they would receive would include provisions related to the temporal affairs of the Church. "Let every man esteem his brother as himself," the revelation specified. A parable was related that indicated that members of Christ's Church should "be one," which apparently referred, in part, to the responsibility of members to care for the temporal needs of one another. The revelation further directed that men would be "appointed by the voice of the church" to care for the poor and needy and to "govern the affairs of the property" of the Church. [^1]

After arriving in Kirtland, Joseph Smith learned that an economic program established by the "Family," the followers of Sidney Rigdon who had created a communal order on Isaac Morley's farm in the northeastern section of Kirtland township, involved both petty controversies and major conflicts. According to John Whitmer, some members of this society had decided that what belonged to one brother belonged to all; therefore they would take each other's clothes and other property and use them without permission. Such action, he observed, was leading to their temporal destruction. [^2] Recognizing that problems were afflicting these members, Joseph Smith instructed them to abandon their "common stock" program for a more nearly perfect law of the Lord. [^3]

Not only was there a need to provide members of the communal order in Kirtland with a better economic system, but finances were also required to support various Church programs. For example, money, goods, and property were needed immediately to help the poor and to assist immigrants who had sacrificed much to gather in Ohio. Some of the Church leaders also needed financial help. Joseph Smith lacked a home for his family; and Sidney Rigdon, after uniting with the Latter-day Saints, lost his pastoral home and the economic support he had previously received from his congregation. After Edward Partridge was called in February 1831 to devote all of his time to the Church, he was not in a position to support his family through his mercantile enterprises. Moreover, as the years passed, funds were necessary to support Church publications, educational programs, and the construction of buildings, especially the Kirtland Temple. [^4]

Living in an age of social ferment, the Prophet was undoubtedly aware of some of the idealistic financial systems then being used. Prior to 1830, Shakers, Harmonites, Owenite Socialists, and Separatists of Zoar, Ohio, had initiated unusual economic systems. Some of the most successful orders had been instituted by members of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, commonly known as Believers or Shakers. By 1830 this faith had established twenty communistic-type communities between Maine and Kentucky; three were located in Ohio, including one a few miles west of Kirtland. Individuals who joined this order gave to the society their personal belongings and lived under a system of common ownership and use of property. Men and women slept in different dormitories, ate in a common dining room, worked on assigned tasks, and embraced the principle of celibacy. [^5]

The Saints did not have to wait long for details concerning the new economic order they were to follow. On February 4, 1831, a few days after his arrival in Kirtland, the Prophet received a revelation calling Edward Partridge as the first bishop of the Church and instructing him to devote all of his time to this service. [^6] Five days later, in the presence of twelve elders, Joseph Smith received another revelation that not only provided Bishop Partridge with a brief guide concerning some of his responsibilities, but also outlined the basic structure of the new system.

The economic order revealed on February 9 has been called the law of consecration and stewardship, the First United Order, the Order of Enoch, and the Order of Stewardships. An underlying basis of this new system was the concept that the earth, as well as everything on it, belongs to the Lord, and individuals, as stewards of the Lord, have a responsibility to care for the poor. Members of the Church were therefore told by revelation to consecrate their property to the Lord through the bishop and his counselors appointed for that purpose, "with a covenant and deed which cannot be broken." After receiving the property, the bishop was instructed to appoint every man "a steward over his own property," or that which he (the member) had received from the bishop, "sufficient for himself and family." The surplus was to be kept in the Lord's storehouse "to administer to the poor and needy," as determined by the bishop and the elders of the Church, for the purchase of land and for the building up of a New Jerusalem. [^7]

The revelation provided a general outline of the law of consecration and stewardship; but many people, members and nonmembers alike, did not at that time understand the precise meaning of such terms as "consecration," "steward," "stewardship," and "storehouse." Consequently, as the Latter-day Saints began to live this law, additional information was revealed through the Prophet; and as the months and years passed, Joseph Smith and other Church leaders continued to instruct the Saints in the law of consecration and stewardship.

The Saints gained a better understanding of the meaning of stewardships when, in May 1831, Joseph Smith received a revelation regarding the temporal affairs of the Saints who had recently arrived in the Western Reserve from the area of Colesville, New York. He informed these immigrants that they should settle in Thompson, Ohio, a few miles east of Kirtland, on property owned by a new convert to the Church, a former Shaker named Leman Copley. According to the revelation, the Saints in Thompson were to consecrate their property to the Lord through Edward Partridge, after which he was to "appoint" or distribute a portion to every family according to their "circumstances and . . . wants and needs." [^8]

Although Bishop Partridge attempted to inaugurate the law of consecration in Thompson, conflicts developed that prevented its full implementation. While the precise reasons for the conflict are not known, selfishness and greed no doubt played a part. After Leman Copley broke a contract agreeing to let Latter-day Saints occupy his farmland and ordered them off his property, Newel Knight hastened to Kirtland to inform Joseph Smith of the difficulties. [^9] Subsequently, the Prophet received a revelation in June 1831 instructing Newel Knight and others living on the Copley farm to "repent of all their sins" and "to journey into the regions westward, unto the land of Missouri, unto the borders of the Lamanites." [^10] Shortly thereafter, at least fourteen families (twenty-three adults and thirty-eight children) who had emigrated from eastern New York to Ohio commenced their journey to the Missouri frontier. [^11]

Another attempt to set in motion the law of consecration and stewardship was undertaken by Church leaders after members began gathering in western Missouri in the summer of 1831. Some of these immigrants had been called by revelation to colonize that region, while others immigrated there with a direct calling, that they might participate in the building of a Zion, a city of refuge and peace, in "western America." On June 4, 1831, the day following a special conference held in Kirtland, Joseph Smith received a commandment instructing twenty-eight elders to journey to Missouri. [^12] Shortly after this revelation was received, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, William W. Phelps, and Joseph Coe were also called to journey west. [^13]

The elders who had been called to Missouri began leaving Kirtland in pairs or small groups in the middle of June. Joseph Smith, accompanied by seven others, started west on the nineteenth and went as far as Cincinnati by wagon, canal boat, and stagecoach. From Cincinnati, they proceeded by riverboat to St. Louis; and from there, five of them—Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, William W. Phelps, Edward Partridge, and Joseph Coe—walked 240 miles across the state to Jackson County. [^14] There they met Oliver Cowdery, Ziba Peterson, and Peter Whitmer, three of the missionaries who had introduced the gospel to Sidney Rigdon's followers in the Western Reserve, along with Frederick G. Williams, who had joined the missionaries in Kirtland. Parley P. Pratt had earlier left the group in Missouri to travel east to appraise conditions of the Church in Ohio and inform the Prophet of the accomplishments of the missionaries. The four missionaries were now joined by the elders from Ohio, the Saints from the Colesville branch, and a few other persons who had immigrated west. [^15]

While Joseph Smith was in Jackson County during the latter part of July and in early August, he received four revelations containing information on various subjects, including the law of consecration. The revelations indicated that Missouri was "the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion," that the inhabitants of Zion were to cleanse themselves from all unrighteousness (for Zion meant pure in heart), that they were to love and serve God and love their neighbors as themselves, and that they were to live in accordance with other laws of God. It was also revealed that the village of Independence was the "center place" of Zion and that a temple was to be built there on land west of the courthouse. William W. Phelps was called to serve as a printer for the Church, and Oliver Cowdery was to assist him in this duty. [^16]

Martin Harris

Most of the new information relating to the law of consecration pertained more to assignments than to further disclosures concerning the nature of the law. Bishop Edward Partridge was given the responsibility of dividing the land among the Saints so that all who gathered could receive an inheritance. Sidney Gilbert was called to serve as a land agent for the Saints; he was to establish a merchandising store in that community and use the profits from this business to purchase land upon which the Saints could settle. Martin Harris was commanded by revelation to set a good example for other members by "laying his moneys before the bishop." He was then to receive an inheritance according to his own desires. [^17]

Dedication of Independence Temple SiteHCIn addition to laying a foundation for a new economic order, Joseph Smith and other Church leaders were involved in many other activities in Missouri. On August 2, 1831, the Prophet assisted the Colesville Saints in laying the first log for a house of worship in Kaw Township, twelve miles west of Independence. The log was carried by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. That same day, Sidney Rigdon was in Independence consecrating and dedicating that area for the gathering of the Saints. On August 3, in the company of eight other men, Joseph Smith stood on a ten-acre plot where a temple was to be erected and dedicated the land for the building of a house of the Lord. [^18]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCSix days after the temple site was dedicated, the Prophet and ten others, including Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon, launched their canoes on the Missouri River and commenced the journey back to Ohio. On the third day of this trip they encountered treacherous waters. While the group was camping on the riverbank, Joseph Smith reported that William W. Phelps saw in vision "the destroyer in his most horrible power, ride upon the face of the waters." The next morning, August 12, the Prophet announced that he had received a revelation that referred to this vision and that instructed Sidney Gilbert and W. W. Phelps to continue the journey in haste by land or water, and instructed others to avoid the water route "save it be upon the canal, while journeying to their homes." [^19] In accordance with this revelation, Joseph and some of the other elders continued their journey to St. Louis by land, then traveled east by stage, arriving in Kirtland on August 29, eighteen days after leaving Independence. [^20]

After returning to Kirtland, Joseph Smith received several additional revelations instructing members, some named specifically, concerning their responsibilities under the law of consecration. Titus Billings and Isaac Morley were told to sell their farms in Ohio and migrate to Missouri. [^21] Others, including Newel K. Whitney and Frederick G. Williams, were commanded not to sell their property but to remain in Kirtland. [^22] Members of the Church in Ohio were admonished to contribute toward the purchase of land in Missouri, in order to assist in the building of Zion in Jackson County. Meanwhile, Oliver Cowdery and Newel K. Whitney were called on a mission among members of the Church to raise funds for building the New Jerusalem in western America. [^23]

A major problem preventing success under the law of consecration in Kirtland in 1831 was the fact that few members of the Church there owned land or other forms of property that could be used for redistribution. Since most converts were unable to contribute significant amounts of property to the order, land was not available to be distributed in the form of inheritances. The only large acreage owned by members was the Isaac Morley farm on which the "Family" had been living. Although he sold to a nonmember approximately fifty acres of land in 1831, he retained about eighty acres; and after he had immigrated to Missouri, many members of the Church settled on this farm. In fact, this land was the principal gathering place for the Saints in Kirtland prior to 1832. Newel K. Whitney owned a store on the flats that provided his family with a source of income. A few other members (while paying taxes on horses and cattle) lived in homes on land on which they had not commenced paying taxes, indicating that, in some instances, they did not possess title to the land. [^24]

Even though Latter-day Saints lacked sufficient land in Kirtland for the granting of inheritances to all, Joseph Smith continued to receive revelations during the fall of 1831 concerning the temporal responsibilities of Latter-day Saints. At a conference held in Hiram, Ohio, members agreed that some of the revelations received by the Prophet should be printed and circulated; six men—Joseph Smith, Martin Harris, Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, Sidney Rigdon, and William W. Phelps—were entrusted with this assignment. They organized a "literary firm" in November 1831 as a joint stewardship to publish and sell books, periodicals, and newspapers for the Church. Although none of the men owned property in Kirtland, they were commanded to be equal in "temporal things." They were to be provided with the necessities of life, but any surplus they earned was to be given into the Lord's storehouse. [^25] In December, Newel K. Whitney was called to serve as bishop in Kirtland and the eastern branches of the Church. While presiding over the temporal affairs of Latter-day Saints living in Kirtland, he maintained the Lord's storehouse, kept an account of property consecrated for use by the membership of the Church, and in other respects assisted the poor in securing the necessities of life. [^26]

Another attempt to implement the law of consecration and stewardship occurred in April 1832. In compliance with a revelation Joseph Smith had received in Missouri during his second trip to that state, a central council, referred to as the order, the United Order, and the United Firm, was created to manage the temporal affairs of the Church. This included the general supervision of the poor, a responsibility that was continued on a local level by the bishops of Zion (Missouri) and Kirtland. In the spring of 1832, nine leaders assembled to direct the activities of the United Firm. Five were then living in Missouri (Oliver Cowdery, Edward Partridge, Sidney Gilbert, John Whitmer, and William W. Phelps) and four were residents of Ohio (Joseph Smith, Newel K. Whitney, Sidney Rigdon, and Jesse Gause). After one of the leaders, Jesse Gause, apostatized, Frederick G. Williams became a member of the firm, as did John Johnson. After Oliver Cowdery and Martin Harris returned to Ohio, they united with the other leaders in Kirtland in directing the economic affairs of the Church in that part of the country. [^27] These men functioned as a controlling body (like a board of directors that manages a corporation) and used the financial means at their disposal to finance various Church programs. While sharing the responsibilities of holding properties in trust, directors of the United Firm cared for the poor, supervised the bishop's storehouses, purchased land for those who gathered in Kirtland and Missouri, and assisted in the construction of the Kirtland Temple. [^28]

Between 1832 and 1834 there was a significant increase in the amount of property owned and managed by Church leaders in Kirtland. In April 1832, shortly before the United Firm was organized, Frederick G. Williams purchased approximately 144 acres in Kirtland for two thousand dollars. This land, known as the Frederick G. Williams farm, was located on a plateau south of Kirtland Flats. On May 3, 1834, this property was conveyed (without monetary remuneration) to Joseph Smith, who acted as agent for the Church. [^29] In April 1833, Joseph Coe and Ezra Thayer, who had been called to serve as land agents, purchased for the Church 103 acres from Peter French. The French property, which cost the Saints five thousand dollars, stretched from the Williams farm to the brow of the hill (which included the property on which the temple was built) and then down the steep slope to the east branch of the Chagrin River. [^30]

Leaders of the Church not only managed the Williams, French, and Isaac Morley farmlands, but also under the stewardship system they operated the Newel K. Whitney store, a tannery, a printing shop, and an ashery. They later also operated a steam sawmill. While some converts who gathered to Kirtland had sufficient funds to purchase land from nonmembers, others settled on Church property. Those who occupied the Church land contributed what they could toward Church programs, in a sense renting the land or making payments in anticipation of future ownership. Meanwhile, property taxes were paid by various Church leaders. [^31]

Another significant change in the application of the law of consecration and stewardship occurred in 1834. On April 23 of that year, Joseph Smith received a revelation that separated the United Order in Kirtland from the order in Zion and, because of internal conflicts, persecution, and expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, dissolved the organizational structure in Missouri. [^32] This revelation also instructed the members of the United Order in Kirtland to divide among themselves some of the Church property. Instead of managing most of the Church properties as a group, those in Kirtland were given specific responsibilities, and select property was to be their stewardship. Sidney Rigdon received the home and lot on which he was living, including a tannery. He was to direct the tannery and draw his financial support from it. [^33] Oliver Cowdery and Frederick G. Williams were called to direct the operation of a printing office. Elder Williams was also given stewardship over the home in which he resided, and Elder Cowdery was given the lot adjacent to the printing office. [^34] John Johnson was given the home where he was living, Joseph Smith was given land near the lot where the Kirtland Temple was being built, and Martin Harris was also made steward over a plot of land. [^35] Meanwhile, Newel K. Whitney not only continued to operate the general store, but he was also given the lot on which the ashery was located. [^36] Although the revelation assigned many specific stewardships to certain members mentioned by name, it also made clear that every member of the Church was a steward "over earthly blessings" and was responsible to the Lord for his stewardship. The Prophet taught that it was within the stewardship of all members to "be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness," for "the power [of the Spirit of God] is in them." [^37]

In 1833, while a few leaders in Kirtland were pooling their economic resources in an attempt to secure funds to support Church programs, Bishop Edward Partridge was directing in Missouri a different type of economic order. There, members voluntarily conveyed their property to the bishop and, in return, received inheritances. Instead of conveying deeds to members, Bishop Partridge, in the fall of 1832, leased land to the Saints. Under the provision of the contracts, stewards were not permitted to transfer their inheritances to their wives, children, or heirs, or to sell their property. The contracts further stipulated that if an individual left the Church, he had no legal claim to his inheritance. [^38]

On several occasions, Joseph Smith wrote to Church leaders in Missouri informing them that their application of the law of consecration and stewardship was not correct. In a letter to William W. Phelps, dated November 27, 1832, the Prophet indicated that he was displeased because the Saints who had gathered in Zion had not received "their inheritance by consecrations, by order of deed from the Bishop." [^39]

About five months later, the Prophet informed Bishop Partridge, in a letter dated May 2, 1833, that although stewards had no claim over their initial consecration, their inheritances belonged to them; it was their property. "Concerning inheritances," he explained, "you are bound by the law of the Lord to give a deed, securing to him who receives inheritances, his inheritance for an everlasting inheritance, or in other words, to be his individual property, his private stewardship." [^40] He further taught that if an individual transgressed and left the Church, the inheritance still belonged to him. This concept became a binding principle when it was included in a revelation that was initially published in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (1835). The Prophet recorded in that work a statement that removed any confusion concerning the ownership of inheritances: "And if he shall transgress and is not accounted worthy to belong to the church, he shall not have power to claim that portion which he has consecrated unto the bishop for the poor and needy of my church; therefore, he shall not retain the gift, but shall only have claim on that portion that is deeded unto him." [^41]

As one studies the various revelations and instructions given through Joseph Smith on the subject of consecration and stewardship, it becomes possible to summarize and better understand this economic program. In harmony with an economic phase of the law, members were asked to deed all their property to the bishop of the Church. They then received title to a stewardship—a means of production or support for the family. This inheritance was based on the wants (inasmuch as the wants were just), needs, circumstances (including the size of the family), and abilities of the stewards. At appointed times, surplus production and increase beyond the needs of the family were to be given into the bishop's storehouse for Church projects, including the care of the poor. Should anyone leave the order, he was to receive his inheritance but not the surplus he had given to the Church. Families were to live separately, and business relations were to be conducted under a system in which stewards owned or held title to their property.

Saints who entered this order were placed on essentially the same economic level. This basic equality was to be retained by their giving periodically their surplus to the Church. This surplus was actually to be derived from two main sources: consecrations that exceeded the amount given as inheritances and contributions from the stewards. This surplus (or residue, as it is called in section 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants) was, of course, a vital part of the economic system. It was needed to support various Church programs, such as helping immigrants secure land and aiding stewards who experienced economic reversals resulting from misfortunes or disasters.

Major area of LDS Activity in Kirtland

This system not only preserved the essential values of the capitalistic system, such as personal initiative, private ownership, and reward for effort, but it was also designed to eliminate some of the negative aspects of that economic system, including poverty amid plenty, inequalities of wealth, and wasteful competition. The law of consecration promoted economic equality without compromising free agency or excellence. The redistribution of wealth placed all families on essentially the same economic plane and eliminated the need for certain kinds of welfare programs by giving to everyone, including the poor, sufficient property to care for their needs. It was not aimed at establishing complete equality, for members received different kinds and types of inheritances, but it was designed to implement a principle given in a revelation recorded in Kirtland in March 1831: "It is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin." [^42]

Though Joseph Smith taught the basic principles of the law of consecration and stewardship in the 1830s, only certain parts of the law were lived at that time. In some respects, the closest application of the law in Kirtland was made by the members of the United Order or United Firm. Many others, however, were living in harmony with a basic principle of the law of consecration—that of sacrificing one's time and material possessions for the building of the kingdom of God. In the mid-1830s, many Kirtland Saints sacrificed a substantial part of their material wealth to advance programs of the Church, including building the Kirtland Temple. A high percentage of the Saints were not asked to consecrate their property, and many converts who gathered in Kirtland did not purchase land in that township. Instead of owning their own farms, they lived on Church property near the temple site, where they built small frame homes and for several years devoted most of their energies and economic resources to the building of the temple. This application of the law of consecration in Kirtland is evident in the Geauga County tax records for the decade of the thirties. In March 1835, Joseph Smith identified 121 men who had assisted in building the temple, which was still under construction, and they were to receive at that time a special blessing. This list included most but not all of the men who had worked on the temple. Of these 121, some 52 percent owned land in Kirtland during the 1830s (based on tax records of land and recorded deeds), and 13 who did not own land (11 percent) paid a personal property tax. During the years the temple was under construction (1833-36), only 30 percent of the temple builders purchased land in Kirtland. Though a few of the men lived across the township line and would have owned property in another community, many of them lived on Church property (with various Church leaders paying the assessed tax), and instead of buying land, they used their resources for the building of a house for the Lord. [^43]

Although most members of the Church in Kirtland gave generously of their time, energies, and material means to build up the kingdom of God, a few converts were chastized for failing to contribute, commensurate with their means, to the poor and to the Church. In an important case tried before the Kirtland high council in June 1836, two members, an elder and a seventy, were accused of coveting their money and lacking the benevolence that should accompany one's conversion to the gospel of Christ. During one of these trials, Frederick G. Williams, a member of the First Presidency, acknowledged that the Church was poor, financially speaking, and admitted that the Church was plagued with debts that caused embarrassment to the leaders. Additional contributions, he said, were needed to alleviate this distress. Following these remarks, another member of the First Presidency, Sidney Rigdon, discussed the relationship between property and the laws of God. "It is the duty of the Saints," he suggested, to sacrifice their "all" for the building of the kingdom of God and to care for the poor. Christ, he reasoned, sacrificed everything so that we might be saved; thus we must follow the Savior's example and be made perfect through our suffering. One of the members was criticized for failing to help a neighbor who had fallen from a roof, injured himself, and was unable to work temporarily. The neighbor's family was experiencing economic hardships, and the accused had said that he was planning to help them, but this promise had not been realized. In one of these cases, the court ruled that the member should change his attitude toward giving, or the hand of fellowship would be withdrawn from him. In the other case, the member confessed that he did not realize his selfishness, promised to correct his failing, and asked forgiveness of God and the Church. [^44]

While a few Church leaders pooled their economic resources and other members sacrificed their material wealth to advance the restoration movement in Kirtland, a more specific application of the law of consecration and stewardship was attempted in Missouri. However, problems developed there over its application, and before the full program was implemented, many Latter-day Saints were driven from their homes in Jackson County. Therefore, at no time during the 1830s did many members of the Church live the law as specifically outlined in the revelations announced in the 1830s. However, many nonmembers were convinced that the law of consecration and stewardship was controlling the economic activities of members of the Church. Such persons were not only in error regarding the Church's compliance with that law, but, largely due to newspaper misrepresentation, they misunderstood the law itself and condemned the Saints for advocating such a program.

When the initial revelation on the law of consecration and stewardship was recorded, the Church did not own a printing press. The revelation, however, was copied by some members, and one of these transcripts was obtained by a non-Mormon editor in Ravenna, Ohio. Subsequently, this revelation was published in Ravenna in the fall of 1831 and then reprinted in other papers of the Western Reserve. Critics of the Church contended that Latter-day Saint preachers had been commanded not to tell members of the economic program until they had become "strong in the faith." The revelation was published by non-Mormons under the heading "Secret Bye Laws of the Mormonites," with a caption explaining that Mormons were compelled to embrace the economic regulations. [^45]

Though the critics were wrong when they stated that Latter-day Saints were compelled to live in harmony with the law of consecration and stewardship, they did not misrepresent the facts when they asserted that the Latter-day Saints were called upon to make economic sacrifices. Amid poverty, privations, and other forms of economic distress, the Kirtland Saints continued to sacrifice by gathering in Ohio and Missouri, by supporting the Church's missionary program, by building a temple for the Lord, and by helping the Saints in Missouri. [^46] The restored gospel thus prepared men for a new pattern of living. While non-Mormon critics scoffed at the Saints for relinquishing some of their worldly wealth, they failed to comprehend that the converts of the Church were endowed with new incentives and were motivated by a law revealed through revelation that encouraged them to devote their time, talents, and material wealth to the building of Christ's kingdom on the earth.

The Law of Consecration

---
Notas:
[^1] Although the wife of John Johnson is referred to in some contemporary records as Elsa or Elsey, she was also called Alice in a family Bible. A tombstone located in the cemetery next to the Kirtland Temple includes the following inscription: "In Memory of Mary E., daughter of John and Alice Johnson, who died March 30, 1833, in the fifteenth year of her age." Geauga Deed Records, Book 18, pp. 478-79; Book 24, p. 100; Book 25, pp. 15, 409, 440. For additional information on the John Johnson family, see Keith Perkins, "A House Divided: The John Johnson Family," Ensign 9 (February 1979): 54-59.
[^2] Hayden, Early History of the Disciples, p. 250. The account of the healing of Elsa Johnson was included in a funeral sermon delivered by B. A. Hinsdale on August 3, 1870, entitled "Life and Character of Symonds Ryder." See also Luke Johnson, "History of Luke Johnson," Deseret News, May 19, 1858, p. 53; "Philo Dibble's Narrative," in Early Scenes in Church History, p. 79; and HC 1:215n-16n.
[^3] HC 1:215; Hartwell Ryder, "A Short History of the Foundation of the Mormon Church," typescript, Hiram College, p. 3.
[^4] Robert J. Matthews, A Plainer Translation: Joseph Smith's Translation of the Bible, pp. 8-20.
[^5] Ibid., pp. 11-12. See also D&C 45:60-61; 73:3-4; 76:15; and HC 1:238-39, 131-33.
[^6] HC 1:245.
[^7] Matthews, A Plainer Translation, pp. 12-13.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 26-28, 39-40, 55-58, 91-95.
[^9] Ibid., p. 96.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 53-54.
[^11] See D&C 45:60-61. D&C 76:15-18, 77, and probably sections 84, 86, 88, 107, and 132 were recorded in connection with this project.
[^12] HC 1:98; Matthews, A Plainer Translation, pp. 26-27.
[^13] D&C 45:60-61.
[^14] Matthews, A Plainer Translation, p. 31.
[^15] HC 1:211.
[^16] It is not clear whether Joseph Smith translated the books of the New Testament in the order in which they appear in the King James Version or whether he passed from one section to another. Some revisions were made after he had completed his first revision and was reviewing what he had previously translated. We also do not know if some of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants (such as section 74) were received while he was actually translating a particular book or whether he received the revelation while he was pondering over a concept recorded in the New Testament.
[^17] HC 1:245.
[^18] D&C 76:20-24.
[^19] 1 Corinthians 7:14; D&C 74:7.
[^20] D&C 77.
[^21] D&C 76:25-112.
[^22] D&C 76:28.
[^23] "Recollections of the Prophet Joseph Smith," Juvenile Instructor 27 (May 15, 1892): 303-4.
[^24] HC 1:295.
[^25] HC 1:324, 368-69, Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 8; Joseph Smith to the Brethren (in Zion), July 2, 1833, Church Archives, cited in HC 1:368-70.
[^26] Matthews, A Plainer Translation, pp. 15-16, 41-47.
[^27] Ibid., pp. 52, 207-18.
[^28] Far West Record, pp. 18-19.
[^29] HC 1:104.
[^30] Richard P. Howard, Restoration Scriptures, pp. 197-98.
[^31] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 62.
[^32] Far West Record, pp. 18-19; HC 1:222-24, 270.
[^33] D&C 1:17-24, 37.
[^34] Far West Record, p. 19.
[^35] D&C 67:6-7.
[^36] HC 1:226. There are many variations in the spelling of McLellin in contemporary records, such as McLellan, McLelland, and M'Lellin. The 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants spells it McLellin.
[^37] HC 1:229.
[^38] D&C 69:1-2.
[^39] HC 1:229-34; D&C 133.
[^40] D&C 133:9, 13, 25-26, 62-64.
[^41] D&C 1, 67-70, 133.
[^42] Far West Record, pp. 19-20.
[^43] D&C 70.
[^44] HC 1:226.
[^45] Howard, Restoration Scriptures, p. 199.
[^46] Ibid., p. 200.
