Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 7

First Missionary EffortsHCThe Call to Preach

First Missionary EffortsHCDuring the 1830s Latter-day Saints commenced missionary work in various parts of the world. After declaring the restored gospel to the inhabitants of New York, missionaries began preaching in Ohio and Missouri; and while elders were serving in these three states, others began preaching in New England, the mid-Atlantic states, and the South. During the early 1830s, missionaries carried the message of the restoration not only into every state of the young nation, but into eastern Canada as well. Before the decade had passed, missionaries from Kirtland and other parts of North America had carried the gospel across the Atlantic to responsive communities in England.

During most of the thirties, Kirtland was the major center for Latter-day Saint missionary activity. Many elders received calls to preach and, endowed with deep convictions, went forth to serve. Sometimes, however, converts were ordained prematurely. Some who accepted calls to preach possessed more enthusiasm than genuine knowledge or ability. Recognizing the need to regulate ordinations and supervise the activities of missionaries, Church leaders residing in Kirtland provided members with instructions and educational experiences designed to enhance their understanding of the gospel and their ability to communicate with others. [^1]

Kirtland was a favorable location for organizing and directing the missionary program. A few miles north of the community was the "Old Girdled Road," one of the main highways of the Western Reserve, which connected Cleveland with settlements in western Pennsylvania and New York. Fairport harbor was also nearby; there members could board sailing vessels that would carry them along the shores of Lake Erie. After proceeding east to Buffalo, New York, missionaries could skirt Lake Erie and Lake Ontario and penetrate upper Canada, or they could travel along the Erie Canal to the Hudson River. From the Albany region, elders could move south toward New York City or continue east into New England. While many elders went east from Kirtland, others went south and west. Like the spokes of a wheel, roads radiated from Kirtland to many sections of the Western Reserve. Kirtland was also near the Ohio Canal, which ran through the Western Reserve to the Ohio River. From this juncture individuals could continue directly overland to the southern states or proceed along the Ohio to the Mississippi, which in turn was the main western highway transporting people north and south, from Missouri and Illinois to Mississippi and Louisiana. [^2]

First Missionary EffortsHCAn Internal Call to Preach

First Missionary EffortsHCSome of the first elders who served as missionaries began preaching without having received an official call from Church leaders. They were acting in harmony with a revelation received by the Prophet, which stated: "If ye have desires to serve God ye are called to the work; for behold the field is white already to harvest." [^3]

First Missionary EffortsHCIn November 1830, Frederick G. Williams joined the four elders who had introduced the gospel in Geauga County and journeyed with them to Missouri. Another Ohioan, John Murdock, met the traveling elders, was baptized, confirmed, and ordained an elder, and began preaching in the Western Reserve—all within one week's time! He had previously been engaged in an itinerant crusade, declaring the need for the recovery of New Testament Christianity; but after his conversion he began preaching the reality of the restoration. Concentrating his efforts in the eastern communities of Cuyahoga County, he baptized about seventy Ohioans within four months. He temporarily discontinued all economic pursuits, and while his family was being cared for by another member, he devoted himself to the ministry full time. [^4]

First Missionary EffortsHCMeanwhile, Levi Hancock heard that a work had been translated that contained a description of Christ's visit to his "other sheep" on the American continent. He investigated the report. After listening to the leaders of the restored Church in Mayfield, he followed them to Kirtland, where he was baptized by Parley P. Pratt. A few days later, after he was ordained an elder, he rode back to his home in Rome, Ashtabula County, and began to hold meetings. During that month, November 1830, Levi Hancock noted that he "preached from place to place where the folks were well acquainted" with him. [^5]

First Missionary EffortsHCSome of the early missionaries testified that after receiving an internal call from God to preach, they sought a confirmation from Church leaders and then went forth as the Spirit directed. Such was the case with Jared Carter. In early 1831 he left home on a business venture. He had traveled about twelve miles when he was given a copy of the Book of Mormon by a man who did not believe its contents. As he read the book, Jared prayed that the Lord might reveal the truth to him. After earnest study and prayer, Carter wrote, he was convinced by "manifestations of the Spirit of God" that the gospel of Jesus Christ had indeed been restored. Shortly thereafter he met Hyrum Smith, and in February 1831, he was baptized for the remission of sins, after which, he said, he was enwrapped by the Spirit of God. That spring he immigrated to Ohio and settled in Thompson, where his wife was baptized. They subsequently moved to Amherst, Ohio, and Jared Carter started preaching. Shortly after securing from Joseph Smith an affirmation of his duty to preach, he traveled to Vermont to proclaim the gospel to his relatives. For five months, from September 1831 to February 1832, he traveled as the Spirit guided him. Upon returning home, he learned that his three brothers, Simeon, Gideon, and John, who had been living in different parts of the nation, had all joined the Church and were actively teaching others about the new faith. [^6]

First Missionary EffortsHCThis practice of serving missions without a specific call from an ecclesiastical leader continued for a number of years. Another example of an elder who went forth in the early 1830s to serve as the Spirit directed him was Zera Pulsipher, who met Jared Carter during the latter's mission in Vermont. This investigator was already interested in the message of restoration; he had secured a copy of the Book of Mormon, read it, and become convinced that it was a new witness for Christ. However, he was not certain that the Church had been reestablished on the earth, so when he met Elder Carter, he asked him if the power of the ancient church had been restored, including the gifts of the Spirit. Elder Carter responded with a firm "Yes!" Then Zera Pulsipher asked him if the sick had recovered after he had lain his hands upon them. The missionary replied that on many occasions he had witnessed the healing of the sick through the power of God, which had been restored to the earth. [^7]

First Missionary EffortsHCZera Pulsipher was convinced that Elder Carter spoke the truth, and after asking God if the everlasting gospel was again on the earth, he received a witness of the reality of the restoration. In January 1832, he was baptized by Jared Carter.

Shortly after joining the Church, Zera Pulsipher commenced missionary work. According to a family record, while working on his farm he felt impressed to leave home and begin preaching. The impulse was so strong that shortly before noon he unyoked his oxen and turned them into the pasture, then walked to the house and asked his wife for a clean shirt and a pair of socks.

"Where on earth are you going?" she asked.

"I don't know, only that I am going to preach the gospel. The Lord will show me where to go. I am going where He guides me."

"How long will you be gone?" she inquired.

Earliest Missionary EffortsHC"I don't know. Just long enough to do the work the Lord has for me to do." [^8]

Immediately after lunch, the new missionary traveled in the direction the Spirit indicated. He soon joined forces with another itinerant missionary, Elijah Cheney. The two elders located a school in Richland, New York, where they were allowed to preach in the evenings. One of the first converts baptized by Elder Pulsipher in Richland was a young farmer named Wilford Woodruff, who became one of the most successful missionaries in the history of the restoration. Within one month, the two elders had baptized a number of individuals and organized a branch of the Church in Richland. [^9]

Another member who went forth to preach shortly after his conversion without, apparently, receiving a direct call from Church leaders was Brigham Young. In December 1832, eight months after his baptism, he left his home in Mendon, New York, together with his brother Joseph, to preach in Canada. Within one month these two elders baptized approximately forty-five persons in the area of Kingston and organized several branches of the Church in that region. Returning to New York, Brigham Young continued to preach and baptize in Mendon and vicinity. Before migrating to Kirtland in the fall of 1833, he completed a second mission to Canada, where he strengthened the branches he had earlier helped organize. [^10]

Called by Church Leaders

Immediately after he settled in Kirtland, the Prophet Joseph Smith commenced directing the missionary program of the Church, calling many members by name to preach the gospel. In addition, a number of the revelations recorded in Kirtland included injunctions to members to preach the gospel to the world. In the same revelation that disclosed the Law of the Lord (including the rudiments of the law of consecration and stewardship), men of the priesthood were instructed to "go forth" to declare the gospel "to the east and to the west, to the north and to the south," traveling two by two in the name of the Lord and with the power of Christ. [^11]

In the latter part of February 1831, the Prophet received a revelation instructing the elders to gather in Kirtland in June for a special conference. One of the purposes of this missionary gathering was also revealed by revelation: All elders who were worthy and able were to "go forth into the regions round about, and preach repentance unto the people." [^12] In a subsequent revelation, they were told that when the inhabitants of the land had repented, the elders were to organize churches in the name of Christ and according to the laws of the land. [^13] The following year Joseph Smith received another revelation that emphasized the responsibilities of members to be involved in missionary work: "It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor," the Lord said. [^14]

In March 1831, specific instructions were given by revelation to three elders. Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, and Leman Copley were commanded to introduce the gospel to members of the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, known as the Shakers. [^15] One of the Shaker communal societies was located a few miles west of Kirtland. In harmony with this revelation, the three men went forth and introduced the restored gospel to these Protestants. [^16]

At a conference in Kirtland in June, twenty-eight men, including the Prophet, received specific missionary callings. By revelation, these elders were called and instructed to travel to Missouri, two by two, taking different routes and "preaching the word by the way." [^17] Joseph Wakefield and Solomon Humphrey were called to labor in the east. [^18] After the twenty-eight elders arrived in Missouri, those about to return to Ohio were instructed to preach in Cincinnati and other communities they visited on their journey home. [^19]

In October 1831, William E. McLellin and Samuel Smith were called to preach in the eastern states in regions where the gospel had not yet been proclaimed. [^20] After Elder McLellin failed to magnify this calling, he was called during a conference held on January 25, 1832, at Amherst, Ohio, to preach in the Southern states along with Luke Johnson, Major N. Ashley, and Burr Riggs. [^21] During this conference, Orson Hyde, Samuel H. Smith, Lyman Johnson, and Orson Pratt were called by revelation to preach in the eastern states, and Asa Dodds and Calves Wilson were commanded to serve in the western states. [^22] Others were called to travel two by two and preach, though they were not assigned to labor in a particular geographical area. Seven pairs of elders were called to the ministry and commanded to preach from house to house, from village to village, and from city to city. [^23]

Following the Amherst conference, a few other members received missionary calls in revelations later published in the Doctrine and Covenants. In March 1832 Jared Carter was called to preach in the eastern states, in the area where he had served his first mission. [^24] Instructions revealed that month to Stephen Burnett and Eden Smith specified that although it "mattereth not" in what part of the world they preached, they were to proclaim the gospel to everyone within range of their voices. [^25] In August 1833, John Murdock was called to preach in the eastern states; [^26] and in July 1837, Thomas B. Marsh was called to preach throughout the world. [^27]

A few members were also called by revelation to serve as missionaries while they were enlisting soldiers in Zion's Camp, an army that was to travel to Missouri to aid the Saints who had been driven from their homes. Four pairs of elders, including Joseph Smith and Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight and Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith and Frederick G. Williams, and Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt were called to serve in this dual capacity. [^28]

While some elders were receiving assignments directly from Joseph Smith, others received missionary calls from lesser Church leaders. In April 1832, for example, while the Prophet was en route to Missouri, Jared Carter journeyed from Amherst to Kirtland to receive his missionary assignment. He was informed by an elders' conference that he should return to the eastern states with Calvin Stoddard, who was to serve as his companion. [^29]

Sometimes missionaries were given their choice between remaining in Kirtland and attending school or leaving immediately for the mission field. When Heber C. Kimball sought counsel on this matter in May 1836, the Prophet told him that he should make this decision himself. Elder Kimball chose to return to the mission field and immediately left for New York and Vermont. [^30]

A missionary assigned to a particular geographical area was sometimes allowed to trade assignments with another elder. During a missionary conference held in Kirtland in September 1837, 109 elders were called to preach the gospel. These men were divided into eight groups, and each group was assigned to a specific region. The elders in each division were instructed to hold their own meetings in preparation for their missions, and were told that those who desired to travel in a different district from the one to which they had been appointed could change with those of another region. [^31]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCOn February 17, 1834, the Kirtland high council, a body of twelve men, was organized. [^32] This body assisted the Prophet and his counselors in directing missionary activities of the Church. After receiving letters from the Saints in Canada requesting additional missionaries, the high council invited men to volunteer for this service. On February 20, the high council announced that Lyman E. Johnson, Milton Holmes, Zebedee Coltrin, Henry Harriman, Jared Carter, and Phineas Young should journey to Canada on condition that they settle their affairs at home. [^33]

Calling of the Twelve ApostlesOrganizational Changes in OhioHCA major reorganization of the missionary program occurred in 1835 with the calling of men to serve in the first Quorum of Seventy and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Although the precise responsibilities of members of these two quorums were not originally disclosed, individuals called to this service received general instructions to go forth and preach the gospel "in all the world." [^34] On March 12, 1835, the apostles were given specific instructions by the Prophet to commence missionary work on May 4 of that year in the eastern states. The Twelve decided that during their missionary travels, they would also conduct a series of conferences. Between May 9 and October 2, they conducted four conferences in New York, two in Maine, and one each in Canada, Vermont, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire. [^35]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCJoseph Smith again called the seventies and apostles to serve as missionaries in 1836. In March, following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the seventies, the Twelve, and other bearers of the priesthood were instructed by the Prophet "to go forth and build up the Kingdom of God." That summer, nine of the apostles fulfilled missions, and during the ensuing winter, ten apostles served as missionaries. [^36]

In the midst of economic troubles that struck Kirtland in 1837 and an internal crisis that caused serious divisions among members of the Church, the Prophet called Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde, both members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, to introduce the gospel in England. Elder Kimball recalled that one day, while they were in the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet approached him and said softly, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me, 'Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel and open the door of salvation to that nation.'" Elder Kimball was overwhelmed with this assignment. In his journal, he relates that he went into an upper room in the temple almost daily and poured out his soul to his Heavenly Father, asking for protection and power to fulfill an honorable mission. Although his family was almost destitute at the time, he determined that he should accept the mission call. "The cause of truth," he said, and "the Gospel of Christ, outweighed every other consideration." [^37]

Accompanied by two recent converts, Willard Richards and Joseph Fielding, Elders Kimball and Hyde left for England on June 13, 1837, traveling without purse or scrip. In New York City, they were joined by three recent converts from Canada: John Goodson, Isaac Russell, and John Snyder. On July 1, the missionaries set sail for England; they arrived in Liverpool twenty days later. When Elders Kimball, Hyde, and Russell boarded a homebound ship in that same harbor exactly nine months later, they left in England more than fifteen hundred members organized into many branches of the Church. [^38]

Missionary Licenses

Church authorities in Kirtland regulated missionary activities not only by issuing specific calls to preach the gospel, but also through instructions concerning ordination to the ministry and the licensing of missionaries. Some men had apparently been ordained before they were prepared to magnify their callings. In December 1833, elders were instructed not to ordain any candidate for the ministry until he had demonstrated faith, had been called and chosen by God, and could teach effectively the pure gospel of Christ. [^39] On February 12, 1836, Church leaders declared that no one was to be ordained to an office in the Church in Kirtland "without the unanimous voice" of the members of a particular quorum organized in that community. Individuals who lived in other areas were not to be ordained until they had been recommended by the voice of the branch of the Church in which they resided. This recommendation was to be submitted to the ecclesiastical body that supervised activities of local branches, and the men who were appointed by Church leaders to preside over the branches were to supervise the ordinations in their respective regions. [^40]

This coordination and regulation of the missionary program was designed to assure that only worthy members would serve as ambassadors of the Lord. The license that William Smith, brother of the Prophet, received included the following information: "This certifies that William Smith, a member of the Church of Christ, organized on the 6th of April, 1830, has been ordained a Priest of said Church, by authority of a conference held in Orange, Cuyahoga Co., Ohio, on the 25th day of October, A.D., 1831. This is therefore to give him authority to act in the office of his calling, according to the articles and covenants of said Church." This certificate, William commented, helped him better understand the importance of his mission to warn all men of the coming of Christ. "I accordingly made several circuits into the country round about," he wrote, "in order to declare unto them [people he met] the truths of the gospel." [^41]

In March 1836 the Church's First Presidency announced that a new system was to be instituted for recording "ordinations and licenses." The license identified the office of the priesthood held by the member and stated that he was authorized to preach the gospel. Clerks were to be appointed in all the conferences to record ordinations and issue a certificate to each person who had been ordained, specifying the date of the ordination and the office to which the individual had been ordained. This information was also to be sent to Kirtland, where a record of all such transactions would be kept. Church clerks were further instructed to announce quarterly, in a Church publication, the names of all who had received licenses during the preceding three months. In addition to these procedures, the presidency decreed that all bearers of the priesthood who had previously received licenses to preach were to send their certificates to Kirtland with a letter verifying their worthiness and signed by a branch clerk, after which the faithful bearers of the priesthood would receive new licenses from the conference in which they resided. [^42]

In compliance with these instructions, between March and early June 1836, 263 members received certificates from Kirtland, consisting of 244 licenses for elders, 11 for priests, 3 for teachers, and 5 for deacons. By the end of that year, 285 men had received certificates in Kirtland affirming that they were worthy to preach the everlasting gospel. [^43]

Church Schools

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCRecognizing that an educated lay ministry has an advantage over an uneducated group, several educational institutions were organized in Kirtland, designed to train men to be effective missionaries and administrators of Church affairs. Though the schools were called by different names, such as the School of the Prophets and the School of the Elders, the general objectives of the institutions remained the same: to teach men the doctrines of the kingdom and to prepare elders to go forth to serve with increased power and effectiveness. Between 1833 and 1838, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and other Latter-day Saint leaders taught in these schools many subjects, including English grammar, history, and theology. [^44]

In a letter published in the Evening and the Morning Star in Kirtland in December 1833, leaders informed the elders that they should be "exceedingly careful about unnecessarily disturbing and harrowing up the feelings of the people." "Your business," the letter continued, "is to preach the Gospel in all humility and meekness, and warn sinners to repent and come to Christ." Missionaries were further told they should avoid contention and disputes with critics who did not desire to know the truth. If individuals rejected their testimony in one area, they were to travel to another community and resume preaching. [^45]

After the Kirtland Temple became a seminary of learning for Latter-day Saints, the Prophet taught the elders various principles designed to aid them in their missionary labors. They were told "not to contend with others on account of their faith, or systems of religion." Rather, they were to "go in all meekness, in sobriety, and preach Jesus Christ and Him crucified." [^46]

Other Characteristics of the Early Missionary Program

Church leaders directing the missionary program from Kirtland not only prescribed the communities where many missionaries would labor, but sometimes also identified the duration of their calls. Sometimes elders were called to preach for a few weeks, at other times for a much longer period. Generally, however, the early missionaries traveled as the Spirit directed and terminated their missions according to their own judgment. The completion of a mission did not necessarily mean the elder's missionary service had ended. One call followed another, so that some persons were constantly preaching. They departed in the midst of harvests and during the dead of winter, during periods of personal prosperity, and at times of economic depression. Reporting on missionary activity in June 1836, William W. Phelps wrote from Kirtland to his wife in Missouri: "The Elders are constantly coming and going. Last week Bros. Simeon Carter and Solomon Hancock started for the east. Bishop Partridge and Counselor Isaac Morley will start soon," he continued. "Last week elders Amasa M. Lyman, Peter Dustin and James Emmett returned from their missions, and Elder Oziel Stemps arrived in Kirtland this week." [^47]

As missionaries went forth to proclaim the gospel, they frequently used the popular proselyting techniques of that age. They sometimes went from house to house, teaching all who would listen. In order to reach larger groups, they often made arrangements to preach in schoolhouses, courtrooms, and other public and private buildings. They often received permission to preach in Protestant meetinghouses, especially Methodist churches. They also preached in barns, in open fields, and on city sidewalks, at times engaging in public debate with members of other faiths. [^48]

Between 1831 and 1837, more missionaries served in Ohio than in any other state. This was due to the fact that more elders commenced missionary work from Kirtland than any other community, and they would preach in Ohio while traveling to other parts of North America. Moreover, many missionaries served for only a few weeks or months and of necessity concentrated their efforts in communities near their homes. Consequently, Ohio was saturated with missionaries crossing and crisscrossing its plains and valleys. In December 1831, for example, Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon preached in several communities west and south of Kirtland, including Leroy, Thompson, Rome, Bloomfield, Hiram, and Wethersfield. After returning briefly to Kirtland, Hyrum was again on the move, and on January 14, 1832, he commenced another mission to communities west of Kirtland—Cleveland, Florence, and Amherst. [^49]

Another active missionary in the 1830s was Lorenzo Barnes. He had been living in Norton, Medina (now Summit) County, Ohio, since 1816 and joined the Church on June 16, 1833. Less than one month after his baptism, he was ordained an elder and called on a mission by a council of high priests in Kirtland. He preached in various communities in Ohio in August and September, then returned to Kirtland to work on the temple for three or four weeks. That winter he taught school, but in the spring, he accepted the call to serve in Zion's Camp. Upon returning from Missouri in October, he began another mission that continued for more than six months. In the spring of 1835, having remained home for less than a month, Elder Barnes again returned to the mission field, preaching in Ohio and then in Pennsylvania for almost six months. [^50]

Even Joseph Smith served as a traveling missionary, preaching the gospel in Ohio, Canada, and the states stretching from Massachusetts to Missouri. He was the only president of the Latter-day Saints to labor as a full-time missionary while presiding over the Church. Every year the Prophet lived in Ohio, he preached outside that state and visited members in various parts of North America. In 1831, 1832, 1834, and 1837, he traveled to western Missouri to instruct the Saints who had gathered there, finally making his home in that state in 1838. [^51] Following his second trip to Missouri in 1832, he went with Newel K. Whitney to Albany, New York City, and Boston. [^52] In 1833 he served a one month mission in upper Canada. [^53] In 1834 he spent nearly one month preaching in New York State, after which he proceeded to Missouri and, before the year's end, to Pontiac, Michigan. [^54] The next year he returned to Michigan. [^55] In 1836 he went to New York City, Boston, and Salem, Massachusetts, and made a third trip to Michigan. [^56] In 1837 he traveled for the fourth time to Michigan and Missouri and made a second visit to Canada. [^57]

During these fourteen known journeys outside the state of Ohio between June 19, 1831 and March 15, 1838, the Prophet traveled about 15,000 miles, averaging some 2,000 miles each year. His trips to Missouri and to the East Coast generally kept him away from home for about two and a half months at a time, and during the years of his journeys both east and west (in 1834 and 1837), he was traveling almost five months of the year. These trips were made by nearly every conceivable mode of transportation: horseback, wagon, carriage, stagecoach, canal barge, steamboat, sailing vessel, canoe, railroad car, and on foot.

On all of these trips outside of Ohio, Joseph Smith was accompanied by other members of the Church. Sidney Rigdon was his most frequent companion, traveling with the Prophet on seven of the fourteen journeys. Newel K. Whitney journeyed with the Prophet on his two long trips in 1834, his excursions to Missouri and the East Coast. Oliver Cowdery accompanied him during two of his trips to Michigan and on his journey to Salem. Frederick G. Williams accompanied him on a march to Missouri and two trips to Michigan. Parley P. Pratt served as his missionary companion when the Prophet preached in New York in 1834 and sought recruits for Zion's Camp. In addition to the several hundred men who participated in Zion's Camp, many other Latter-day Saints traveled with the Prophet, including Edward Partridge, Joseph Coe, A. S. Gilbert, Peter Whitmer, Jesse Gause, Thomas B. Marsh, and Vinson Knight. [^58]

Preaching the gospel and visiting the Saints was not Joseph Smith's only concern during these journeys outside Ohio. During his four trips to Missouri, he improved the organization of the Church in that area, held conferences, transported supplies to oppressed members, and assisted Saints in establishing a new gathering place in Far West. In 1834 he traveled to New York State, accompanied by other missionaries, to recruit men for Zion's Camp and to raise money to help the Saints in Missouri and Ohio. During his missions to the East Coast in 1832 and 1836, he sought funds to finance Church programs in Ohio. He traveled to Michigan in 1837 on banking business and went to Canada that same year partly to secure help in redeeming the paper currency issued by the Kirtland Safety Society. [^59]

Joseph Smith's mission to Salem in 1836 was one journey that possibly began as an attempt to secure funds for the Church but became a proselyting mission. According to Ebenezer Robinson, who worked in the printing office in Kirtland, Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Sidney Rigdon traveled to Salem, Massachusetts, in the summer of 1836 after hearing a report that there was a hidden treasure there. [^60] Following their arrival in Salem, the Prophet received a revelation, dated August 6, that said, "I, the Lord your God, am not displeased with your coming [on] this journey, notwithstanding your follies." The Prophet was told that he should not be concerned about his debts, but he was to remain in the area and become acquainted with the men there. "And the place where it is my will that you should tarry, for the main," the revelation continued, "shall be signalized unto you by the peace and power of my Spirit, that shall flow unto you." [^61] In consequence of this revelation, the Prophet and his companions remained in eastern Massachusetts for about one month, traveling from house to house, teaching people and preaching publicly when the opportunity arose. [^62]

One of the most complete descriptions of a preaching mission undertaken by the Prophet Joseph Smith was his own account of his first mission to Canada in 1833. The missionary journal that he kept at that time contains an almost daily account of his activities, with about half the entries in his own handwriting and the other half in the handwriting of scribes. He had decided to travel to Canada when Freeman Nickerson, a convert from New York, and others asked him to preach to their relatives in Canada. Accompanied by Sidney Rigdon and Freeman Nickerson, the Prophet left Kirtland on Saturday, October 5, in a wagon driven by a team of horses provided by Nickerson. The following day, a Sunday, Elder Rigdon preached to a congregation in Springfield, Ohio, and that evening the missionaries attended another meeting held in the home of one of the Saints who lived in that community. [^63]

During the first week of the mission, the men traveled along the shores of Lake Erie and entered New York State, visiting members and preaching at meetings along the way. After they arrived at Freeman Nickerson's farm in Perrysburg, Cattaraugus County, western New York, on October 12, the Prophet recorded in his journal, "I feel very well in my mind. The Lord is with us, but have much anxiety about my family." [^64] Soon thereafter, he received a revelation in which the Lord assured him and Sidney Rigdon that their families were well. The Prophet was also told on this occasion that he and Sidney were to declare in that region the thoughts the Lord would instill in their hearts. While Joseph was to be given power to expound the scriptures, the revelation continued, Sidney was to be a spokesman for him and would have power to bear a strong testimony to the world. "Continue your journey," the revelation admonished, "and let your hearts rejoice; for behold, and lo, I am with you even unto the end." [^65]

On Sunday, October 13, Joseph and Sidney preached to a "large congregation" in western New York. The next day they continued their journey, arriving three days later at Mount Pleasant, upper Canada, at the home of Eleazer Nickerson, the second son of Freeman Nickerson. [^66] During the remainder of the week, with the land covered with a fresh mantle of snow, the two missionaries sought to spread the warmth of the gospel, teaching and preaching in Mount Pleasant, Brantford, Colburn, and Weathersford. [^67]

One of the highlights of this missionary experience occurred on Sunday, October 27, after Joseph and Sidney had preached to a group gathered in the Nickerson home. Twelve converts were baptized, including Freeman Nickerson's two adult sons, Moses and Eleazer, and Lydia Bailey, who later married Newel Knight in Kirtland. That evening, the Prophet conducted a confirmation meeting. After partaking of the sacrament, the missionaries laid their hands on the heads of the converts and bestowed the gift of the Holy Ghost. [^68] The success of the missionaries' labors continued the following day when they baptized two additional converts and confirmed them near the water's edge. That night they held their last meeting in the area, during which they ordained Eleazer Nickerson an elder and witnessed one of the sisters speaking in tongues. [^69]

The journey home required five days of traveling. When they arrived in Kirtland, one month after beginning this mission, the Prophet recorded in his journal his genuine love for his family and his deep gratitude to the Lord. "Found my family all well according to the promise of the Lord," he wrote, "for which blessing I feel to thank his holy name." [^70]

Missionary work in upper Canada continued after Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon left that region. Writing to Sidney Rigdon on December 20, 1833, Moses Nickerson observed: "Your labors while in Canada have been the beginning of a good work: there are 34 members attached to the Church at Mt. Pleasant, all of whom appear to live up to their profession, five of whom have spoken in tongues and three sing in tongues: and we live at the top of the mountain. For my part, I feel that I cannot be thankful enough for that which I have received: the scriptures have been opened to my view beyond account." [^71]

Moses Nickerson requested that other missionaries be sent to that area, and John P. Greene was called to serve there. Writing to the editor of the Messenger and Advocate, he reported that he had been received by the Saints with expressions of joy, and many were desirous to be instructed more perfectly in the word of the Lord. "I labored in this region about two months with a good degree of satisfaction," he stated, "and preached the gospel to many hundreds of souls." [^72]

Sacrifices of the Saints

This early missionary program could not have continued without great sacrifices by the Latter-day Saints. Periodically, women surrendered their husbands so that the men of the priesthood could carry the message of the restoration to others. While enduring great loneliness, these women managed the farms and households, taught the children, and prayed for the safe return of their husbands.

Most elders left for their missions with meager funds and relied on others to provide them with the necessities of life. Like Protestant itinerant preachers of the early nineteenth century, Latter-day Saint elders walked from house to house not only preaching, but also seeking shelter and food from generous hosts. Many of them encountered trials and hardships as they traveled without adequate food, rest, or protection from the elements. During the first mission of the Twelve, Heber C. Kimball reported he suffered from fatigue and hunger, experienced a throbbing pain from his blistered feet, and sometimes found it difficult to locate a room where he could spend the night. [^73]

Traveling without money was considered a severe trial by Lorenzo Snow, who joined the Church in Kirtland and later became president of the Church. The principle, he said, was contrary to his natural feeling of independence and self-respect. From the time he was old enough to work he had paid his own way, and, he asserted, nothing but a positive knowledge that God required such sacrifices would have induced him to become dependent on others for the common necessities of life. [^74]

A number of the early elders were almost destitute when they entered the mission field. When George A. Smith, cousin of the Prophet, received his call to the eastern United States, he was so poor that he did not own or have the means to purchase the clothes and books he'd need. Consequently, Joseph and Hyrum Smith gave him some gray cloth, and Eliza Brown made him a coat, vest, and trousers. Brigham Young gave him a pair of shoes, while his father gave him a pocket Bible and the Prophet gave him a copy of the Book of Mormon. [^75]

Erastus Snow and John E. Page were also poor when they returned to the mission field in the spring of 1836. Describing his status at the time of his departure for a mission in western Pennsylvania, Elder Snow wrote, "I left Kirtland on foot and alone with a small valise containing a few Church works and a pair of socks, with five cents in my pocket, being all my worldly wealth." Meanwhile, Elder Page informed the Prophet that he could not accept a call to preach because he was destitute of clothing. "I don't even have a coat to wear," he exclaimed. The Prophet removed his own coat, gave it to Elder Page, and declared, "Take this and the Lord will bless you abundantly." [^76]

Orson Hyde was another early convert who devoted much of his time and energy to missionary service. Every year between his baptism in 1831 and his move to Far West, Missouri, in 1838, he labored as a full-time missionary. A few days following his baptism and ordination, he was called to serve as a missionary with Hyrum Smith in northern Ohio. The following year, he received a second call to preach, this time to the eastern states with Samuel H. Smith. During this eleven-month mission (between January and December 1832), Elder Hyde traveled approximately two thousand miles, mostly by foot, in New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Maine, Connecticut, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island. In 1833, he fulfilled a mission in Pennsylvania and New York with Orson Pratt. His marriage in 1834 to Nancy Marinda Johnson, daughter of John and Elsa Johnson, did not interrupt his missionary service. In 1835, following his call to serve as one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve, the thirty-year-old apostle fulfilled a mission in Vermont and New Hampshire. In 1836, he served as a missionary in Portage County, Ohio, western New York, and eastern Canada. And in June 1837, Elder Hyde left Kirtland with Heber C. Kimball and other missionaries to introduce the gospel in England, not returning home until May 21, 1838. [^77]

Some unmarried priesthood holders practically lived in the mission field during the 1830s. Such was the case of Erastus Snow. Converted in 1832 and baptized in February 1833, he was ordained a priest in November 1834, after which he commenced preaching in his home state of Vermont. In 1835, he served as a missionary in Vermont and New Hampshire. Three months after his ordination to the office of elder in August 1836, at the age of seventeen, Elder Snow traveled seven hundred miles to Kirtland, where he attended the Elder's school, was ordained a seventy, and received a special endowment. Following his anointing in the Kirtland Temple, he returned to the mission field. Between April and December 1836, he served a mission in Pennsylvania. Summarizing this experience, Elder Snow recorded in his journal, "Absent 8 months and 14 days and traveled in all 1600 miles and preached 220 times." He further noted that he baptized during this mission about fifty individuals and obtained twenty subscriptions to the Messenger and Advocate. [^78]

Between January 1837 and June 1838, Erastus Snow continued to devote nearly all his time to missionary work. In January 1837 he preached in Ohio. Following a brief interval during which he attended school in Kirtland, he again headed west; and between May and December 1837 he served as a missionary in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Maryland, returning to Kirtland at the end of the year. In January 1838 he began another mission, serving primarily in Maryland. He was back in Kirtland on June 3, and twenty-two days later, he emigrated west, thereby changing his base of operations. [^79]

From Kindness to Cruelty

The response to the message proclaimed by the early missionaries varied from community to community and from year to year. Levi Jackman recorded in his journal that while he was preaching in Columbus, Ohio, in 1832, people were courteous and treated him with respect. [^80] One year later Evan M. Greene wrote that during his missionary experience in Pierpont, Ohio, a large congregation gathered, and though the crowd did not embrace the gospel, many seemed keenly interested in his message. [^81]

That same year, Orson Pratt preached in southern Ohio in the vicinity of Cincinnati and declared that a few believed and obeyed and many were astonished by the doctrines he disclosed. [^82]

While some Americans expressed an interest in the message of the restoration, others seemed apathetic, and a few launched aggressive campaigns against the Saints. The opposition took different forms. Sometimes critics attacked elders of the Church after members of their congregations united with the Saints, while some hostile individuals denounced the Mormons before elders had baptized even a single convert in their areas. Some missionaries complained that antagonists interrupted their preaching and accused them of being deceivers and false prophets. George A. Smith wrote that once he was heckled by a minister who commenced howling, and others joined him by gnashing their teeth, as if they were going to tear him and his companion apart. [^83] Missionaries also reported that vicious lies circulating about their beliefs and practices hindered people from considering the message of the restoration. [^84] At times elders were denied the use of halls or meetinghouses that were generally available to traveling preachers. Though elders George A. Smith and Marcellus F. Cowdery were once denied the use of a Methodist meetinghouse, a large crowd gathered, so large that they could not all have been accommodated in the church. Consequently, the missionaries preached in a nearby field. [^85]

Sometimes opponents of the Church took overt action. Mobs armed with guns and clubs threatened to beat elders and often demanded that the missionaries leave the area. Elders were also seized by angry mobs and taken before local judges, where they were accused on various false charges. [^86] Some were pelted with eggs and other objects. A few fled when mobs threatened to tar and feather them. [^87]

Parley P. Pratt recorded in vivid detail the circumstances of his first imprisonment. While traveling west from Kirtland in November 1831 during his mission to western Missouri, he stopped in the neighborhood where he had lived prior to his conversion. Some in that area desired to learn about the restoration, while others, he said, "were filled with envy, rage and lying." While staying at the home of Simeon Carter, he was arrested on "a very frivolous charge." Late one evening, he was taken by a magistrate before a judge who boasted that he would imprison the missionary in order to test his powers of apostleship. Various witnesses testified against Elder Pratt, and he was locked in a public house for the night.

In the morning the officer appeared and took me to breakfast; this over, we sat waiting in the inn for all things to be ready to conduct me to prison. In the meantime my fellow travelers came past on their journey, and called to see me. I told them in an undertone to pursue their journey and leave me to manage my own affairs, promising to overtake them soon. They did so.

After sitting awhile by the fire in charge of the officer, I requested to step out. I walked out into the public square accompanied by him. Said I, "Mr. Peabody, are you good at a race?" "No," said he, "but my big bull dog is, and he has been trained to assist me in my office these several years; he will take any man down at my bidding." "Well, Mr. Peabody, you compelled me to go a mile, I have gone with you two miles. You have given me an opportunity to preach, sing, and have also entertained me with lodging and breakfast. I must now go on my journey; if you are good at a race you can accompany me. I thank you for all your kindness—good day, sir."

I then started on my journey, while he stood amazed and not able to step one foot before the other. Seeing this, I halted, turned to him and again invited him to a race. He still stood amazed. I then renewed my exertions, and soon increased my speed to something like that of a deer. He did not awake from his astonishment sufficiently to start in pursuit till I had gained, perhaps, two hundred yards. I had already leaped a fence, and was making my way through a field to the forest on the right of the road. He now came hallooing after me, and shouting to his dog to seize me. The dog, being one of the largest I ever saw, came close on my footsteps with all his fury; the officer behind still in pursuit, clapping his hands and hallooing, "Stu-boy, stu-boy, take him—watch—lay hold of him, I say—down with him," and pointing his finger in the direction I was running. The dog was fast overtaking me, and in the act of leaping upon me, when, quick as lightning, the thought struck me, to assist the officer, in sending the dog with all fury to the forest a little distance before me. I pointed my finger in that direction, clapped my hands, and shouted in imitation of the officer. The dog hastened past me with redoubled speed towards the forest; being urged by the officer and myself, and both of us running in the same direction.

Gaining the forest, I soon lost sight of the officer and the dog, and have not seen them since. I took a back course, crossed the road, took round into the wilderness, on the left, and made the road again in time to cross a bridge over Vermilion River, where I was hailed by half a dozen men, who had been anxiously waiting our arrival to that part of the country, and who urged me very earnestly to stop and preach. I told them that I could not then do it, for an officer was on my track. I passed on six miles further, through mud and rain, and overtook the brethren, and preached the same evening to a crowded audience, among whom we were well entertained.

The Book of Mormon, which I dropped at the house of Simeon Carter, when taken by the officer, was by these circumstances left with him. He read it with attention. It wrought deeply upon his mind, and he went fifty miles to the church we had left in Kirtland, and was there baptized and ordained an Elder. He then returned to his home and commenced to preach and baptize. A church of about sixty members was soon organized in the place where I had played such a trick of deception on the dog. [^88]

Not all local officials and juries ruled against the early missionaries; some groups protected their rights. While Parley P. Pratt was preaching in Mentor, Ohio, in 1835, a band of about fifty men interrupted his preaching by playing instruments so loud that others could not hear his sermon. Then these rowdies pelted him with eggs until his body was smeared. After Elder Pratt sued the captain of this crowd, Grandison Newell, a jury ruled that Newell should pay damages amounting to forty-seven dollars. [^89]

The emphasis on missionary service continued without interruption throughout the 1830s. During a general meeting of the priesthood held in Kirtland on May 2, 1835, members agreed that when circumstances permitted, all elders should travel in the world and preach the gospel with all their might, mind, and strength. [^90] A year later, during a meeting held in the Kirtland Temple, Joseph Smith told some three hundred bearers of the priesthood that they should be actively involved in missionary work. It was not necessary, he advised, for them to go forth two by two as in former times, but they should serve "in all meekness, in sobriety, and preach Jesus Christ and Him crucified." [^91]

The challenge to carry the gospel to others did not change during the economic distress of the Church in 1837. Writing from Kirtland in the fall of that year, Marcellus Cowdery informed a friend in Virginia that "Brother Joseph and Sidney say that the elders must be out all winter this year. No compulsion, you know, but this is the word to the elders, and there are great promises to those who go and are faithful. From what I learn it seems to me that the cause is a greater one and of more intense interest to the children of men than I have ever before fully realized." [^92]

After most of the Saints emigrated from Kirtland in 1838, the headquarters of the missionary program of the Church shifted west. The geographical change, however, had little effect on the missionary policies, procedures, and techniques that had been launched in Kirtland. And the dedication and determination of the missionaries who departed from Kirtland during the 1830s remained characteristic of the restoration movement.

The Call to Preach

---
Notas:
[^1] This estimate of the Mormon and non-Mormon population in Kirtland is based on an analysis of membership information gathered by the author and tax records of Kirtland for the 1830s. See Table 2, p. 140.
[^2] For a description of themes emphasized by early Latter-day Saint missionaries, see Bitton, "Kirtland as a Center of Missionary Activity, 1830-1838," p. 504; Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," pp. 134-38; and Barbara McFarlane Higdon, "The Role of Preaching in the Early Latter-day Saint Church, 1830-1846."
[^3] HC 1:312-16.
[^4] Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 44.
[^5] Journal History, October 1, 1831.
[^6] Messenger and Advocate 2 (July 1836): 342-46.
[^7] Diary of Elias Smith, June 19 to September 19, 1837.
[^8] Journal of Orson Pratt, 1833; Watson, Orson Pratt Journals, pp. 18-22, 66-69.
[^9] Journal of Joseph Fielding, Book 1, pp. 4-7; Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 143-50.
[^10] Journal of Lorenzo Barnes, pp. 7-9. Punctuation, spelling, and capitalization in this quotation have been changed for the sake of clarity.
[^11] High Priest Minutes, Spanish Fork, February 5, 1878, Church Archives; autobiography of Jonathan Crosby, p. 3. See also autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 4, and autobiography of William Huntington, p. 2.
[^12] Autobiography of Nancy Alexander Tracy, p. 23.
[^13] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, December 1833; "Autobiography of Wilford Woodruff," Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine 3 (October 1883): 2.
[^14] "Autobiography of Wilford Woodruff," p. 2; journal of Wilford Woodruff, December 1833; Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 35.
[^15] Roberts, The Life of John Taylor, pp. 31-41; Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 135-51.
[^16] Eliza R. Snow, comp. , Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 5-7; autobiography of Eliza R. Snow, p. 8.
[^17] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 1-3.
[^18] Autobiography of Eliza R. Snow, p. 6; Eliza R. Snow, Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, pp. 5-6.
[^19] Autobiography of Phebe W. Woodruff, p. 1.
[^20] Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, pp. 30-31.
[^21] Autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington, pp. 5-6; autobiography of William Huntington, pp. 1-2.
[^22] Autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, daughter of Mary Ann Stearns Pratt, pp. 1-2.
[^23] For accounts of the journey to Kirtland, see autobiography of Zadoc Knapp Judd, pp. 4-5; autobiography of Nancy A. Tracy, p. 6; autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, pp. 2-3; autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, pp. 30-31; autobiography of Warren Foote, p. 10; Journal History, May 1, 1833; and autobiography of Benjamin F. Johnson, p. 9 (hereafter cited as "My Life's Review").
[^24] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, pp. 5-8; autobiography of Elizabeth Beswick Tanner, p. 1.
[^25] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, pp. 10-11.
[^26] HC 1:389, 410; 2:180, 253, 281; journal of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 9.
[^27] HC 2:468-69.
[^28] Journal of Samuel H. Rogers, p. 4; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 4-6.
[^29] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 4
[^30] Journal History, October 29, 1833; autobiography of Wandle Mace, p. 37; Pratt, Autobiography, p. 45. For additional contemporary accounts of Joseph Smith see "Joseph Smith, the Prophet," Young Woman's Journal 17 (December 1906): 537-48; Millennial Star 3 (May 1842): 8; and Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith, the Man and the Seer, pp. 11-17.
[^31] Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, p. 39.
[^32] Autobiography of Joseph Bates Noble, pp. 4-5; Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 4:691.
[^33] Autobiography of Jonathan Crosby, p. 13.
[^34] Juvenile Instructor 27 (January 1, 1892): 24.
[^35] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 4.
[^36] Narrative of Nancy Alexander Tracy, p. 8.
[^37] Autobiography of Mary Adeline Beman Noble, pp. 17-20; journal of Joseph Bates Noble, pp. 10-13.
[^38] In November 1835, the Prophet spent many hours discussing religion with Robert Matthias, a controversial preacher who claimed to be a prophet; Mr. Messenger, a Universalist preacher from New York; Erastus Holmes, an investigator from Newbury, Ohio; Elder Josiah Clark from Kentucky; and Henry Capron, from Manchester, New York. HC 2:304-7, 311-12, 321-22.
[^39] "An Account 'About the Mormons,'" B. C. Fowls Papers, Western Reserve Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio.
[^40] Diary of Reynolds Cahoon, p. 8; diary of Levi W. Hancock, p. 47; "Memoirs of President Joseph Smith [III] (1832-1914)," Mary Anderson, ed., Saints' Herald, November 6, 1934, p. 1413; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 224.
[^41] Geauga Deed Records, Book 20, p. 526; Book 21, p. 467; Book 22, p. 151; Book 23, p. 94; Book 25, p. 168; Book 26, p. 141.
[^42] Messenger and Advocate 2 (July 1836): 348-49. See also Geauga Deed Records, Book 24, pp. 200, 325, 361-62, 384; and Book 25, pp. 409, 620.
[^43] George A. Smith in JD 12:150.
[^44] Joseph Smith estimated in October 1835 that about 500 or 600 persons communed in the chapel, and approximately 1, 000 members lived in "the vicinity" of Kirtland (possibly meaning the Western Reserve). The estimate of 800 includes children of members and is based primarily upon an identification of families living in Kirtland in 1835. HC 2:296.
[^45] The non-Mormon population estimates for the 1830s are based upon the census reports for 1830 and 1840 and the relationship between the census and the personal property tax payers for the 1830s. The author has identified the Mormon and non-Mormon taxpayers for every year during the 1830s, based upon a comparison of those who paid taxes with various records that contain the names of members. For estimates of Church membership in Joseph Smith's history, see HC 1:366; 2:64, 296, 379, 430, 435. Some of these estimates probably do not include unbaptized children. The average Latter-day Saint family in Kirtland was slightly smaller (fewer than six members per household) than the average nonmember family in Ohio (6.3 per household). Latter-day Saints who gathered to Kirtland were also generally young (the average age of a head of a household was thirty) and their families were, therefore, not yet complete. See Mark Grandstaff, "Marriage Patterns of the Mormon Community at Kirtland, Ohio, 1830-1838," BYU Special Collections. The size of non-LDS families declined from 6.3 in 1830 to 6 in 1840.
[^46] Jenkins, The Ohio Gazetteer, p. 248.
[^47] Ibid., pp. 55, 99, 126, 158, 348, 455, 488; Marvin S. Hill, C. Keith Rooker, and Larry T. Wimmer, The Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 15.
[^48] Northern Times, October 2, 1835, pp. 3-4.
[^49] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 13.
[^50] Bitton, "Kirtland as Center of Missionary Activity," pp. 500-502. Reminiscences and journal of Lorenzo Barnes (1812-35), pp. 1-7; journal of Lorenzo Barnes, 1835-39.
[^51] HC 1:188-205, 265-72; 2:63-139, 518-28; 3:1-8.
[^52] HC 1:295.
[^53] HC 1:416-23.
[^54] HC 2:40-45, 168-69.
[^55] HC 2:253.
[^56] HC 2:463-66. Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 14.
[^57] Messenger and Advocate 3 (April 1837): 491; HC 2:502-3, 518-28.
[^58] HC 1:188-205, 265-72, 295, 416-23; 2:40-45, 63-139, 168-69, 253, 463-66, 518-28.
[^59] O. F. Whitney, "Newel K. Whitney," Contributor 5 (January 1885): 127; HC 2:40-45, 518; Messenger and Advocate 3 (April 1837): 491; autobiography of Nathan Tanner, p. 21.
[^60] Ebenezer Robinson, "Items of Personal History of the Editor," p. 12.
[^61] D&C 111:1, 8.
[^62] HC 2:464-66.
[^63] Diary of Joseph Smith, 1832-34, pp. 5-6; Dean C. Jessee and William G. Hartley, "Joseph Smith's Missionary Journal," New Era 4 (February 1974): 35. An account of this missionary experience was included in the Prophet's history; see HC 1:416-23.
[^64] Diary of Joseph Smith, 1832-34, pp. 6-7.
[^65] D&C 100:1-12.
[^66] In his diary, Joseph Smith referred to Eleazer Freeman Nickerson as Freeman A. Nickerson. Diary of Joseph Smith, 1832-34, pp. 5-6. See also Jessee and Hartley, "Joseph Smith's Missionary Journal," and Freeman Nickerson papers, Church Archives.
[^67] Diary of Joseph Smith, 1832-34, pp. 6-13.
[^68] Ibid., pp. 14-15; Journal History, October 27, 1833.
[^69] Diary of Joseph Smith, 1832-34, pp. 16-17.
[^70] Ibid., pp. 17-18.
[^71] Journal History, December 20, 1833.
[^72] Messenger and Advocate 1 (October 1834): 7-8.
[^73] "Extracts from the Journal of Heber C. Kimball," Millennial Star 26 (1864): 569.
[^74] Eliza R. Snow, comp. , Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 15.
[^75] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 29.
[^76] "History of John E. Page," Deseret News, June 16, 1858, p. 69.
[^77] Orson Hyde, "History of Orson Hyde," Deseret News, May 5, 1858, p. 45; Howard H. Barron, Orson Hyde: Missionary, Apostle, Colonizer, pp. 27-101.
[^78] Journal of Erastus Snow, pp. 2-26.
[^79] 79. Ibid., pp. 26-45.
[^80] 80. Journal of Levi Jackman, p. 3.
[^81] 81. Journal of Evan M. Greene, p. 18 (March 28, 1833).
[^82] 82. Journal History, February 16, 1835, pp. 2-3.
[^83] 83. Messenger and Advocate 1 (June 1835): 141; journal of Lorenzo Barnes (1812-1835), p. 7; George A. Smith, "My Journal," Instructor 81 (December 1946): 565.
[^84] 84. Messenger and Advocate 1 (January 1835): 63-64, memoirs of George A. Smith, pp. 30-31.
[^85] 85. George A. Smith, "My Journal," p. 564. Protestant meetinghouses were sometimes available to traveling preachers of various faiths, and the facilities in the Kirtland Temple were also made available to others. Messenger and Advocate 3 (October 1836): 395-96.
[^86] 86. Messenger and Advocate 1 (March 1835): 93; 2 (August 1836): 365-67.
[^87] 87. Autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 27. Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 128-29; John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," chapter 4.
[^88] 88. Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 48-51.
[^89] 89. Ibid., pp. 128-29; Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," pp. 153-54.
[^90] 90. HC 2:222.
[^91] 91. HC 2:431.
[^92] 92. Journal History, September 26, 1837.
