Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 8

Growth of the Church in Kirtland

Although about nine families living in Kirtland in 1830 joined the Church shortly after the introduction of the gospel in the Western Reserve, some of these members migrated to Missouri, and only a few other settlers living in Kirtland joined the Church. Most Latter-day Saints who resided there during the thirties were converts who had emigrated from other parts of North America, especially New England, Pennsylvania, and New York. In obedience to instructions from Church leaders and missionaries, between 1831 and 1838 hundreds of Latter-day Saints settled in Kirtland to live near the Prophet and among other Latter-day Saints. During this decade, all of the men who would preside over the Church during the nineteenth century, following the martyrdom of the Prophet, were converted and traveled to Kirtland, where they became acquainted with Joseph Smith. Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Lorenzo Snow settled in Kirtland, and Wilford Woodruff used Kirtland as a base for his missionary activities.

As a consequence of the constant influx of converts into Kirtland, Latter-day Saint membership in that township continued to increase. In the years 1836 to 1838, probably half or more of all residents in Kirtland were members of the Church. [^1]

The message proclaimed by the earliest missionaries and embraced by the converts of the 1830s was that the gospel of Jesus Christ had been restored to the earth through a latter-day prophet. In discussing the reality of the restoration, the missionaries informed their listeners of the disruption of the primitive church, including the alteration of beliefs and the loss of God's authority. Then they bore witness that the heavens had opened, that latter-day visions were occurring, and that the priesthood, the power and authority to act in the name of God, had been reestablished by angelic messengers. Many testified that they had experienced the power of God and knew that the gifts of the spirit evident among the early Christians were again being manifested. They also told of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and testified that this work was a new witness for Christ. [^2]

The missionaries generally concentrated on the first principles of the gospel. "Repent and embrace the gospel," they preached. When they discussed repentance, they often coupled this principle with the doctrines of faith in Christ, baptism by immersion by those in authority for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The early missionaries also warned people to prepare for the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. Sensing an urgency to his mission, Joseph Smith frequently told of the imminence of the Second Coming and of the calamities that would occur prior to the millennial reign of Christ. In a letter intended for publication, written in January 1833 to N. E. Seaton, an editor of the American Revivalist and Rochester Observer in New York, the Prophet warned: "Not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the history of our nation; pestilence, hail, famine, and earthquake will sweep the wicked of this generation from off the face of the land, to open and prepare the way for the return of the lost tribes of Israel from the north country." [^3]

Three years later, at a meeting in Norton, Medina (now Summit) County, Ohio, the Prophet discussed the prophecy of Joel concerning the destructions in the latter days and predicted that after the Saints had been gathered from among the gentiles (non-members), desolation and destruction would plague mankind, and none would escape except the pure in heart. [^4]

Missionaries carried this warning from Kirtland to many other communities. On October 1, 1831, a group of nine elders meeting in Kirtland agreed that "the duty of the elders was to go forth and warn the inhabitants of the earth of the things known in the Church of Christ in these last days." [^5] Orson Hyde echoed this theme in an article printed in the Messenger and Advocate in 1836. "God will soon begin to manifest his sore displeasure to this generation . . . by vexation and desolating wars. . . . The war cloud will arise from an unexpected quarter," he predicted. Although he suggested that righteousness could avert this destruction, he observed that "men seemed determined to pursue their own course." [^6]

The simplicity of the message declared by the missionaries is evident from notations many of them entered in their diaries. Elias Smith wrote that he preached on the "first principles," on the Second Coming, on the necessity of prophets, on the Book of Mormon fulfilling biblical prophecy (especially Isaiah, chapter 29), and on the fruits of Mormonism. [^7] Orson Pratt recorded in his missionary journal some of the themes of his sermons, noting that he frequently spoke on the restoration, miracles, the first principles of the gospel, and sometimes the gathering of the Saints and the Millennium, "the thousand years of peace." [^8] Joseph Fielding reported that he listened intently to Parley P. Pratt as he preached about the apostasy and the restoration of the everlasting gospel. [^9] Lorenzo Barnes aptly summarized the message he and many other missionaries were proclaiming to the world when he wrote:

Our manner of teaching the people generally was—in the first place to lay before them the first principles of the gospel: faith, repentance, baptism for the remission of sins, & the laying on of the hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. These we proved from the New Testament to the people were preached and practiced by the apostles and obeyed by the people in ancient days and Paul says if we or an angel from heaven preach any other let him be accursed & then by comparing the ancient order of things with the teachings of the present generation and [we] left the people to judge who were preaching the gospel that Paul did and who were preaching a different one.

Secondly showed what the power of Godliness was and who were denying it. Proved the necessity of more revelations wherever the Church of Christ is on the earth and then that according to the prophecies there will be more revelations given in the last days to bring about the great work that is to be accomplished. And then the prophecies concerning the restoration of the House of Israel and the means that God will make use of to bring about the great work. The covenants made to the Fathers, the coming of Christ, his kingdom and reign on earth &c. &c. [^10]

Early Conversions

Many of the converts who settled in Kirtland had not been fully satisfied with the religions they had previously examined and were seeking a return to New Testament Christianity. Before he met the Latter-day Saint missionaries, Zebedee Coltrin said that he longed to see the day when apostles and prophets served the people, as described in the ancient scriptures. Meanwhile, Jonathan Crosby was concerned about the numerous divisions in the Protestant faiths and their lack of spiritual power. "Where," he asked, "is the faith and gifts of the gospel enjoyed by the ancient Saints?" [^11] Nancy Alexander was also involved in a religious quest when she met the Latter-day Saint elders. Her mother was a Baptist, her aunt and uncle Presbyterians, and she was raised a Methodist by her grandmother. After studying the Bible, she became dissatisfied with the Protestant groups with which she was familiar, for none of them, she wrote, were led by apostles and prophets, and none claimed the same spiritual gifts manifest among the early Christians. [^12]

For three years prior to meeting Latter-day Saint missionaries, Wilford Woodruff had been searching earnestly for the truth. He stated that the Lord had whispered to him that His Church would be established in the last days. He had also been taught this concept by an elderly friend, Robert Mason, who lived in Connecticut and who claimed to have learned from God that since the authority possessed by the apostles of old had been lost, no one had the authority to administer the ordinances of the gospel. Believing that the doctrines and practices of the religious communities he investigated did not agree with the gospel of Jesus Christ as described in the New Testament, Wilford Woodruff refused to join any church. [^13]

When Wilford returned to his home following his daytime labors and learned that two missionaries were preaching in the schoolhouse, he hastened there immediately, praying that the Lord might reveal his will to him. Arriving at the school, he saw his brother Azmon, who had also come to hear the elders, and then located a chair near the front of the crowded classroom. Following a prayer and some congregational singing, Zera Pulsipher spoke for about an hour and a half on the restoration of the gospel. Wilford testified that during this sermon the Spirit of God rested upon him and bore witness of the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon and of the mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Immediately following the service, he began to read the Book of Mormon. While studying this volume of scripture, he declared, he received a witness that it was the word of God. On December 31, 1833, two days after he met the elders, both Wilford and Azmon Woodruff were baptized. "The snow was three feet deep," Wilford recorded in his journal, "the day was cold, and the water was mixed with ice and snow, yet I did not feel the cold." That night he was confirmed a member of the Church, and a few days later he was ordained a teacher in the newly organized branch in Richland. A few months later, after learning from Parley P. Pratt about the request for volunteers to help the Saints in Missouri, he traveled to Kirtland. There he met Joseph Smith, and he then accompanied the Prophet as he led Zion's Camp from eastern Ohio to western Missouri. [^14]

Although John Taylor was serving as a lay preacher in the Methodist church, when he heard the message of the restoration, he was not satisfied with his membership in that church. He had emigrated from England to Canada and had united with other Methodists in the Toronto area who gathered regularly to study the scriptures. During this investigation, many in this group concluded that there was a difference in the teachings of the New Testament and statements found in the popular creeds of Christendom. John Taylor and others also concluded that the churches they investigated did not possess the authority to preach the gospel and administer sacred ordinances. Shortly after listening to the "voice of warning" as declared by Parley P. Pratt, John and his wife began studying the Book of Mormon. On May 9, 1836, both joined the Church. After being ordained an elder, John went forth to preach the gospel, and in the summer of 1836 he traveled to Kirtland to meet Joseph Smith. There he received instructions to return to Canada and preside over branches of the Church that had recently been organized in that land. [^15]

Also dissatisfied with the churches of his time was Lorenzo Snow. While attending school, he concluded that "if there is nothing better than is to be found here in Oberlin College, goodbye to all religions." At the close of the school term he traveled to Kirtland, not to investigate Mormonism, but to study Hebrew and visit his sister, Eliza R. Snow. While in Kirtland, he became acquainted with Joseph Smith, studied the teachings of the Church, and decided that New Testament Christianity had returned to the earth. In June 1836, Lorenzo Snow was baptized by John Boynton, a member of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. [^16]

Not all the early converts who gathered in Kirtland joined the Church quite this readily. Brigham Young investigated for two years before consenting to be baptized. In 1830 he had secured a copy of the Book of Mormon that had been given to his brother Phineas by Samuel Smith, but he had failed to receive a witness of its authenticity in just one reading. Nevertheless, he continued to study and pray. In January 1832, he traveled to Columbia, Pennsylvania, with Phineas Young and Heber C. Kimball, a neighbor, to learn more about the restoration from members of a small branch of the Church there. Immediately after returning to his home in Mendon, New York, Brigham hitched up his horse and traveled by sleigh to Kingston, Canada, to inform his brother Joseph that he had learned that the purity of the gospel had been revealed to man. On April 14, 1832, Brigham Young was baptized and confirmed a member. [^17]

Eliza R. Snow also investigated the Church for a number of years before being baptized. During the 1820s she became acquainted with Sidney Rigdon, Alexander Campbell, and Walter Scott, and learned their views concerning the need to return to the ancient Christian order. When she initially heard that "the Lord was speaking from the heavens" to Joseph Smith, she thought this was "too good to be true." She met Joseph Smith during the winter of 1830-31, when the Prophet was visiting her family, and attempted to determine whether or not he was honest by watching his facial expressions. Believing in the admonition "Prove all things and hold fast to that which is good," she determined, following this visit, to investigate the Church. Four years later, on April 5, 1835, Eliza was baptized. She later testified that during the evening following this ordinance, she had "realized the baptism of the Spirit as sensibly as . . . that of the water in the stream." [^18]

The Gathering

Many of the converts who gathered to Kirtland made great sacrifices after joining the Church. Some were disowned by their families; others lost the companionship of former friends. Heeding the counsel of the missionaries, many left their homes and loved ones to begin a new life among the Latter-day Saints. One such convert was Phebe W. Carter, who married Wilford Woodruff in 1837. She said that she could not have left her home in Maine had she not been sustained by her faith and trust in Israel's God. "My friends marveled at my course, as did I, but something within impelled me on," she remembered. "My mother's grief at my leaving home was almost more than I could bear. . . . My mother told me that she would rather see me buried than to cast my lot among the Mormons."

"Phebe," her mother asked, "will you come back to me if you find Mormonism false?"

"Yes, mother, I will," Phebe promised.

Because she could not endure the trial of facing her parents as she left home, Phebe wrote farewells to members of her family the night before her departure. Leaving the notes of love on a table, she ran downstairs, climbed into a carriage, and began the thousand-mile journey to Kirtland. Remembering her promise, Phebe never returned to the parents whom she respected and loved dearly. [^19]

In addition to surrendering the companionship of former friends and relatives, most Saints made financial sacrifices to gather to Kirtland. Joseph Holbrook of Weatherfield, New York, for example, attempted to sell his farm after joining the Church; however, partly because other Latter-day Saints in his community had recently sold their property and immigrated to Kirtland, he was unable to find a buyer. After Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt visited that community in March 1834 and instructed the Saints to help the oppressed members in Missouri, he decided to sacrifice his farm. He sold it for a span of mares, a wagon, some harnesses, and $150 in cash, which was in his estimate one-third the actual value of the farm. He spent part of his money traveling to Kirtland and gave half his cash to Solomon Angel to help him and his family migrate to the Mormon community in western Missouri. [^20]

Another Kirtland Saint who emigrated from New York after selling his property at a financial loss was William Huntington. Following his baptism in 1835, his home in Watertown became a base of operations for many missionaries and remained so until he was instructed by Joseph Smith's father to gather with other members as soon as possible. He subsequently sold the farm for much less than anticipated and, accompanied by his family, moved to Kirtland. [^21]

The immigrants who arrived in Kirtland were of varied social, religious, and economic backgrounds and came from many different sections of the nation, especially New York and New England. Husbands and wives, bachelors and widows, the young and the aged all participated in this movement. While most were farmers, some were skilled in other occupations—teachers, ministers, blacksmiths, painters, glaziers, coopers, and carpenters. After Brigham Young preached in Vermont in 1836, Mary Ann Stearns Winters recalled, "the spirit of gathering rested upon the converts" and, agreeable to the counsel given, "all who could, migrated to Kirtland." Mary Ann accompanied her widowed mother and joined the same company in which Phebe Carter was traveling. This company was led by John Carter, who was returning from a mission in New England. [^22]

The immigrants made their way to Kirtland by many different routes and forms of transportation. Some walked hundreds of miles to reach their destination; others rode in wagons, carriages, and stagecoaches, or on horseback. Some traveled on canal barges and sailed on lake vessels. Some migrated alone or with members of their family, while others united in larger groups and formed covered-wagon trains. During this journey some spent nights in taverns, some rested in tents in the backs of wagons, and others slept on the ground in the open air. They proceeded along frozen paths, pushed their way through piles of drifting snow, forded turbulent streams, and wandered along dust-choked trails. They were sometimes plagued by pesky insects and frightened by poisonous serpents. They suffered hunger, thirst, and fatigue and endured monotonous meals. They migrated during winter storms, proceeded through spring rains, and sweated through summer droughts. Some were accustomed to hard work and the rigors of conquering a wilderness. For others, the journey was a severe trial. For all it was an exciting adventure leading to a new religious experience as well as a new life. [^23]

A few of the immigrants were fairly prosperous when they joined the Church and could afford the most comfortable means of transportation possible. John Tanner was one of the wealthiest of these immigrants. Before his conversion to the Church in 1831, he had accumulated about twenty-two hundred acres of land west of Lake George in New York. He also owned a sawmill, a gristmill, a dairy, and a large herd of cattle. He had contracted a disease that afflicted his leg, and for five months he hobbled about on crutches. Then he met two missionaries, Jared and Simeon Carter, who informed him of the restoration of God's church. After reading the Book of Mormon, John Tanner was converted, and he was immediately healed following a prayer by one of the missionaries. As he walked without crutches, he wept and praised the Lord for sending him the gospel with its accompanying blessings. [^24] He commenced selling his property, secured wagons for the journey west, and, on December 25, 1834, departed for Kirtland with three other families, making a party of forty-five. Because of his wealth, he was able to help these families and others whom they met on the journey to Kirtland. [^25]

Since there were two gathering places for the Saints in the 1830s, some who arrived in Kirtland remained only briefly before continuing on to Missouri, while others settled in the Kirtland area. A few immigrants who could not decide where they should gather sought counsel from Church leaders. Some were instructed to proceed to Missouri, and others, such as John Tanner, William Huntington, and James Lake, were directed to remain in Kirtland. [^26]

Although some Latter-day Saints purchased land in Kirtland, the majority of the members there lived on farms purchased by the leaders of the Church. By the end of 1836, most of the Church property had been settled, and there was relatively little room for additional families who could not afford to purchase farms of their own. Consequently, Church leaders began asking members who could not support themselves not to emigrate, and encouraged the branches to assume responsibility for providing the necessities of life for the needy. [^27]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCMeeting the Prophet

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCMany persons traveled hundreds of miles to Kirtland simply to meet Joseph Smith. Most of these visitors had been baptized by Latter-day Saint missionaries, but some delayed this ordinance until after they had conversed with the Prophet; then, following additional investigation, they were baptized in the east branch of the Chagrin River. A number of visitors returned home, sold their farms, and then began the hegira that led them back to Kirtland or to the other gathering place of the Saints in western Missouri. [^28]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCMost of these travelers had never before seen a man who claimed to be a prophet of God, and they approached Kirtland with various attitudes concerning the proper appearance and conduct of such a man. In Kirtland, the Prophet was likely to be found working in the fields, attending school or church meetings, or relaxing with his family. Early in November 1832, shortly after the death of his first wife, Miriam Works Young, Brigham Young, accompanied by Joseph Young and Heber C. Kimball, left his home in Mendon, New York, and traveled 325 miles in Kimball's wagon to meet Joseph Smith. When they arrived in Kirtland, they learned that the Prophet was chopping wood in a field behind the Whitney store. Guided by the sounds of the striking ax, the men hastened toward the east branch of the Chagrin River, where they found the Prophet working with his brothers. [^29] There stood Joseph Smith, dressed like any common working man of his generation. He was larger, however, than most of his contemporaries, standing six feet tall and weighing about two hundred pounds. Well-built, he was closely shaven and appeared strong, active, and handsome. His complexion was light, his eyes blue, and his hair light brown. The visitors were not disappointed in the appearance or comportment of the man they had come to see. [^30]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCWhen Wilford Woodruff met Joseph Smith for the first time, in April 1834, he also found the leader engaged in physical activities. "My first introduction was not of a kind to satisfy the preconceived notions of the sectarian mind as to what a prophet ought to be, and how he should appear," Wilford commented.

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCIt might have shocked the faith of some men. I found him and his brother Hyrum out shooting at a mark with a brace of pistols. When they stopped shooting, I was introduced to Brother Joseph, and he shook hands with me most heartily. He invited me to make his habitation my home while I tarried in Kirtland. This invitation I most eagerly accepted, and was greatly edified and blest during my stay with him. He asked me to help him tan a wolfskin which he said he wished to use upon the seat of his wagon on the way to Missouri. I pulled off my coat, stretched the skin across the back of a chair, and soon had it tanned—although I had to smile at my first experience with the Prophet. [^31]

Joseph Bates Noble remembered working with the Prophet when he first became acquainted with him. Arriving in Kirtland in the summer of 1833, less than a year after his conversion, he went to Joseph Smith and informed him that he was planning on staying there for a few days. The Prophet invited Noble to join him as he headed for the hay fields. For six of the nine days that Joseph Noble remained in Kirtland, he worked with the Prophet and listened to his testimony concerning the reality of the restoration. The powerful conviction Noble gained helped sustain him as he moved from New York to Ohio and then joined other Latter-Saints in their march to Missouri, their flight to Illinois, their trek across the Plains, and their colonization of the Great Basin. [^32]

Almost two years after his conversion, Jonathan Crosby rode to Kirtland to meet the Prophet and to find a place where he and his wife could settle. Immediately after making arrangements to stay in the Johnson Tavern, he expressed his innermost desire: "I must go and see the Prophet of God first of all." Learning where the Prophet lived, Jonathan hastened to the home and was welcomed by Joseph Smith. They had a cordial conversation, the Prophet asking Jonathan to relate to him the incidents leading to his conversion. Some time after this conversation, Jonathan recalled his impressions of the Prophet: "He didn't appear exactly as I expected to see a Prophet of God. However, . . . I found him to be friendly, cheerful, pleasant, [and] agreeable. I could not help liking him." [^33]

Joseph Smith was not always busy when immigrants and visitors arrived in Kirtland. Louisa Y. Littlefield recalled that he sometimes awaited the arrival of travelers who were coming to the community. As visitors arrived, she related, "Joseph would make his way to as many of the wagons as he . . . could and cordially shake the hand of each person." He was especially interested in children, she observed. He would seek out the children and babies, blessing the infants and taking the young children by the hand and speaking especially to them. [^34]

Some of the converts testified that when they first met Joseph Smith, they received a powerful witness that he was a man of God. Brigham Young declared that when he first shook hands with the Prophet his joy was full, for he received a testimony, by the spirit of prophecy, that this was a prophet of God. [^35] Nancy Alexander, who was converted in 1834 and who immigrated to Kirtland in the spring of 1835, testified that when she and other members of her family first met Joseph Smith, they were convinced that "he was inspired of God." [^36]

Not all the members who eventually gathered to Kirtland had their first meeting with Joseph Smith in that community. Mary Beman, a young schoolteacher living in Avon, Livingston County, New York, who married Joseph Bates Noble, recalled that in the spring of 1834, before she joined the Church, she beheld for the first time "a Prophet of the Lord." At that time Joseph Smith was engaged in missionary work and occasionally stayed in the Beman home. "I can truly say," she wrote, "at the first sight [of Joseph Smith] . . . I had a testimony within my bosom that he was a man chosen of God to bring forth a great work in the last days." She also remembered the Prophet's persuasive testimony concerning the truth of the Book of Mormon, a witness that left a lasting impression on her mind. She further related that she appreciated cooking for and serving food to the missionaries and enjoyed many interesting conversations with the Prophet and the other traveling elders. [^37]

Some of the visitors who traveled to Kirtland during the 1830s to meet the celebrated Mormon prophet were not members of the Church. He spent many hours discussing the distinguishing aspects of the restored gospel with ministers, teachers, adventurers, and curiosity seekers. [^38] He frequently succored and entertained in his home both members and nonmembers. "He was a . . . friend to the poor and needy," one nonmember wrote, "and many a weary-foot-sore traveler has been the recipient of his bounty." [^39]

Impact of the Gathering

As a result of the flow of immigrants into Kirtland, there was a constant need for places to house them. Many resided with other Saints until they could secure homes of their own. The first major gathering place of the Saints in Kirtland was the Isaac Morley farm; although Morley moved to Missouri in 1831 and sold a portion of his land in Geauga County, he retained a tract of approximately eighty acres, which was farmed for a brief period by other members. Some members lived on the flats near the Newel K. Whitney store. Following Joseph Smith's residency in Hiram and his second trip to Missouri in the summer of 1832, the Saints provided him and his family with an apartment in the Newel K. Whitney store. The Smiths occupied part of the first floor and the all of second floor of the building. [^40]

After the Church secured the Frederick G. Williams and the Peter French farms on the plateau south of the meandering branch of the Chagrin River and decided to build a temple there, the main gathering place for the Saints in Kirtland shifted from the Morley farm and flats to the fertile land near the temple site. Not all Latter-day Saints, however, settled near the temple. Many continued to live near the Chagrin River or in other parts of the township. Heber C. Kimball settled near a creek southwest of the Morley farm, while John Tanner, Artemus Millet, and Eliza R. Snow secured land south of the Williams farm. In October 1836 another large farm became available when the Church purchased from Peter French approximately 240 acres in the southwestern section of Kirtland Township. [^41]

By the summer of 1836, the land stretching approximately one-quarter of a mile from the East Branch of the Chagrin River to the temple on the hill was dotted by small wooden homes, "generally small and inelegant," and occupied primarily by Latter-day Saints. This pattern of dwellings continued for about two miles south of the temple. A village was laid out on the plateau where the temple was built, with streets crossing each other at right angles. Most of the lots contained half an acre, and in 1836 a lot sold for fifty-five to two hundred dollars. [^42]

Because of the lack of economic opportunities in Kirtland, some of the early converts who immigrated to Geauga County chose to settle in nearby towns rather than the community where the Church leaders resided. The Prophet advised the Saints not to seek employment elsewhere, but to remain in Kirtland. George A. Smith recalled that some members did not follow his counsel, preferring to settle in Chagrin, Painesville, Cleveland, and other nearby communities to gain some temporary economic advantages. Many of these settlers, he concluded, eventually drifted away from the Church. [^43]

Although the Latter-day Saint population grew slowly in Kirtland during the years 1831 and 1832, the town experienced a rapid increase of Saints beginning in 1833. Most of the New York Saints who had immigrated to Geauga County in the spring of 1831 and some of the old Kirtland residents who joined the Church immigrated to Jackson County, Missouri, that summer. Jackson County continued to be the main gathering place for the Saints until the fall of 1833; and within two years—between the summer of 1831 and the summer of 1833—more than eight hundred Saints settled in western Missouri, while only a few convert families established their homes in Kirtland. In 1832 approximately one hundred members resided in that community, compared to some twelve hundred nonmembers.

Several forces combined, however, to stimulate a remarkable growth of Church members in Kirtland beginning in 1833. After construction began on the temple in the summer of 1833, there was a need for laborers and craftsmen to assist in building a "house for the Lord." In November of that year Latter-day Saints were driven by incensed mobs from Jackson County, temporarily interrupting the flow of Saints to that region. Meanwhile, missionaries continued to encourage new members to gather in Ohio or Missouri. Consequently, in the mid-1830s Kirtland was a major gathering place for Latter-day Saints. In 1835 about 900 members were living in Kirtland with another 200 or more living near that township. [^44] Three years later, more than 2,000 members were living in Kirtland and vicinity. While the non-Mormon population of that township probably remained between 1,100 and 1,300 from January 1833 to January 1838, the Latter-day Saint population increased between 200 and 500 annually, with the greatest growth occurring in 1835, 1836, and 1837. [^45] During a five-year period (1833 to 1838) approximately 70 Latter-day Saint families arrived in Kirtland every year and in some years 100 families settled there or near the temple. This substantial immigration significantly changed the religious complexity and settlement pattern of a town that reported 1,000 inhabitants in 1830 and approximately 3,000 in 1837. [^46] By 1837 there were about 300 homes in Kirtland, 3 churches, and 1 tavern or hotel. Kirtland was larger than Chardon, Painesville, Akron, Canton, Warren, and Youngstown and was not much smaller than Cleveland or Dayton. [^47]

Accompanying the remarkable growth of population in Kirtland during the 1830s was an increase in the number of businesses, especially those owned and operated by Latter-day Saints. In October 1835 one group of Latter-day Saints advertised their businesses in the Northern Times, a newspaper published every Friday evening by Frederick G. Williams. Sarah S. Johnson announced that she had recently opened a new millinery and dress shop a few rods west of the printing office, featuring dresses, bonnets, and other items in harmony with the latest eastern ladies' fashions. Frederick G. Williams, a botanic physician, advertised a list of medicines he had for sale. Others advertised that they had facilities to tan hides and produce leather or to make furniture, and some enumerated goods available in their mercantile stores, from axes and bricks to barrels and tubs. [^48] Latter-day Saints also owned a brickyard, a printing office, an ashery, a tannery, a shoe shop, a forge, a pottery firm, a carriage shop, and a steam sawmill. Meanwhile, non-Mormons owned several mercantile firms, a sawmill, a gristmill, a carding mill, and a clothing and shoe factory. [^49]

Growth of the Church in Kirtland

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 88:119.
[^2] D&C 38:32. See also D&C 95:8.
[^3] Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1833.
[^4] Benjamin Johnson, "My Life's Review," pp. 10-11.
[^5] HC 1:349. See also autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 19.
[^6] HC 1:335.
[^7] HC 1:336; autobiography of Joel Hills Johnson; Benjamin Johnson, "My Life's Review," pp. 10-11; Robert Kent Fielding, "The Growth of the Mormon Church in Kirtland, Ohio," p. 81.
[^8] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 230-31.
[^9] D&C 82:11-12.
[^10] D&C 92:1-2; 96:6; Fielding, "Growth of the Mormon Church in Kirtland, Ohio," p. 81.
[^11] Benjamin Johnson, "My Life's Review," pp. 10-11.
[^12] HC 1:335; Geauga Deed Books, Book 17, p. 32; Book 18, p. 487; Book 19, p. 203; D&C 104:20; Fielding, "Growth of the Mormon Church in Kirtland, Ohio," p. 80.
[^13] D&C 95:3, 11-17.
[^14] HC 1:342-43, 349-50, 353-54.
[^15] HC 1:353; "Lorenzo Dow Young's Narrative" in Fragments of Experience: Sixth Book of the Faith-Promoting Series, p. 42; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 10.
[^16] HC 1:353; Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 12.
[^17] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 230.
[^18] Autobiography of Truman O. Angell, p. 4.
[^19] "Extract from Journal of Elder Heber C. Kimball," Times and Seasons 6 (January 15, 1845): 771.
[^20] Autobiography of George W. Johnson, p. 2.
[^21] Ohio Observer (Hudson), August 11, 1836; Cincinnati Journal and Western Luminary, August 25, 1836, p. 4.
[^22] Orson Pratt in JD 14:273.
[^23] Brigham Young in JD 1:133-35; HC 1:400; Journal History, July 23, 1833. According to George A. Smith, the twenty-four elders who participated in the service in which the cornerstones were laid according to the order of the holy priesthood were Joseph Smith, Jr., Hyrum Smith, Joseph Smith, Sr., Newel K. Whitney, Orson Hyde, Frederick G. Williams, John Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Samuel H. Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, Joseph C. Kingsbury, Joel H. Johnson, Don Carlos Smith, William Smith, Gideon Carter, Solomon Humphrey, Edmund Durfee, Harpin Riggs, Sylvester Smith, Joseph Coe, Jared Carter, Jacob Bump, Levi W. Hancock, and David Elliot.
[^24] Heber C. Kimball in JD 10:165; HC 2:161.
[^25] Heber C. Kimball in JD 10:165-66. See also "Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6 (April 15, 1845): 867.
[^26] Autobiography of Artemus Millet, p. 1.
[^27] HC 1:342; D&C 90:28-30.
[^28] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, pp. 25-27.
[^29] HC 1:349-50. A copy of this letter is located in the Church Archives. See also Oliver Cowdery to John F. Boynton, May 6, 1834, Church Archives.
[^30] HC 2:24-25.
[^31] HC 2:34-35, 239, 252, 375.
[^32] Oliver Cowdery to John F. Boynton, May 6, 1834, Church Archives.
[^33] Phinehas Howe Young, "History," Millennial Star 25:390-91.
[^34] HC 2:44.
[^35] HC 2:175.
[^36] HC 2:234, 281, 287-88.
[^37] HC 1:347; 2:288, 293; D&C 94:13-14.
[^38] The Orson Pratt Journals, p. 26; HC 1:451, 465.
[^39] HC 2:2. See also "History of the Church," Book B, Agenda, p. 4, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives.
[^40] HC 1:418; 2:169. See also Oliver Cowdery to Ambrose Palmer, October 30, 1833, microfilm copy, Church Archives; HC 1:417-19, 465; 2:142, 169-70, 384-85.
[^41] The first issue of the Evening and Morning Star printed in Kirtland was dated December 1833. In October 1834, the first issue of the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate appeared. The Latter-day Saint press in Kirtland continued to print material for the Church until December 1837, when this printing establishment was "burned to the ground." HC 2:528.
[^42] HC 2:142, 169.
[^43] HC 2:64. See also chapter 11 in this work.
[^44] HC 2:167. See also "History of Orson Pratt," Deseret News, June 2, 1858.
[^45] Autobiography of William Burgess, Jr., pp. 1-2. See also autobiography of William Draper, p. 1, and "Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6 (April 15, 1845): 867.
[^46] Mrs. Peter S. Hitchcock, "Joseph Smith and the Kirtland Temple," Historical Society Quarterly, Lake County, Ohio 7 (November 1965): 3.
[^47] Ibid.; Harry Black, Kirtland Temple, p. 10. Black walnut, oak, cherry, and white wood were used in the construction of the temple.
[^48] HC 2:363; Black, Kirtland Temple, p. 13; autobiography of Artemus Millet, p. 6. Although tradition says that women gave their china and glassware to the building project so that it could be crushed and mixed with the stucco, there are no known contemporary accounts relating to this sacrifice. "There is no doubt that dishes and glassware were mixed with the stucco, but whether they were old or discarded dishes or the ladies' best is not known." Linda K. Newell and Valeen T. Avery, "Sweet Counsel and Seas of Tribulation," BYU Studies 20 (Winter 1980): 155-56.
[^49] HC 2:363; Hitchcock, "Kirtland Temple," p. 129. The two contracts that were issued for the plastering of the temple are the only known contracts granted to members of the Church for laboring on this temple.
