Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 9

A Temple on a Hill

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOne of the most imposing early nineteenth century structures in Ohio is a stately temple located on a plateau overlooking a meandering branch of the Chagrin River. This building, erected by Saints at the direction of the Prophet, is a remarkable symbol of faith, determination, and sacrifice. Though few in number and lacking the wealth of the opulent merchants of the East and the aristocratic planters of the South, the Saints pooled their energies and resources and within three years, despite harassment from threatening crowds, built a sacred house of the Lord where they could study, worship, and obtain a special gift from God.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCLess than two years after his arrival in Kirtland, Joseph Smith received a revelation that commanded the Saints to build a sacred temple in that community. The revelation, given in December 1832, directed that members of the Church were to organize and "establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God. " [^1] During the ensuing summer, they further learned that they would receive in the Lord's house an "endowment," an unusual gift or blessing from God. Undoubtedly, some of them recalled that as early as January 1831, when the Saints were commanded to gather in Ohio, they were told that there they would receive an endowment from on high. [^2]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe revelation instructing the Saints to build the Kirtland Temple presented major challenges. In addition to the need for architectural plans and materials for the construction of the building, they had to obtain land near the construction site where the laborers could live. Moreover, there was a need for money to purchase land and materials, food, clothing, and shelter.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe problems seem overwhelming when one considers the relative wealth of the membership in Kirtland in the early 1830s as reflected by land and tax records. In the spring of 1833, shortly after the revelation to build the temple, only ten Latter-day Saints were known to have been assessed a property (land) tax or a personal property tax (a tax on cattle, horses, and merchandise). Four of these men were assessed a tax on land (one of them, Isaac Morley, lived in Missouri), and six were assessed a tax on cattle and horses. This taxed property amounted to approximately 189 acres, representing only 1.2 percent of the assessed land in the township. Nearly 184 acres of this land consisted of two Church farms, the Isaac Morley and the former Peter French farms. Four additional acres belonged to Newel K. Whitney and one to Selah Griffin.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCChurch leaders did not begin paying taxes on the 143-acre Frederick G. Williams farm until 1834. Apparently some of the Saints residing in Kirtland lived on Church farms, and most of them did not own cattle. Except for Newel K. Whitney's assessment on his merchandise, not one of the Saints who were assessed a personal property tax in that year paid a tax on land, and not one of the members who paid a tax on land paid a personal property tax, indicating that the animals belonged to members who did not pay land taxes. [^3]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Latter-day Saints were so poor and so few in number early in 1833 that, according to Benjamin F. Johnson, when construction on the temple began, "there was not a scraper and hardly a plow that could be found among the Saints" to dig the foundation. [^4] "Notwithstanding the Church was poor," Joseph Smith observed, "yet our unity, harmony and charity abounded to strengthen us to do the commandments of God." [^5]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCSecuring Land for the Temple

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCIn the spring of 1833, the Saints concentrated on purchasing land where a temple could be built and where workers could erect homes. On March 23, 1833, a committee comprising Joseph Coe, Moses Dailey, and Ezra Thayer was appointed to secure land for the building of a stake of Zion in Kirtland. Thayer reported shortly thereafter that the Peter French farm could be purchased for five thousand dollars. Following the report, Sidney Rigdon ordained Ezra Thayer and Joseph Coe as general agents of the Church to buy this property. [^6]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Peter French farm was situated immediately north of the Frederick G. Williams property and included land in lot 30, a small piece of lot 31, and most of the land in lot 17 with the exception of business property located at the crossroads and the industrial land situated near the river. The farm property was being used for farming and provided excellent lots for homes on the crest of the plateau, below the hill, and near the main businesses and mills of Kirtland. Church leaders were especially interested in the clay deposits located there. A brick kiln had already been built on this property, and it had furnished the bricks for the spacious French home, located south and across the street from the Newel K. Whitney home. [^7] Although some Latter-day Saints thought the temple would be built on a lot within the Frederick G. Williams farm, after the area was surveyed members learned that the temple site would actually be located on the western edge of the French farm. [^8]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCPrior to the purchase of the French farm, Joseph Smith, Newel K. Whitney, Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, and Oliver Cowdery (the latter two being in Missouri) had already combined their economic interests and had equal claim to the properties they possessed. [^9] On March 15, 1833, Frederick G. Williams was admitted into this united order and was assigned to supervise the manufacture of bricks to be used in building the temple. After John Johnson joined the order, he helped pay the mortgage on this land, and therefore the property belonged to the United Firm. [^10] For several months workers tried to make bricks, but Benjamin F. Johnson recalled that the plan to build the temple with brick was abandoned because not far from the temple site was a stone quarry where large rocks were conveniently available. [^11]

The temple as viewed from Kirtland Flats

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCAlthough the Saints were faced with the problem of transporting building materials from the flats up a steep hill that became muddy during wet weather, the temple was erected in a choice location on a wooded plateau immediately south of Kirtland Flats. Following its construction, the building looked like a tower overlooking the beautiful Chagrin Valley. Viewed from the flats, it appeared to be perched on top of a hill. From other parts of the community, however, the view toward the temple was downward, for some of the hills, especially to the north and east, were higher than the temple. Whether the temple was viewed from the flats or from the hills, it appeared as a majestic structure.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCIn the spring of 1833, the Saints investigated purchasing additional land on the flats, but transactions were not completed, probably owing to exorbitant prices. Other landowners were willing to sell on terms acceptable to the Church. Sixteen acres of woodland west of the Elijah Smith land was secured by Newel K. Whitney from Gideon Riggs for $550. From this and other forests, trees were cut, dragged to the river, and then floated to the mill for processing. Eventually a lumber kiln was built to properly dry the wood used in building the temple.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Church rounded out its holdings at that time by purchasing a local tannery. Sidney Rigdon was given the responsibility of directing this shop, and when the United Firm was dissolved, title to it was conveyed to him. [^12]

The Saints Rebuked

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCWithin six months after the Saints had been commanded to erect a house of the Lord, they had purchased the land but had not yet started construction. On June 1, 1833, they were chastized by revelation for not proceeding satisfactorily with the project. "Ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin," the revelation stated, "in that ye have not considered the great commandment in all things, that I have given unto you concerning the building of mine house." They were further told that if they kept the commandments of God, they would have the power necessary to construct this temple. "Let the house be built," the revelation continued, "not after the manner of the world," but "after the manner which I shall show unto three of you, whom ye shall appoint and ordain unto this power." The revelation then gave a general description of the temple. The "inner court" was to be fifty-five feet wide and sixty-five feet long. There were to be two "courts," or assembly halls. The lower court was to be dedicated as a house of worship, and the upper court was to be used as a school for the apostles. [^13]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOn May 4, 1833, Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter were appointed as a committee to obtain donations for the construction of a school for the elders. Shortly thereafter their responsibilities were increased, for not only was a schoolhouse to be included in the building that housed the printing office, but another school was to be included in the spacious temple. In June the three men were called to direct construction of the temple; on June 6, a conference of high priests voted they were to proceed immediately with this project and to obtain materials, including stone, brick, and lumber. [^14]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCConstruction of the temple began in early June. Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young and his brother Lorenzo D. Young, and Reynolds Cahoon rode south in search of a quarry where stone suitable for the temple walls might be secured. They located one about two miles from the temple site and filled Lorenzo Young's wagon with stones to transport back to the temple lot. Fifteen-year-old George A. Smith also helped haul that first load of rocks from the Stannard quarry to the temple site, after which Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon began digging with their own hands a trench where the foundation was to be laid. [^15]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCWhen construction began on the temple, detailed architectural plans were not available, but the Saints had been assured by revelation that God would endow the faithful with the power to accomplish the task. On June 3, a conference of high priests called upon members of the First Presidency, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams, to prepare the plans. [^16]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCLucy Mack Smith said that her son Joseph asked the brethren to present their views concerning a meetinghouse to accommodate the growing congregation. Some favored constructing a frame building and others suggested a log house. The Prophet reminded the men that they were not building a house for themselves but for God. "Shall we brethren build a house for our God, of logs?" he asked. "No," he replied, "I have a better plan than that. I have a plan of the house of the Lord, given by himself; and you will soon see by this, the difference between our calculations and his idea." [^17]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCAccording to Truman O. Angell, one of the supervisors in the building of the temple, the Prophet informed his counselors in the First Presidency, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, that the Lord would show them "the plan or model of the House to be built." The three men knelt in prayer, and the building appeared before them in vision. Elder Angell reported that Frederick G. Williams later described this vision in the completed temple and said that the hall where they were then standing coincided precisely with the room he had beheld in the vision. Elder Angell further stated that when someone recommended to Joseph Smith that the seats in the building be rearranged, the Prophet said that the seats were located where he had seen them in vision. [^18]

Lucy Mack Smith, Joseph Smith's mother

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOthers verified that the temple was built in harmony with a vision beheld by the Prophet. Heber C. Kimball declared that the "pattern" of the temple "was given in a revelation to Joseph Smith, Jr., Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams." [^19] George Washington Johnson, an early convert whose mother joined the Church but whose father remained a nonmember after settling in Geauga County, declared that Joseph Smith was shown in vision various details concerning the construction of the temple. [^20] Truman Coe, a Presbyterian minister in Kirtland and a critic of the Church, wrote in 1836, "The completion of the temple, according to the pattern shown to Joseph in vision, is a monument of unconquerable zeal." [^21] Another who confirmed the vision of the Prophet regarding the building of the Kirtland Temple was Orson Pratt. "The Lord," he said, "gave [the Latter-day Saints] the pattern by vision from heaven, and commanded them to build that house according to that pattern and order; to have the architecture, not in accordance with architecture devised by men, but to have everything constructed in that house according to the heavenly pattern that he by his voice had inspired to his servants." [^22]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOn July 23, 1833, six weeks after workers started digging the foundation, twenty-four men of the priesthood met on the temple site to lay the cornerstone. In order that there might be twenty-four priesthood holders participating, several men, including Joseph C. Kingsbury and Don Carlos Smith, were ordained shortly before the service. The First Presidency and three other elders commenced the ceremony by laying a stone on the southeast corner. The remaining elders were formed into three groups of six elders each, and each group laid one of the remaining cornerstones. [^23]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThroughout the summer and fall of 1833, nearly every able-bodied Latter-day Saint in Kirtland worked on the temple. Only those engaged in missionary service were excused, and many of these elders assisted in this project when they were not preaching in the mission field. Joseph Smith acted as foreman in the stone quarry and frequently worked on the construction project. "Come, brethren, let us go into the stone-quarry and work for the Lord," he would say. After the stone had been cut, it was placed on wagons and hauled to the temple site. "Every Saturday," Heber C. Kimball observed, "we brought out every team to draw stone to the Temple." Hour after hour the men worked in cutting and hauling the stone. Usually in one day they could transport to the temple site sufficient rocks to keep the masons busy for a full week. [^24]

Front hall of the temple, showing first and second floors

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe women also assisted in building the Lord's house. Emma Smith was in charge of sewing and cooking for the workers. The sisters, Heber C. Kimball recalled, made stockings, pantaloons, and jackets. "Our wives were continually knitting, spinning and sewing, and in fact, I may say doing all kinds of work! They were just as busy as any of us," he added. [^25]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCWhile plans were being prepared for the building of the temple, Church leaders sought individuals who could assist in supervising the work. Lorenzo Young informed the Prophet that he knew a skilled mason in Canada, a recent convert to the Church, who was qualified to assist in building the house of the Lord.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCHyrum Smith subsequently wrote to the man, Artemus Millet, requesting that he move to Kirtland and help in the construction project. At that time Millet was employing thirty-six Scotch masons in his own business, but he turned the business over to his family, traveled to Kirtland, and immediately began working on the temple. Later he returned to Canada, settled his business affairs, and assisted his family in emigrating to Kirtland. [^26]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThroughout the period of the building of the temple, the Church was in great financial distress. The Saints who gathered in Kirtland were unable to pay for the land they purchased in 1833, and since nearly everyone was working on the temple, funds were needed to sustain the workers. Latter-day Saints living in various parts of North America were asked to contribute to the building fund, and converts who gathered in Kirtland were requested to donate their material wealth. One of the first to contribute to this project was Vienna Jaques. After giving much of her material wealth to the Church in March 1833, she was informed by revelation that others would assist her in her journey to Missouri, and that upon her arrival in Zion, Bishop Partridge would give her "an inheritance." [^27]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCJohn Tanner also gave generously to help the Church during this period of financial distress. After migrating to Kirtland, he loaned Joseph Smith money to help pay the debt to Peter French for the temple site. He also contributed about three thousand dollars for supplies for the bishop's storehouse. To make these contributions, it was necessary for this wealthy farmer to sell his property in Bolton, New York, including about twenty-two hundred acres of land, a sawmill, and a gristmill. Throughout his residence in Kirtland, he continued to give until he had sacrificed nearly everything he owned. [^28]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe three-member building committee was to supervise the collection of contributions for the temple construction. On June 1, 1833, they issued a circular to the various branches of the Church, requesting that Church officers appoint in every locality someone responsible for securing pledges of contributions, then sending the donations to Kirtland. [^29]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCWhen leaders of the Church conducted conferences in various parts of the nation, they asked the Saints to assist in building the Lord's house through their contributions. On February 9, 1834, members of New Portage, Medina County, Ohio, were asked to build a temporary meetinghouse in their community and to send contributions to Kirtland to help build a stake of Zion there. [^30] Members of the Quorum of the Twelve were called to missionary service in 1835, and were asked to instruct members at conferences they conducted to send as much money as possible to Kirtland to help build the temple and assist the Saints. [^31]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCMeanwhile, a number of individuals were also called on missions to help raise money. In 1834, Jared Carter was sent east primarily to secure subscriptions for the house of the Lord, and others were asked to assist him in raising funds for this project. [^32] One year later, Phineas Young was called on a mission to Michigan to "collect money for the relief of the building committee in Kirtland." [^33] While Joseph Smith was in New York in 1834 enlisting recruits for Zion's Camp, he requested that the Saints not only assist their brethren in Missouri, but also lend a helping hand to the Saints in Kirtland. Since the Saints still owed Peter French $2,000, Orson Hyde was to remain in New York until he obtained the money needed "for the relief of the brethren in Kirtland." [^34]

The Kirtland Temple

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCAlthough members in Kirtland possessed little money, they contributed what they could for the building of the temple. One evening while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were contemplating their financial problems, Joseph prophesied that "in a short time the Lord would arrange His providences in a merciful manner" and send them assistance so that they might be delivered from debt. The two leaders covenanted that if the Lord would prosper them in their business and help them pay their debts, they would give one tenth of their increase to the poor of the Church. [^35]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCResponding to the plea for additional contributions, on June 18, 1835, the Saints in Kirtland subscribed $950 for the temple project. On June 25, $6,232.50 was added within one hour to the temple subscription. Additional funds were secured on September 23, 1835, when Noah Packard loaned the Church $1,000. Thirteen days later Elder Stevens loaned $600 to Frederick G. Williams and his committee, which action, according to the Prophet, "greatly relieved us of our present difficulties." [^36]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThose who labored on the temple were given some economic assistance by the Church. Bishop Whitney, for example, who was in charge of the committee's storehouse, used some of the money contributed to the Church to secure goods that could be given to the workers. [^37]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCDuring the fall and winter of 1833-34, mobs threatened to tear down the walls of the temple, and men were posted to protect the walls laid during the day. "Our enemies were raging and threatening destruction upon us," Heber C. Kimball declared. He added that for weeks some men did not remove their working clothes and slept with their rifles in their arms. [^38]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThat fall and winter, construction of the temple was delayed not only by threats of violence but also by a lack of materials and by the immediate need for a building to house a press and a school. Work began on a structure just west of the temple, with the main floor to serve as an Elders' School or School of the Prophets, and the second floor to house the printing establishment. Though the Saints concentrated for a while on building the printing office in the fall of 1833, some continued working on the temple. Between March 1833 and February 1834, Orson Pratt was in Kirtland only about two months (and boarded in the Prophet's home), but during that brief time between missionary journeys he managed to work on both Church buildings for about thirty days in November 1833. [^39]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOn October 1, 1833, Oliver Cowdery left for New York with $800 to purchase a press. He was accompanied by Bishop Newel K. Whitney, who was to secure supplies for the bishop's storehouse. [^40] Two months later, on December 18, bearers of the priesthood assembled in the printing office, which was still under construction, to dedicate the newly secured press. Publication of The Evening and the Morning Star continued under the editorship of Oliver Cowdery. Among the first publications printed were reprints of the fourteen issues of the paper that had been printed in Missouri between June 1832 and July 1833. [^41]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCDuring the summer of 1834, when the weather provided the best conditions for working on the temple, construction practically stopped as Kirtland members prepared to assist the beleaguered Saints in Missouri. [^42] They not only devoted their energies to organizing an army, but also collected money, funds that under different circumstances could have been used for building the temple. Moreover, most able-bodied men in Kirtland participated in the long march west, so that between May and September 1834, few laborers were available to work on the Lord's house. [^43]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThat fall work on the temple progressed rapidly without any further interruptions. According to a notation in Joseph Smith's diary in October 1834, "Great exertions were made to expedite the work of the Lord's House." [^44] William Burgess recalled that at that time the walls of the temple stood about four feet above the ground. During the winter of 1834-35, almost every able-bodied member of the Church again united to assist, and the walls rose rapidly. [^45]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCSince the temple walls were two feet thick and more than sixty feet high, an enormous amount of stone was needed. Most of the sandstone used in the walls was probably secured from the Stannard quarry (located two miles south of the temple in what is today the Chapin Forest near Highway 306). Some of the larger blocks were carefully tooled, and those placed above the doorways were cut in lengths of up to eight feet.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOne of the major challenges facing the builders was the raising of the huge frame, which consisted of "oak beams mortised and tenoned together and secured by wooden pins." The timbers measured ten by fourteen inches in diameter and at least fifty-five feet in length. Eight timbers, which aided in supporting the roof, were placed on stone piers in the basement and were raised so that they stood vertically seventy feet in the eaves. [^46]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCWhile some workers were hauling stone to the temple site, others were busy cutting trees in the nearby forests, taking the timber to the mills, and transporting the lumber to the temple site. The roof was made of handsplit cedar shakes. The floors were built with 11/8-inch walnut boards cut at random widths and lengths. The gables, dormers, window frames, belfry, seats, and pulpits were also constructed of wood. [^47]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCIn harmony with directions provided by leaders of the Church, two large auditoriums were built one above the other, while the third or attic floor was divided into five rooms. A small hall was constructed across the front of the temple, with steep winding stairs, flanked by artistically curved handrails, on the north and south sides of the vestibule. On the front of the temple was the inscription "House of the Lord. Built by the Church of Christ in 1834."

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCArtemus Millet and Lorenzo Young were given a contract in the amount of one thousand dollars to supervise the plastering of the temple exterior. This work was accomplished between November 2, 1835, and January 8, 1836. The stucco used on the outside walls was composed of crushed limestone mixed with clay and bluish river sand. Dishes and glassware were pulverized and mixed with the stucco so that the bluish-tinted walls glistened in the light of the sun. [^48]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCWhile the outside walls were being completed, Jacob Bump, who had received a contract for $1,500, was directing the plastering of the interior. Although most plasterers did not work during winter, Bump would build fires on the earthen floor of the basement to heat the building so that workers could work during the coldest months of the year. [^49] Workers plastered all the sidewalks and ceilings, including the ceiling on the attic floor. "A barrel vault ceiling, presumably the work of Jacob Bump, showed a foundation which was constructed not of lath, but of boards an inch or so thick set on edge in the form of the vault." [^50]

Upper auditorium of the temple

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCUnder the direction of Brigham Young, a skilled painter, workers began putting the finishing touches on the building in February 1836, using primarily a pristine white paint. On February 22 he stopped attending the Hebrew class in order to devote all his energies to painting and finishing the temple's interior. He continued working full-time on the temple until March 27, when the building was sufficiently finished to be dedicated. [^51]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCEarly in 1836, female members of the Church, under the direction of the Prophet's father, Joseph Smith, Sr., made carpets and curtains for the temple. [^52] The curtains were placed on rollers so that they could be lowered from the ceiling by ropes. When lowered, they divided the main hall into either two or four rooms (depending on the number of curtains lowered), thereby enabling members to hold separate meetings simultaneously in this one spacious hall. Curtains were also placed near the ceilings above the pulpits so that they could be lowered adjacent to the pulpits and create an atmosphere of privacy at either end of the hall. [^53]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCIn many respects, the Kirtland Temple resembled other buildings of that period, particularly some of the Congregational churches erected in New England and the Western Reserve. The rectangular building had a gabled roof, dominated by a bell tower that rose to a height of 120 feet. The outside stucco walls were painted with lines, giving the appearance of bricks. Two massive front doors, weighing about three hundred pounds each, were nine feet six inches high, five feet two inches wide, and two inches thick. Five steps led up to the doors, which opened into a ten-foot wide foyer. On the main floor, four candelabra hung by chains from the ceiling, with twelve candlestick holders in each light fixture.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCAlthough it was similar in appearance to many other houses of worship built in the early republic, the Kirtland Temple was a unique structure. [^54] Like the temple of King Solomon, it was built in compliance with the dimensions given by revelation: "Verily I say unto you, that it shall be built fifty-five by sixty-five feet in the width thereof and in length thereof, in the inner court. And there shall be a lower court and a higher court, according to the pattern which shall be given unto you hereafter." [^55]

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe building also blended various forms of architectural styles into one harmonious pattern. Colonial-styled windows behind the pulpits in the east and west ends of the two main halls blended with the general features of the building, while the five Gothic windows built on the two sides of the building, as well as the two erected at the west end of the temple, complemented the unusual columns erected in the lower hall. The lower auditorium was decorated with unusual carved columns and arches. Ionic fluted columns pointed to delicately carved arches that contained various patterns, including a Grecian egg-and-dart design cut into the wooden arch above the west window. Blossoms and a trailing vine also enriched the arches, and a design of leaves and bars decorated the capitals of the columns that rose through the main floor of the temple and stretched to the eaves of the building. [^56]

Lower auditorium of the temple. Beginning at top of west tier, letters engraved on pulpits and explanations generally given of their meanings are: M.P.C.—Melchizedek Presiding Council (presidency of the Church, which served as presidency of the Kirtland stake); P.M.H.—Presiding Melchizedek High Priesthood (Quorum of the Twelve or stake high council); M.H.P.—Melchizedek High Priesthood (representing the high priests quorum); P.E.M.—Presiding Elder Melchizedek (representing the elders quorum). Beginning at top east tier: B.P.A.—Bishop Presiding [over]Aaronic [Priesthood]; P.A.P.—Presiding Aaronic Priest; P.T.A.—Presiding Teacher Aaronic; P.D.A.—Presiding Deacon Aaronic. (Source: Clarence L. Fields, "History of the Kirtland Temple," p. 28; Times and Seasons 6 (June 1833): 786-87; Henry Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio, p. 282)

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCFour tiers of pulpits, arranged like a flight of stairs, were built on the east and the west ends of the two main halls of the temple. A table leaf in the shape of a yoke was attached to the pulpits on the lower tiers and could be raised for the convenience of administering the sacrament. The other three tiers of pulpits at each end of the temple were elevated one above another. Within each tier were three pulpits, each with a seat behind it—one for the presiding officer and the other two for his counselors. The two sets of pulpits represented the two priesthoods of the Church, the Aaronic and Melchizedek, and the initials of various officers were embossed in gold letters on each pulpit. The first or highest tier of pulpits on the west side of the building was occupied by the First Presidency, the next by the president of the high priests and his two counselors, the third by the high priests, and the fourth by the president of the elders and his two counselors. The highest tier of pulpits on the east end of the temple was occupied by the bishop of the Church and his two counselors, the next by the president of the priests and his counselors, the third by the president of the teachers and his counselors, and the fourth by the president of the deacons and his two counselors. [^57] Moveable benches enabled the congregation to face either end of the building.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCThe second story was designed for instruction and was thus constructed differently in a few respects from the first floor. Tables were available for use by students, and the pulpits on this floor were less decorative than those on the first floor.

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCOne of the most beautiful features in the temple was found behind the pulpits at the east end of the hall on the second floor. A fan-shaped window was built above three rectangular windows, with a carving of an Egyptian water vine inserted above the window. The anthemion, a Greek flower, is the keystone design of the carving. The combined effect of the windows and carving has led to its being identified as "The Window Beautiful."

Construction of the Kirtland TempleHCLess than three years after construction of the Kirtland Temple began, the Saints prepared to dedicate their temple as a House of the Lord. By sacrificing their time, talents, and material wealth, they had built, at a cost of from $40,000 to $60,000, the first temple in the dispensation of the fulness of times. [^58]

A Temple on a Hill

---
Notas:
[^1] HC 1:374-76; Evening and Morning Star 2 (December 1833): 114-15.
[^2] HC 1:374-76.
[^3] Painesville Telegraph, August 30, 1833, p. 2; Ohio State Journal (Columbus), August 24, 1833, p. 3; Cleveland Herald, August 31, 1833, p. 3. For additional information on reasons Latter-day Saints were persecuted in Missouri, see Richard L. Bushman, "Mormon Persecutions in Missouri," BYU Studies 3 (Autumn 1960): 11-20; Warren A. Jennings, "The Expulsion of the Mormons from Jackson County, Missouri," Missouri Historical Review 64 (October 1969): 42; Warren A. Jennings, "Zion Is Fled: The Expulsion of the Mormons from Jackson County, Missouri," pp. 109, 119-37.
[^4] HC 1:398. These demands were printed in many American newspapers, including Painesville Telegraph, August 30, 1833, p. 2, and Cleveland Herald, August 31, 1833, p. 3.
[^5] Times and Seasons 1 (December 1839): 18. Ohio State Journal (Columbus), August 24, 1833, p. 3, reported that the Mormon leaders were granted two hours to accept the demands of the Missourians, while a memorial prepared by members of the Church and sent to Governor Daniel Dunklin reported that the Mormon leaders were given only fifteen minutes to consider these demands. Evening and Morning Star 2 (December 1833): 114-15.
[^6] HC 1:390-91; Times and Seasons 1 (December 1839): 18; autobiography of Edward Partridge, p. 15; Painesville Telegraph, August 16, 1833, p. 3.
[^7] HC 1:399-400; Evening and Morning Star 2 (December 1833): 114-15; Evening and Morning Star 2 (January 1834): 122-23; Times and Seasons 1 (December 1839): 18-19.
[^8] Painesville Telegraph, August 16, 1833, p. 3.
[^9] Cleveland Herald, August 24, 1833, p. 3.
[^10] Ohio Argus (Lebanon), September 6, 1833, p. 3.
[^11] HC 1:417.
[^12] HC 1:446; Evening and Morning Star 2 (December 1833): 118-19.
[^13] Ibid., p. 118.
[^14] Ibid., pp. 118-19.
[^15] Ibid., pp. 118-19.
[^16] Ibid., p. 120.
[^17] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 225.
[^18] Oliver Cowdery to Elizabeth Cowdery, December 6, 1833, copy of Cowdery Letters, Huntington Library, San Marino, California; microfilm copy in Church Archives.
[^19] Joseph Smith to Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, and John Whitmer, December 5, 1833, Church Archives, cited in HC 1:448-51.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] Joseph Smith to the exiled Saints in Missouri, cited in HC 1:453-56.
[^22] Ibid.
[^23] D&C 101:1-2, 6-8.
[^24] D&C 101:16-21. See also Heber C. Kimball in JD 9:27 and Brigham Young in JD 11:324.
[^25] Joseph Smith to W. W. Phelps, January 14, 1833, Church Archives, cited in HC 1:316-17, and B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church 1:315-16.
[^26] HC 1:426-28; Evening and Morning Star 2 (January 1834): 124-25; Times and Seasons 1 (December 1839): 18.
[^27] HC 1:429-31; Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 99-100; "Philo Dibble's Narrative," Early Scenes in Church History, pp. 83-85.
[^28] HC 1:433-35; Evening and Morning Star 2 (January 1834): 125-26; Times and Seasons 1 (January 1840): 33-35.
[^29] HC 1:436-38; Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 102-3; Times and Seasons 1 (January 1840): 35; Evening and Morning Star 2 (January 1834): 126.
[^30] "Philo Dibble's Narrative," in Early Scenes in Church History, p. 85.
[^31] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 103.
[^32] HC 1:457-58.
[^33] Evening and Morning Star 2 (January 1834): 126.
[^34] Oliver Cowdery to Samuel Bent, January 7, 1834, Oliver Cowdery Papers, Church Archives.
[^35] Lyman Cowdery letter dated January 13, 1834, Church Archives.
[^36] HC 2:39; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 41-42; Pratt, Autobiography, p. 109.
[^37] Peter Crawley and Richard L. Anderson, "The Political and Social Realities of Zion's Camp," BYU Studies 14 (Summer 1974): 4, 10-11.
[^38] D&C 101:51, 55-56.
[^39] HC 2:39-40; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 41-42.
[^40] HC 1:418; 2:169. See also Oliver Cowdery to Ambrose Palmer, October 30, 1833, microfilm copy, Church Archives; HC 1:417-19, 465; 2:142, 169-70, 384-85.
[^41] The first issue of the Evening and Morning Star printed in Kirtland was dated December 1833. In October 1834, the first issue of the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate appeared. The Latter-day Saint press in Kirtland continued to print material for the Church until December 1837, when this printing establishment was "burned to the ground." HC 2:528.
[^42] HC 2:142, 169.
[^43] HC 2:64. See also chapter 11 in this work.
[^44] HC 2:167. See also "History of Orson Pratt," Deseret News, June 2, 1858.
[^45] Autobiography of William Burgess, Jr., pp. 1-2. See also autobiography of William Draper, p. 1, and "Extracts from H. C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6 (April 15, 1845): 867.
[^46] Mrs. Peter S. Hitchcock, "Joseph Smith and the Kirtland Temple," Historical Society Quarterly, Lake County, Ohio 7 (November 1965): 3.
[^47] Ibid.; Harry Black, Kirtland Temple, p. 10. Black walnut, oak, cherry, and white wood were used in the construction of the temple.
[^48] HC 2:363; Black, Kirtland Temple, p. 13; autobiography of Artemus Millet, p. 6. Although tradition says that women gave their china and glassware to the building project so that it could be crushed and mixed with the stucco, there are no known contemporary accounts relating to this sacrifice. "There is no doubt that dishes and glassware were mixed with the stucco, but whether they were old or discarded dishes or the ladies' best is not known." Linda K. Newell and Valeen T. Avery, "Sweet Counsel and Seas of Tribulation," BYU Studies 20 (Winter 1980): 155-56.
[^49] HC 2:363; Hitchcock, "Kirtland Temple," p. 129. The two contracts that were issued for the plastering of the temple are the only known contracts granted to members of the Church for laboring on this temple.
[^50] Hitchcock, "Kirtland Temple," p. 3.
[^51] HC 2:399; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 12.
[^52] HC 2:399.
[^53] Fields, "History of the Kirtland Temple," pp. 26-27. There was no bell in the tower before 1890.
[^54] Robert Winter, in "Architecture on the Frontier: The Mormon Experiment," Pacific Historical Review 43 (1974): 52, notes that "the practice of mixing Gothic and classical details, as in the Kirtland Temple, was not unknown in eastern architecture," for it was seen in buildings in New England, New York, and Pennsylvania. Therefore, the mixture of various types of architectural forms was not what was unique about the architecture of the Kirtland Temple; rather, the distinctive characteristic of this building was the precise nature of the blending.
[^55] D&C 94:4-5;1 Kings ch. 6.
[^56] Black, Kirtland Temple, pp. 13-14; Hitchcock, "Kirtland Temple," p. 3. There are thirty-two Gothic and five colonial windows in the temple.
[^57] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball (enlarged version), pp. 33-34, manuscript, Church Archives; Black, Kirtland Temple, pp. 15-16.
[^58] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball (enlarged version), p. 33; "Kirtland," Messenger and Advocate 3 (1837): 490. The major cost of the building was for the purchase of glass and special tools for cutting and carving wood.
