Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 10

Expulsion from Jackson CountyHCThe Crisis in Missouri

Expulsion from Jackson CountyHCIn the middle of August, 1833, Oliver Cowdery arrived in Kirtland from western Missouri with news of shocking events there. In July, settlers in the Independence area had banded together and demanded that the Latter-day Saints leave Jackson County. This body was not like the ordinary lawless band that ruthlessly raided frontier settlements, for it included prominent citizens, such as a county clerk, an Indian agent, a postmaster, a lawyer, a constable and deputy constable, two justices of the peace, and two merchants. [^1]

To justify their unusual demands, non-Mormons in Jackson County prepared a long list of grievances. Evidence that there was a cultural clash between the Mormons, who had come to Jackson County primarily from northern states, and other Missourians, who had come primarily from southern states, was expressed in the sentiment that the Mormons were easterners, meaning Yankees. Although many Missourians were indifferent toward organized religion, the beliefs of the Saints also fell under attack. They were denounced for believing in visions, revelations, and modern-day miracles similar to those performed by apostles and prophets of old. They were condemned not only for teaching the reality of the restoration, but also because religion was such an all-pervasive force in their lives. Moreover, they were accused of being lazy, vicious, and poor, and of tampering with the slaves of the Missourians. Non-Mormons further complained that the Latter-day Saints believed and taught that Jackson County had been given to them by the Lord. [^2]

The concept that Zion would be built by the pure in heart prior to the Second Coming of Christ was incorrectly amplified to the view that Mormons were planning on taking control of all the land and businesses in Jackson County. Were they not growing at an alarming rate? Had they not increased to about one thousand members in just two years in a county that reported three thousand citizens in 1830? And were they not pooling their property, buying goods from a Mormon store, and using the profits from their economic enterprise to purchase additional lands for the constant influx of new immigrants? Were they not thus becoming an economic and political threat? These observations, combined with vicious rumors, persuaded some of the Missourians that Mormons were ultimately planning to expel from Jackson County all who did not embrace their faith. [^3]

After listing their grievances, the settlers enunciated their demands. In a written manifesto they specified that no more Mormons were to settle in Jackson County. They further demanded that Latter-day Saints living in Jackson County pledge to sell their property and leave the county immediately. The editor of the Evening and the Morning Star must close his office and discontinue printing works related to the Church, and stores and shops owned by Church members must close immediately. [^4]

On July 20, a committee of twelve, representing hundreds of Jackson County citizens, delivered the manifesto to six Latter-day Saint leaders in Missouri. The Saints requested three months to consider the orders, since their prophet resided in Ohio, and any decisions should come from him. Their request for sufficient time to consider the demands was denied. They then asked for ten days to evaluate the decree. Again their request was denied. The Missourians granted the Saints only a few minutes to consider and accept their terms. [^5]

When the Missourians failed to persuade the Saints to accept the terms outlined in the manifesto, they returned to the courthouse, where a crowd of about five hundred awaited the response.

Angered by the Saints' refusal to accept their demands, the crowd stormed to the Church-owned printing office at the home of William W. Phelps. There they grabbed his furniture and tossed it into the yard, seized the press and threw it out the window, destroyed the type, burned papers and documents, and finally destroyed the brick home. Next they vented their fury on the mercantile establishment of Gilbert and Whitney, forcing their way into the store and demolishing the merchandise. Then they seized Edward Partridge and Charles Allen, dragged them to the public square, and demanded of them a repudiation of the Book of Mormon. When the two men refused to renounce their faith, the angry mob stripped them of their clothes and smeared their bodies with burning tar, sprinkled with feathers. [^6]

Hostilities were renewed on July 23 when a mob compelled a number of Latter-day Saint leaders to assemble in the public square and tried to force them to sign an agreement to leave the county. One group of Saints must leave before January 1 and the other before the following April, they were told. John Corrill and Sidney Gilbert could remain in Jackson County temporarily to sell the property of those who had been unable to dispose of their land prior to the expulsion from the area.

The agreement to emigrate was signed by some of the Church members, resulting in a temporary calm in Jackson County. This suspension of hostilities provided the Saints with the time they needed to notify Joseph Smith of conditions in Missouri and to await instructions from Kirtland. [^7]

Reactions in Ohio to the Violence in Missouri

When news of the attacks on the Saints in Jackson County became known in Ohio, both members and nonmembers denounced the atrocities. The most notorious anti-Mormon newspaper in Ohio, the Painesville Telegraph, summarized the news Oliver Cowdery had brought back, mentioning the destruction of the Latter-day Saint press, the tarring of Bishop Partridge, who had formerly resided in Painesville, and the promise to leave the county that the Saints had been forced to make under duress. The Telegraph stated that although the reports were presumably "magnified and exaggerated," the citizens of Jackson County had brought disgrace upon themselves by interfering with the legal rights of their neighbors. [^8]

Several other Ohio newspapers also condemned the Missourians. The Cleveland Herald reported that the circumstances were to be regretted in part because groups sometimes became stronger when they were subjected to persecution. [^9] The Ohio Argus, published in Lebanon, reported that the "outrages" seemed to be "uncongenial with the character of free institutions." This paper argued that "to say . . . that any class of free white citizens shall be deprived of 'privileges and immunities' enjoyed by other citizens—To 'prohibit the free exercise' of religion and 'abridge the freedom of speech and of the press' in this manner, is exercising a prerogative altogether repugnant to the constitution and laws of our country and contrary to the laws of civilized society." The article denounced the actions of the Missourians on the basis that America was heralded as a land of liberty. "The great characteristic of the citizens of our free country should be universal toleration," the report continued, adding that although "Mormons may have been troublesome and their doctrines may be obnoxious," the Missourians were still not justified in resorting to violent measures. Finally, the paper recommended that if the Mormons had participated in crimes in Missouri, the citizens of Jackson County should seek legal means of redress rather than resorting to the "outrages" they had committed. [^10]

Supported by a general feeling in Ohio that the rights of the Saints in Missouri had been violated, Church leaders in Kirtland agreed that their fellow members should not vacate their lands in Zion. Instructions were sent to the Missouri Saints that unless they had specifically signed a document promising they would leave, they should not emigrate nor should they sell their property in Jackson County. They were also told to seek legal redress for all crimes committed against them. [^11]

Expulsion of the Saints in Missouri

While the Saints in Kirtland were waiting for further news from Missouri, Orson Hyde and John Gould arrived with the startling report that the Saints in Jackson County had been forced to leave their homes and were fleeing across the Missouri River, wandering in an unknown wilderness. [^12] Elder Hyde vividly described some of the tragic events that led to the expulsion.

On Thursday, October 31, 1833, he reported, when the Missourians were convinced that the Mormons were not going to leave in accordance with the terms of the manifesto, some forty or fifty men attacked several homes of Latter-day Saints approximately ten miles west of Independence near the banks of the Big Blue River, destroying about a dozen homes, then seizing two Church members and beating them severely with stones and clubs. [^13]

Elder Hyde added that the following day, a mob broke into the Gilbert and Whitney store in Independence and scattered the merchandise in the street, while others destroyed Sidney Gilbert's brick home and broke windows and tore down doors in many homes of the Latter-day Saints. When Gilbert seized one of the men who had been destroying his property and took him before a local official, the man was immediately acquitted, while Gilbert was unjustly accused of illegally holding him prisoner.

According to Elder Hyde's report, another series of atrocities occurred on Saturday and Monday nights (November 2 and 4) among the settlements near the Big Blue River. On Saturday, a mob returned to that area to continue their ravages. They fired five or six shots toward the Saints, who had armed themselves, and members of the Church returned the fire and wounded one of the mobsters. Although the mob withdrew in confusion, on Monday a crowd of two to three hundred gathered again in Independence and marched toward outlying settlements near the Big Blue River. That night, in another encounter between the Mormons and the Missourians, two or three mobsters were killed, several were wounded, and about four Latter-day Saints were wounded. [^14]

On Tuesday, November 6, Elder Hyde reported, as some three hundred Missourians prepared to renew their hostilities against the Saints, members of the Church agreed to vacate their homes in Jackson County. But as they began their exodus, the mobsters struck again. The last word he heard before he left the region was that Mormon homes were being plundered, their crops were being ruined, and the Saints were fleeing for their lives, many of them penniless and without sufficient food, clothing, blankets, and other provisions. [^15]

Elder Hyde's report concluded with the observation that he had read a report in a non-Mormon publication shortly after the skirmishes, and that the writer accused the Mormons of being the aggressors, arguing that they had fired the first shot. Such an accusation, Elder Hyde insisted, was deceptive misrepresentation, for he himself had personally observed the armed mob fire five or six times before the Saints returned fire. [^16]

When they learned of the tragedy in Jackson County, the Kirtland Saints were overwhelmed with grief. Lucy Mack Smith said that when her son Joseph heard the news, "he burst into tears and sobbed aloud, "Oh my brethren! my brethren. . . . Would that I had been with you, to have shared your fate. Oh my God, what shall I do in such a trial as this!" [^17]

Oliver Cowdery was deeply concerned about the welfare of his wife, Elizabeth, as well as other members of the Church in Missouri. He did not know if Elizabeth had been killed or beaten; and if she was alive, he did not know where she might have fled. In anguish, he wrote to her, "God only knows the feelings of my heart as I address a few lines to you." He told her that he did not know where to send the letter, and that he wished that she were with him in Ohio. "My prayers ascend daily and hourly to God that you and I may be spared, and yet enjoy each other's society, in this life, in peace." Then, expressing his continued trust in the Lord amid all this adversity, he advised her, "O be faithful to the Lord." [^18]

The fears and concerns of the Saints in Ohio for their friends and loved ones in Missouri were not immediately alleviated. On December 5 a letter arrived from one of the exiled Saints, William W. Phelps, describing the exodus from Jackson County and including information not previously related by Orson Hyde. He reported that on Tuesday, November 5, after a mob of about three hundred men had gathered and threatened the Saints, the Church members agreed to leave the county. They were also forced to surrender their arms, leaving them defenseless. Then, Elder Phelps continued, "a party of the mob . . . began to whip, and even murder" members of the Church as they began the exodus from Jackson County. [^19] Although this letter substantiated Orson Hyde's report, it did not identify those who had been killed nor did it describe the status of the refugees. Details concerning the expulsion were still unknown, leaving the Kirtland Saints with much anxiety and many unanswered questions.

Responding to the Phelps letter, Joseph Smith wrote to Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, and John Whitmer in Missouri and noted that since he had received conflicting and unsubstantiated accounts of the tragedy there, it was difficult to advise them. "We can only say," he said, "that the destinies of all people are in the hands of a just God." He then told them to "collect every particular, concerning the mob, from the beginning" and to send to Kirtland a "correct statement of facts, as they occurred," in order that Church officials in Ohio could present to the public "correct information on the subject." He further requested that the leaders in Missouri apprise the Kirtland Saints of the conditions under which the refugees were living, including "their means of sustenance." He advised the exiled Saints not to retaliate against their aggressors by renewing hostilities. Instead of fighting, they were to try to purchase land in Clay County and to live there during the emergency. "It is your privilege," he suggested, "to use every lawful means in your power to seek redress for your grievances from your enemies, and prosecute them to the extent of the law." Although the Prophet desired to send monetary help to the oppressed Saints in Missouri, he concluded that members of the Church in Ohio could not at that time do so, for they were "deeply in debt" and did not know the means by which they could extricate themselves. [^20]

The first news from Missouri that brought some relief to the troubled minds of the members in Kirtland arrived on December 10. In a letter mailed from Liberty, Missouri, on November 19, Edward Partridge, John Corrill, and William W. Phelps wrote that they knew of only one Latter-day Saint, Andrew Barber, who had been killed during the mobbing in Jackson County, and one other member, Philo Dibble, who had been seriously wounded. [^21]

Upon learning there had not been a mass slaughter of the Saints in Missouri, Joseph Smith immediately prepared another letter to the members there. "O brethren, let us be thankful," he wrote, "that it is as well with us as it is, and we are yet alive." Nevertheless, he lamented, word of the sufferings of the Saints in Missouri "awakens every sympathy of our hearts; it weighs us down; we cannot refrain from tears." Again he asked the Saints to seek redress through legal channels and instructed William W. Phelps to write a reliable history of their persecution in Jackson County. "We must be wise as serpents," the Prophet admonished, "and harmless as doves." [^22]

Although Joseph Smith admitted in his letter of December 10 that he did not know why God had suffered so great a calamity to strike Zion, on the sixteenth of that month he received a revelation that partly explained the reasons the Lord did not intervene and assist the Saints during the crisis in Missouri. This revelation informed the Saints that the Lord "suffered the affliction to come upon them . . . in consequence of their transgressions." Some of the failings of the Saints were then identified: "Behold, I say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances." Since the afflicted Saints "were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord," the revelation continued, the Lord was "slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble. In the day of their peace they esteemed lightly [his] counsel; but, in the day of their trouble, of necessity they feel after [him]." [^23] Church members also learned from the revelation that even though the Saints had been driven from Jackson County and had been scattered abroad, the location of Zion had not been changed. They were instructed to settle in other areas, but they were also told that eventually the "pure in heart" would return and establish Zion in Jackson County. [^24]

One year before Joseph Smith recorded this revelation, he had written to the members in Zion and warned them not to pollute their inheritance. "If Zion will not purify herself," he predicted, the Lord "will seek another people; . . . they who will not hear His voice must expect to feel His wrath. Let me say unto you," the Prophet continued,

seek to purify yourselves, and also all the inhabitants of Zion, lest the Lord's anger be kindled to fierceness. Repent, repent, is the voice of God to Zion; and strange as it may appear, yet it is true, mankind will persist in self-justification until all their iniquity is exposed, and their character past being redeemed. . . .

Our hearts are greatly grieved at the spirit which is breathed both in your [William W. Phelps's] letter and that of Brother Gilbert's, the very spirit which is wasting the strength of Zion like a pestilence; and if it is not detected and driven from you, it will ripen Zion for the threatened judgments of God.

In conclusion, he reminded the Saints that "God sees the secret springs of human action, and knows the hearts of all living." [^25]

Confirmation of the Earlier Reports

As Church members in Ohio continued to gather information concerning the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, they learned that while the reports of Orson Hyde and William W. Phelps contained some errors, their general descriptions of the oppression that had occurred in Jackson County were confirmed. They learned that on Thursday, October 31, about ten homes in the Whitmer settlement west of the Big Blue River had been demolished by a mob of some forty or fifty persons and that border ruffians had brutally whipped several Latter-day Saints. The new reports also confirmed the mobbings in Independence on Friday, November 1, when insurgents stoned houses, broke windows, and tore down doors of many Latter-day Saint homes and partly demolished the Gilbert and Whitney store. When one of the mobsters had been taken before the justice of the peace, Samuel Weston, he was immediately released. Since local officials had refused to protect the Saints, the members in Kirtland were convinced that Elder Hyde was correct when he said that Saints in Zion had armed themselves to defend their lives and property. [^26]

The Kirtland Saints were also able eventually to reconstruct events that had occurred on November 4, 5, and 6. On Monday, November 4, after a hostile group had captured a Mormon ferry on the Big Blue River, Missourians rode to the Wilson store about one mile away and began intimidating women and children. At sunset, armed Saints encountered the ruffians and a pitched battle ensued. The mob fled with the Latter-day Saints in rapid pursuit. In this battle, two non-Mormon Missourians were killed, one Latter-day Saint, Andrew Barber, died, and four members were wounded: Henry A. Cleveland, Jacob Whitmer, William Whitney, and Philo Dibble. A surgeon told Elder Dibble that he would not survive, but after Newel Knight performed a faith-healing ordinance on his behalf, his body discharged a ball and buckshot and the pain suddenly left. Although he recovered, he was crippled for the remainder of his life. [^27]

Following the battle of November 4, Mormons were accused of being the aggressors in that skirmish, and some of the men who had routed the mob near the Blue River were accused of murder. A rumor was circulated that Latter-day Saints were attacking non-Mormons, while another story said the Saints planned to join forces with Indians to drive all non-Mormons from Jackson County. When a militia arrived in the area, supposedly to establish and maintain peace, the commanding officer, Colonel Thomas Pitcher (who was later accused of being one of the mobsters), commanded the Saints to relinquish their guns and leave the state. The Saints assumed that the militia would also seize the arms of their enemies and protect them as they emigrated from the county. [^28] But the next day, armed mobocrats attacked defenseless Saints in many sections of Jackson County, and hundreds were forced to flee from their homes. The disorganized exodus continued on November 7. Men, women, and children fled in every direction; husbands were separated from their wives and children from their parents, as the Missouri River was lined on both sides with destitute emigrants. While rain descended in torrents, the refugees clustered in tents and around fires or tried to rest on the rain-soaked earth. Some members escaped with their household goods, while others lost nearly everything they owned. Though only one Latter-day Saint had been killed by mobsters, others were beaten and molested by the ruthless assailants. [^29]

Disturbing news continued to flow to Ohio from western Missouri in 1834. Philo Dibble reported that all his household furniture, hogs, cows, and crops had been destroyed or stolen, and he failed to recover any of these possessions. [^30] Parley P. Pratt described how all of his provisions for the winter were stolen or destroyed, some of the grain he had left in his fields was harvested by his enemies, his home was burned to the ground, and his fruit trees and other improvements were ruined. He reported that many other Saints in Jackson County experienced similar losses and that the bandits boasted they had burned 203 homes belonging to members of the Church. [^31]

As Latter-day Saints in Kirtland pieced together information about the tragic expulsion of their compatriots in Jackson County, they also attempted to learn what action those in Missouri were taking to receive recompense for the crimes committed and what steps were being taken for them to return eventually to their homes in Jackson County. In a letter dated December 15, 1833, William W. Phelps notified the Prophet that Missouri Governor Daniel Dunklin had been informed about the plight of the Saints and had indicated that he intended to conduct a court of inquiry. Until the Saints secured protection, however, they felt they could not attend this hearing, Elder Phelps added, for if they returned, they faced death at the hands of the mob. A militia in the upper counties was ready to move upon the order of the governor; however, Elder Phelps concluded, "The Governor is willing to restore us, but as the constitution gives him no power to guard us . . . we are not willing to go." [^32]

In a letter written in December to Oliver Cowdery and published in Kirtland in the January issue of the Evening and the Morning Star, John Corrill, a counselor to Bishop Edward Partridge, reported that the governor had manifested a willingness to restore the Mormons to their lands if they requested such help, but such assistance would be "of little use unless he could leave a force there to protect us." The mob has sworn that "three months shall not pass before they will drive us [out] again," he noted, adding that permanent protection could not be provided unless the governor secured such authorization from the state legislature, which would require the calling of a special session of that body, or unless the president of the United States ordered an army into the area. John Corrill also stated that he did not believe a grand jury could resolve the problems that afflicted the Missouri Saints. An impartial grand jury could probably not be formed, he surmised, and even if such a body were created and the insurgents convicted and imprisoned, others would undoubtedly tear down the jails and liberate them. He concluded his lengthy treatise with a persuasive recommendation: The Latter-day Saints could return to their homes if they were "organized into independent companies" and were "armed with power and liberty" to defend themselves. To accomplish this objective, he advised that the numerical strength of the Saints be increased. The enemy was twice as numerous as those whom they expelled, and if the Saints could not effectively protect themselves after returning to their homes, their return would merely lay the "foundation for another scene of murder and bloodshed." [^33]

This letter and similar ones convinced members of the Church in Kirtland that Governor Dunklin would probably help the Saints return to their lands from which they had been driven. "Intelligence from the west informs us that there was a prospect that the governor of Missouri was about to reinstate the brethren upon their lands," Oliver Cowdery wrote on January 7, 1834. [^34] Six days later, Lyman Cowdery wrote that he had been "informed that the governor of that state [had] offered to reinstate" the Mormons on their lands and had issued a proclamation to call out three hundred men from adjoining counties in order that a court of inquiry could be conducted. Although Lyman apparently believed this account, he admitted the report had not been confirmed. [^35]

A Plan of Action Evolves

When Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight arrived in Kirtland on February 22, 1834, members of the Church there learned that no definite action had yet been taken by Governor Dunklin. Two days later, the recently organized high council assembled in Joseph Smith's home along with other bearers of the priesthood to listen to the reports of these men and consider the requests of the Missouri Saints for help. [^36] As they reviewed the reports, they apparently recognized that an impartial court of inquiry could not be conducted at that time in Jackson County, thereby hindering an attempt to insure reconciliation by legal channels. For three months no progress had been made toward securing protection for the Saints if they returned to their lands, they concluded, so unless an army of the Saints was sent to Missouri to provide the necessary protection, within a brief period the members in Missouri would again be driven from their homes. [^37] Thus the leaders in Kirtland realized that they had a responsibility to assist their afflicted brethren. In the revelation that had identified the reasons the Lord was slow to hearken to the prayers of the Saints, a parable described how a nobleman's vineyard, which had not been sufficiently protected, was invaded by an enemy, and the nobleman's servants subsequently fled. The nobleman, after rebuking his servants for failing to comply with all his instructions, commanded one of his men to gather the remainder of the servants, to take "all the strength" of his house, which consisted of his warriors, and to then redeem his vineyard. [^38]

After hearing the reports of Elders Pratt and Wight, Joseph Smith arose and announced that he was going to Zion to assist in its redemption. He then requested the council to approve his decision, and the priesthood bearers sanctioned the resolution without a dissenting vote. When he called for recruits to travel with him, about thirty or forty men immediately volunteered. The elders considered whether they should follow a land route or travel primarily on canal barges and river boats, and they determined to travel by land. They also unanimously agreed that Joseph Smith should serve as the "commander-in-chief of the armies of Israel," an army that was to be called "Zion's Camp." [^39]

The Crisis in Missouri

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 103:21-23, 29-30, 35-40.
[^2] D&C 103:30-34.
[^3] D&C 103:11-15, 20.
[^4] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 109; Orson Pratt Journals, p. 35.
[^5] Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, p. 30.
[^6] HC 2:44; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 42-43.
[^7] HC 2:44.
[^8] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, 1833-1837, April 1834.
[^9] HC 2:48-49. Joseph Smith had returned to Kirtland on March 28, 1834.
[^10] HC 2:50, 52; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 43-47. The Prophet also recorded in his history that about April 1, he received in letters from eastern Saints the sum of $251.60 "towards the deliverance of Zion." HC 2:61.
[^11] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 8. Charles C. Rich later served as an apostle of the Church (1849-83).
[^12] Heman C. Smith, ed., History of the Church 1:445-46, 462; Lyman Omer Littlefield, Reminiscences of Latter-day Saints, p. 29; Journal of the Branch of the Church of Christ in Pontiac, Michigan, 1834, Church Archives.
[^13] "Speech delivered by Heber C. Kimball," Times and Seasons 6 (July 15, 1845): 972; HC 2:64.
[^14] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 7-8; S. Dilworth Young, "Here Is Brigham," pp. 89-91; Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, p. 106.
[^15] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 11. For preparations for the journey west, see also Heber C. Kimball, "Journal," Times and Seasons 6 (January 15, 1845): 771.
[^16] HC 2:61; diary of Moses Martin, p. 1; journal of Wilford Woodruff, May 1, 1834.
[^17] Memoirs of George A. Smith, pp. 10-11.
[^18] "Incidents of the History of Zion's Camp," Millennial Star 26 (December 10, 1864): 793; Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 21; journal of Wilford Woodruff, May 1, 1834; diary of Moses Martin, p. 1; Wayne Allan Jacobson, "A Prosopographical Study of the Zion's Camp Marchers," pp. 17-18. On February 14, 1835, following the march of Zion's Camp to Missouri, fifty-five of the participants in this journey attended a meeting held in Kirtland, which is another indication that about fifty of the participants were Kirtland Saints. Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 147-48.
[^19] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 7; "Autobiography of Wilford Woodruff," Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine 1 (October 1883): 3.
[^20] Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon to the "Churches," May 10, 1834, Oliver Cowdery Letters, Church Archives.
[^21] HC 2:64; autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, p. 31; autobiography of Joseph Bates Noble, p. 6; Kimball, "Journal," p. 771. Nathan Baldwin wrote in his journal that the soldiers of Zion's Camp carried a small white flag with the word "PEACE" enscribed on it in large red letters. Autobiography of Nathan Baldwin, p. 12.
[^22] Wilburn D. Talbot, "Zion's Camp," pp. 35, 132-36; Times and Seasons 6 (January 1, 1846): 1074; autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, p. 9; Kimball, "Journal," pp. 771, 840; autobiography of Nathan Baldwin, pp. 9, 15.
[^23] Autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, p. 31; "Journal of the Branch of the Church of Christ in Pontiac, Michigan," on its journey to Zion, pp. 1, 8, Church Archives.
[^24] HC 2:64-87. In the initial publication of Joseph Smith's history of Zion's Camp in Times and Seasons (6 [January 1, 1845]: 1074-78), the number leaving New Portage was estimated at 150. This number has been corrected in the current edition of this history to 130, which seems to be a more accurate estimate.
[^25] Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 114-15.
[^26] This estimate is based on the assumption that about 130 men left New Portage.
[^27] HC 2:87; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 81; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 23. In addition to the 204 men of Zion's Camp listed in the History of the Church (2:183-85), three other men who participated in this march were Jesse Smith, Lewis Zobriskie, and Gad Yale. Thomas Bullock, an early LDS historian, also identified Horace Evans and Thomas Turner as participants. Meanwhile, David W. Patten and William D. Pratt had been sent from Kirtland in advance of the army, carrying dispatches to the Saints in Missouri. See appendix A. For additional information on the march of Hyrum Smith's division, see Roger Dale Lannius, "Zion's Camp and the Redemption of Jackson County, Missouri," pp. 104-5, 114-16.
[^28] HC 2:87-88. Kimball, "Journal," p. 772.
[^29] HC 2:64. See also Kimball, "Journal," p. 771. The description of the march of Zion's Camp published in Joseph Smith's History of the Church was taken primarily from the journal of Heber C. Kimball. The historians who compiled that portion of this history, in referring to Joseph Smith, used the first rather than the third person. See Dean C. Jessee, "The Reliability of Joseph Smith's History," Journal of Mormon History 3 (1976): 34-39; Howard C. Searle, "Authorship of the History of Joseph Smith: A Review Essay," BYU Studies 21 (Winter 1981): 101-22.
[^30] HC 2:73; Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 114-15; journal of Wilford Woodruff, May 1834; autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, pp. 6-7; Kimball, "Journal," p. 772; journal of Reuben McBride, p. 3.
[^31] Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 114-15.
[^32] HC 2:79-80; Times and Seasons 6 (January 1, 1846): 1076; journal of Wilford Woodruff, 1834; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 79; autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 11; Kimball, "Journal," p. 788; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 20; diary of Moses Martin, pp. 7-8; journal of Reuben McBride, pp. 3-4.
[^33] HC 2:70; diary of Moses Martin, p. 5.
[^34] HC 2:69-70.
[^35] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 25.
[^36] Ibid., p. 12.
[^37] Ibid., p. 22; diary of Moses Martin, p. 4; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 80.
[^38] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 20; Kimball, "Journal," p. 788; autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, p. 8; autobiography of Harrison Burgess, pp. 2-3.
[^39] HC 2:88-89.
