Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 11

Zion's CampHCZion's Camp Marches West

On February 24, 1834, the same day members of the Church in Kirtland decided to send an army west to assist the Saints in Missouri, Joseph Smith received a revelation concerning the recruitment and size of this army. Eight men were called by revelation to gather young and middle-aged male members and also to raise money to help the oppressed members in Missouri. One of these elders, Joseph Smith, was compared in the revelation to the servant who had been instructed by the lord of the vineyard to gather the strength of his house for the recovery of his lands. Another missionary, Sidney Rigdon, was specifically commanded to inform members in the east to keep the commandments relating to the restoration and redemption of Zion. Two other missionaries, Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, were told not to return to Missouri until an acceptable army had been organized. [^1]

By revelation, members of the Church also learned what the Lord considered a satisfactory force. The army ideally was to consist of five hundred volunteers; if five hundred men could not be recruited, an army of three hundred was to be organized; and if three hundred could not be found, then an army of at least one hundred was to be formed. The revelation further instructed the Saints to organize into companies of tens, twenties, fifties, and one hundreds. [^2]

While the Saints were receiving specific instructions by revelation concerning the organization of Zion's Camp, they were also warned that the "redemption of Zion" would be delayed if the Saints continued to "pollute their inheritance." Though members in the East were to be granted an opportunity to assist the exiles in the West, the successful completion of this mission was predicated upon their living in harmony with the commandments of the Lord. The revelation further specified that Zion would not be redeemed until after much tribulation, at which time the Lord would manifest his power. "I say unto you," the revelation read, "Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land." [^3]

Organizing the Army of Israel

For two and a half months, leaders of the Church recruited men in the East to march in Zion's Camp and concurrently gathered contributions of money and goods to help destitute members in Missouri. In the latter part of February the eight missionaries called by revelation left Kirtland and headed east. Traveling two by two, they followed different routes, "visiting the churches and instructing the people." On March 13 Orson Pratt and Orson Hyde held a meeting in New York with members of the China branch and informed them of the "necessity of obeying the parable in the revelations." According to Elder Pratt, three or four young to middle-aged men agreed that if they could arrange their business affairs, they would join this army. [^4] Joseph Holbrook recorded in his journal that the missionaries instructed the volunteers to be in Kirtland no later than May 1. He sold his property in New York for what he considered as one-third of its real value; then he, his brother Chandler, and Solomon Angel, with their families, left New York in March so that the three men could participate in the journey of Zion's Camp. [^5]

On March 17, a conference was held at Alva Beaman's home in Avon, Livingston County, New York, with six of the eight missionaries present. While preaching to members in New York, Joseph Smith talked about the expedition that was being organized and the anticipated results of this action. "The object of the Conference," he later wrote, "was to obtain young and middle-aged men to go and assist in the redemption of Zion, according to the commandment; and for the Church to gather up their riches, and send them to purchase lands according to the commandment of the Lord." [^6]

After seeking recruits and contributions in central New York, the missionaries separated and continued preaching in different regions. Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Lyman Wight traveled together as they returned to Kirtland, while Orson Pratt and John Murdock served as missionary companions, preaching along the way back to the Western Reserve. Accompanied by Henry Brown, Parley P. Pratt, who had traveled east with Joseph Smith, visited members of the Church in the Black River country of New York, where he continued recruiting, raising money, and preaching the gospel. [^7] During this part of his mission Elder Pratt met Wilford Woodruff for the first time and told the young convert it was his duty to prepare to travel to Zion. Like many other volunteers, Wilford Woodruff settled his business affairs, said farewell to relatives in Richland, and traveled by wagon to Kirtland, arriving there on April 25. [^8]

Although the initial request for volunteers was successful, Joseph Smith was not pleased with the response to the plea for help in redeeming Zion. In a letter dated April 7, 1834, and sent by the First Presidency to Orson Hyde, who had continued preaching in New York after the presidency had returned to Kirtland, the Prophet expressed his deep disappointment. "The fact is, unless we can obtain help," he lamented, "I myself cannot go to Zion, and if I do not go, it will be impossible to get my brethren in Kirtland, any of them, to go." He then suggested an economic incentive that might be coupled with a humanitarian motive to encourage the Saints to support the program. He suggested that the brethren in the East could "better themselves" by obtaining land in Missouri for "one dollar and one quarter per acre"; and by responding to this call, they could help the Missouri Saints "stand against that wicked mob." The Prophet also issued another warning to members of the Church: "Unless they do the will of God," he prophesied, "God will not help them. . . . If this Church, which is essaying to be the Church of Christ will not help us, . . . God . . . shall prevent them from ever obtaining a place of refuge, or an inheritance upon the land of Zion." [^9]

During the initial phase of recruiting, the missionaries had sought help from the Missouri Saints in eastern areas where the largest number of Latter-day Saints lived: Ohio, New York, and Pennsylvania, and eventually New England. While some of them continued to labor outside Ohio, throughout the month of April the First Presidency concentrated on efforts in northeastern Ohio. On April 17, Sidney Rigdon preached to Church members in Kirtland, urging them to continue supporting the temple project and at the same time help the distressed members in Missouri. Following these remarks, Joseph Smith asked the Kirtland Saints to contribute all they could for the deliverance of Zion, and they responded with contributions amounting to $29.68. A few days later, while presiding at a conference in Norton, Medina County, Ohio, the Prophet again asked members to sacrifice, and donations totaled $66.37 for the "benefit of the scattered brethren in Zion," and a few additional men volunteered to march to Zion. [^10]

Although most of the Kirtland Saints who participated in the march to Zion enlisted on the day the Prophet announced his decision to travel to Missouri, a few others volunteered during the two and a half months of ardent recruiting. When the initial call came, Joseph Young was engaged in a short-term mission; upon his return to Kirtland, he was encouraged by Brigham Young to enlist. Having recently married and having already served in the mission field, he hesitated to accept the new assignment. Shortly thereafter, he and his brother Brigham discussed the subject with Joseph Smith. "I want you to go with us," the Prophet told Joseph. When Brigham interrupted and said that his brother had not yet decided to join those who were marching west, Joseph Smith said, "Brother Brigham and brother Joseph if you will go with me in the camp to Missouri and keep my counsel, I promise you, in the name of the Almighty, that I will lead you there and back again, and not a hair of your heads shall be harmed." As a result of this promise, Joseph Young agreed to participate in the march to Zion and, according to Brigham Young, the three men clasped hands as a sign of confirming this covenant. [^11]

Some of the elders sought recruits for Zion's Camp in Michigan, Indiana, and Illinois. On April 21, Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight left Kirtland and followed a northern route westward, with instructions to lead those who joined them to a designated place in eastern Missouri. Traveling by wagon, they visited branches of the Church in northern Ohio, Michigan, and Illinois, and contacted members living in many settlements of the Old Northwest. About sixteen men in the Pontiac (Michigan) Branch volunteered to join the march to Zion, and three of them took their wives with them. Since their wagons were filled, these pioneers walked most of the way. As they continued west, a few other recruits, including Charles C. Rich, joined them. After crossing the Mississippi at Quincy, Illinois, this company of Zion's Camp, known as Hyrum's division, traveled to the Salt River, where they joined the much larger company directed by Joseph Smith. [^12]

Preparations in Kirtland

Though Joseph Smith was disappointed because some members did not support the call to help the beleaguered Saints in Zion, he must have been pleased with the early response of the Kirtland Saints. Nearly every able-bodied priesthood holder in that community volunteered to march to Zion. Only a few elders, including Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon, were left behind; these men were to supervise the construction of the temple and direct the affairs of the Church in Kirtland. [^13]

The call to join Zion's Camp was issued six days after Brigham Young married Mary Ann Angell; yet he was one of the first to enlist. Before answering the Prophet's call, the new couple had been busy securing a house, planting a garden, and establishing a home for Brigham's two daughters, who, following the death of his first wife, had been cared for by Vilate Kimball, wife of Heber C. Kimball. Now Mary Ann assumed these responsibilities and began preparing for the absence of her husband. [^14]

Since many of the men had to leave their families with little or no money and there would be no income while they were away, members planted gardens so the women and children could harvest corn and other crops during the army's absence. They were also busy gathering supplies for the army and for the Saints in Missouri, including clothing, bedding, food, and arms, as well as teams to transport the supplies to Missouri.

Some Saints were almost destitute at the time the armies organized to march west. Some had been serving on missions; others were still recovering from the expense of moving to Kirtland, and still others were young men who had never possessed many material goods. George A. Smith was one such person. His father furnished him with a musket, a pair of pantaloons made of bed ticking, several cotton shirts, a straw hat, a cloth coat and vest, a new pair of boots, and a blanket. He packed his blanket and extra clothes in a knapsack made of heavy checked cloth. Soon after he began the journey west, his new boots wore blisters on his feet so severe that his feet began to bleed. Recognizing his distress, Joseph Smith gave him a pair of his own boots, which provided great relief. [^15]

The March toward Zion

On May 1, 1834, the first volunteers for the redemption of Zion marched from Kirtland. This strange group of approximately twenty soldiers, clad in a variety of homespun clothes, were armed with muskets, pistols, swords, bayonets, and dirks (daggers), and accompanied by four baggage wagons. Although May 1 had been designated as the day when the army of Israel was to begin the one-thousand-mile journey to Missouri, most of the men in Kirtland were not ready to begin the march. Consequently, the Prophet instructed the advance party to proceed south to New Portage, where they were to wait for others to join them. [^16]

Four days after the first volunteers departed for New Portage, the Saints in Kirtland gathered to listen to their Prophet. Standing in the shade of the new school, which was under construction, Joseph Smith addressed most of his remarks to the men who had enlisted in Zion's Camp. According to George A. Smith, the Prophet "bore testimony of the work which God had revealed through him" and impressed upon the members of Zion's Camp "the necessity of being humble, exercising faith and patience and living in obedience to the commands of the Almighty." He also promised them that if they "were united and exercised faith, God would deliver them out of the hands of their enemies" and all would "safely return." He warned the men not to murmur like the children of Israel against the Lord and His servants, for he said that if they forgot God and treated His commandments lightly, the Lord "would visit them with His wrath and vex them in His sore displeasure." [^17]

On Monday, May 5, the Prophet assumed his new role as commander-in-chief of the armies of Israel and led about eighty-five men (which, coupled with the twenty who had departed on May 1, was the minimum number set by revelation) from Kirtland. About half of this segment of the army consisted of Kirtland Saints; the others had been gathered from the eastern branches of the Church. Most of these men and others who later joined them were young. George A. Smith and Benjamin Winchester were but sixteen. The average age of the men of the army was about twenty-nine, the same age as their leader, Joseph Smith. A few of the men were much older. Samuel Baker from Norton, Ohio, was nearly eighty; Martin Harris and Freeman Nickerson were in their fifties; and Frederick G. Williams was forty-six. [^18]

While some of the men feared that they might never again embrace their wives and children, others marched briskly in anticipation of an exciting and rewarding adventure. Wilford Woodruff, who had departed with the group that left on May 1, pitched his tent following the first day's journey, then climbed a hill overlooking the camp of Israel and knelt in prayer. He recalled, "I rejoiced and praised the Lord that I had lived to see some of the tents of Israel pitched, and a company gathered by the commandment of God to go . . . and help redeem Zion." [^19]

Although the men marched from Kirtland with mixed emotions, they were united in the belief that not only would they aid the stricken Saints in Missouri with money and supplies, but also they would help them regain their land in Jackson County. These two objectives were announced in a letter from Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon, dated May 10, 1834, and addressed to the membership of the Church. They informed the Saints that the money carried west by the army would help the exiled members in Missouri purchase wheat and supplies. They also wrote that after Zion's Camp had joined the exiled Saints, members of the Church in Missouri would inform the governor that they were prepared to return to their lands. The governor, they suggested, would then be bound to call out the militia to protect them as they returned to their homes in Jackson County. Other members of the Church would subsequently immigrate to Zion so that the Saints there would be sufficiently strong to protect themselves. Since the members of Zion's Camp would eventually return to their families in the East, Elders Cowdery and Rigdon instructed the members in Kirtland to begin preparing immediately, as circumstances permitted, to move to the West. [^20]

After staying overnight in a barn in Streetsboro, Joseph Smith led the main segment of Zion's Camp to New Portage, about fifty miles south of Kirtland, arriving there late in the day on May 6. Here he reorganized the army. In addition to instructing the men concerning safety, comfort, and discipline, he divided them into companies of approximately twelve each. Then he told each company to elect a captain, who was to assign each man his responsibilities. In most companies there were two cooks, two firemen, two tentmakers, two watermen, two wagoneers and horsemen, one runner, and one commissary. Captains were appointed to command not only groups of from ten to twelve, but also groups of fifty and eventually one hundred men, according to the ancient order of Israel. [^21]

At New Portage, the men agreed to consolidate their money into a general fund. Frederick G. Williams was appointed paymaster, with responsibility for managing the fund. Though contributions of members to the Missouri Saints were also placed in the general fund, accounts of these contributions were kept separately. Detailed records of expenses were kept during the journey of Zion's Camp, and at the time the army was disbanded, $233.70 remained, to be redistributed among the veterans. [^22]

Recruits traveling with their families were instructed not to place their money in the general fund. Most of these men anticipated settling in Missouri and were therefore accompanied during the long march by their wives and children, who did the cooking and washing and performed other similar services. [^23]

On May 8, the army of Israel resumed their long march west. Volunteers had continued to arrive at the encampments south of Kirtland, enlarging the number of troops to over 130, with twenty baggage wagons. After moving through the heavily wooded sections of northern Ohio stretching from Wooster to Bucyrus, the army passed the Indian settlements on the Sandusky Plains. As they proceeded through a long range of beech woods, their wagons became mired in mud, but, aided by heavy ropes, the men managed to pull the wagons along the muddy trails. Continuing south, they passed Bellfontaine, marched through the fertile Mad River Valley, and proceeded to Dayton. On May 17, after wading across the Miami River, they crossed the state boundary.

As the army marched across the open plains of Indiana, they suffered from the blazing heat of the sun and the relentless pain of blistered, bleeding feet. On May 21, they passed through Indianapolis, and three days later they crossed the Wabash River by ferryboat. May 30 found them marching through Springfield, Illinois, and on June 4, they camped near the banks of the Mississippi. Though they were aware of the threats that Missourians would not permit a Mormon army to enter their state, the men of Zion's Camp spent two days ferrying across the Mississippi and then continued west across the rolling fields of Missouri. [^24]

As Joseph's division of Zion's Camp continued its relentless march, it was gradually strengthened with additional volunteers, arms, stores, and money. Recruiting officers continued to seek help from Latter-day Saints living in the states where the army was traveling. One of these recruiting officers was Parley P. Pratt. Instead of marching with other members of the army, he rode from one farmhouse to another, locating Latter-day Saints and asking them to help their oppressed brethren in the West. Sometimes he would ride all day and night to remain near the army, and on occasions he would ride into camp, enjoy breakfast with the other troops, secure a fresh horse, and then resume his recruiting activities. [^25] As a consequence of the efforts of various recruiters, about fifty additional men joined this division of Zion's Camp. [^26]

On June 7, Joseph's division encamped in some woods near a spring at the Allred Settlement, where the Salt River Branch of the Church was located. The next day, a Sunday, as the men were resting and attending to their religious duties, they were joined by Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight, who were leading the other company of about twenty men. Zion's Camp had reached its maximum numerical strength; the army of Israel now numbered about 207 men, 11 women, and 11 children. [^27] They now had twenty-five baggage wagons. After the two divisions combined, the Prophet continued as commander-in-chief, with Lyman Wight now serving as second officer. Following another reorganization, in harmony with the pattern established at New Portage, the army proceeded west. [^28]

In many respects the daily routine of Zion's Camp was similar to that of other armies. Since the wagons were loaded with supplies, nearly every able-bodied person walked along the muddy and dusty trails, many of them carrying knapsacks on their backs and guns in their arms. They marched from morning till late afternoon or early evening, when they would make camp, generally near a body of water. Guards would be posted around the encampment at night. There was little time for relaxation, for when the men were not busy marching, caring for their animals, or preparing meals, they were drilling and preparing for action when they reached their destination.

Their diet was also monotonous. They purchased flour along the trail, baked their own bread, and cooked their own food, "generally, which was good," observed Heber C. Kimball, "though sometimes scanty." In addition to flour bread, they sometimes had johnnycake and corn dodgers. [^29]

In other respects, Zion's Camp was not like an ordinary army. These men were heading west in compliance with what they believed to be a commandment of the Lord, and they were being led by a prophet of God. During the journey their commander-in-chief preached the doctrines of the kingdom to them. Every morning and evening the soldiers offered prayers in their tents. On Sunday, the men would usually rest and hold meetings, where they would hear sermons and partake of the sacrament. Moreover, many members of this army had implicit faith that the Lord was accompanying them. As recorded in Joseph Smith's history, "God was with us, and His angels went before us, and the faith of our little band was unwavering. We know that the angels were our companions, for we saw them." [^30]

Parley P. Pratt recalled that on one occasion, while recruiting men for the army, he had traveled all night. About noon the following day he stopped to rest and turned his horse "loose from the carriage to feed on the grass" growing on a broad, level plain. He fell into a deep sleep, he said, and "might have lain in a state of oblivion till the shades of night had gathered" about him. "I had only slept a few moments till the horse had grazed sufficiently," he reported, "when a voice, more loud and shrill than I had ever before heard, fell on my ear, and thrilled through every part of my system." This voice said, "Parley, it is time to be up and on your journey." Shocked into a sudden awareness that he had fallen asleep on an isolated plain, he sprang to his feet, located the horse, and continued his journey. When he rejoined Zion's Camp later and informed Joseph Smith of the incident, the Prophet testified that he had been awakened by "the angel of the Lord who went before the camp." [^31]

According to Heber C. Kimball, during the journey the Prophet not only reported that angels accompanied the camp, but he also told the men about an unusual vision he received. On June 2 the army crossed the Illinois River at Phillips Ferry; and while encamped on the west bank of the river the next day, Joseph and some of the brethren climbed to a high mound on the bluffs above the river. Some of them dug into the mound and discovered a large skeleton with an arrow lodged between its ribs. As the men continued their journey, some desired to know more about the person who had been killed by that arrow. After inquiring of the Lord, Joseph Smith learned by means of vision that he had been an officer who fell in battle, in the last destruction among the Lamanites, and his name was Zelph. "This caused us to rejoice much," Heber C. Kimball commented, "to think that God was so mindful of us as to show these things to his servant." [^32]

While the march was tedious, the participants were constantly on the alert due to threatening rumors and reports. When they learned that antagonists in Indianapolis had boasted that Zion's Camp would not pass through that community, the Prophet assured his followers that the army would proceed through Indianapolis without anyone being aware of their passage. He divided the men into small groups, and some of them hid in the baggage wagons while others walked leisurely through the town, taking different routes. After they regrouped on the other side of town, the Prophet noted that their enemies were still awaiting an approaching army. [^33]

Fearing that others might organize and attack the Saints if they learned the reasons they were marching to Missouri, the members of Zion's Camp generally tried to conceal their identity and objective. Sometimes spies approached the army in an attempt to learn about their mission, and when they asked the Saints where they were from, the soldiers, who were not in uniform, would reply, "Some are from Maine, others are from Massachusetts, New York, and Ohio." Sometimes they were even less specific and would say, "We are from the East." When asked where they were going, they would reply, "We are heading west." Sometimes strangers would also inquire concerning their leader, and the men would respond, "We have no one in particular." When this question was pursued, members of the camp would answer ambiguously, "Sometimes one and sometimes another takes charge of the company so as not to throw the burden upon any one in particular. [^34]

As Zion's Camp continued its long march west, many factors combined to create internal disorder. Many of the men were fearful of the many possible dangers ahead. Some grumbled because of changes in their accustomed life-style, and a few questioned the decisions of the leaders. There were also personality clashes. For forty-five days the men lived and marched together, covering twenty-five to forty miles most days, and suffering from thirst, hunger, and fatigue. Many complained of "sore toes, blistered feet, long drives, scanty provisions, poor quality bread, bad corn dodger, 'frowsy' butter, strong honey, [and] maggoty bacon and cheese." The grumblers often complained to Joseph Smith and blamed him for their discomfort. George A. Smith observed that "even a dog could not bark at some men without their murmuring at Joseph." [^35]

One member of Zion's Camp who exhibited a complaining disposition was Sylvester Smith. On May 14, two days after George A. Smith noted that for the first time in his life he ate raw pork and bread for breakfast, the army ran out of its supply of bread. The commissary had anticipated purchasing bread at Bucyrus but was unable to do so, and the army had no baking utensils. While some men were sent ahead of the army to purchase additional provisions, Zion's Camp was temporarily short of food, and Sylvester Smith grumbled because of what he considered to have been a failure in making proper preparations for the journey. [^36]

Several weeks later Sylvester Smith threatened to kill Joseph Smith's dog because it had kept him awake during the night. Since the Prophet was deeply attached to the watchdog, which had been given to him by Samuel Baker, he was alarmed by Sylvester's threats. One verbal exchange followed another until Joseph accused Sylvester of being possessed of a wicked spirit. Then according to George A. Smith, Joseph prophesied "in the name of the Lord that if [Sylvester] did not get rid of that spirit, the day would come when a dog would bite him, and gnaw his flesh and he would not be able to resist it." Sylvester retorted, "You are prophesying lies in the name of the Lord " [^37]

Sylvester Smith was not the only member of Zion's Camp who murmured and quarreled with others. On June 3 the Prophet stood on the back of a wagon and scolded the men for their lack of humility, their murmuring and fault-finding, and their "fractious and unruly spirits." Because of these transgressions, he said that some of them would die like sheep with the rot. However, if they humbled themselves before the Lord and repented, the scourge would be alleviated, though not entirely nullified. Concluding his chastisement, the Prophet said, "As the Lord lives, this camp will suffer for giving way to their unruly tempers." [^38]

The problems of Zion's Camp were compounded as the men continued their march across the state of Missouri. While at Salt River, Joseph Smith had sent Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde to Jefferson City, the capital of Missouri, to ascertain if the governor "was ready to fulfill the proposition which he had previously made to the brethren to reinstate them on their lands in Jackson county, and leave them there to defend themselves." [^39] When the two men arrived at the capital, Governor Dunklin expressed concern over reports that the citizens of Jackson County were armed and were prepared to attack the Mormons if they returned to that county. In his first direct communication with Latter-day Saints, he advanced a position concerning his executive authority from which he refused to deviate. In a letter addressed to the leaders of the Church in Missouri, dated February 4, 1834, he had argued that the Latter-day Saints had the right to arm themselves, to organize a militia for their protection, and to return to their homes in Jackson County. Nevertheless, he said, "as to the request for keeping up a military force to protect your people, and prevent the commission of crimes and injuries, were I to comply, it would transcend the powers with which the Executive of this state is clothed." Moreover, he reasoned that the U.S. Constitution gave Congress the power to call the militia to assist the state executive in cases of "actual or threatened invasion, insurrection or war, or public danger, or other emergency . . . as [the president] may deem expedient." But, he insisted, "none of these, as I consider, embraces this part of your request." In other words, Governor Dunklin concluded that military force could be used legally to quell mobs but not to restore justice. Therefore, he suggested that Latter-day Saints use the courts to secure redress for any crimes committed against them. [^40]

When they learned that Governor Dunklin would not militarily intervene to help the Saints in the repossession of their Jackson County property, many Church members believed that they had been betrayed. Parley P. Pratt asserted that the governor had refused to carry out the duties of his office because he feared such action would lead to civil war. As he left the governor's office, Elder Pratt mumbled, "The poor coward ought, in duty, to resign; he owes this, morally at least, in justice to the oath of his office." [^41]

Governor Dunklin not only dealt a serious blow to the hopes of the Latter-day Saints by refusing to call out the militia, but he also put another impediment in their path by announcing on June 6 that Mormons had "no right to march to Jackson county in arms," a direct contradiction of his letter of February 4. According to his executive pronouncement, unless men received an order from or were given permission by the commander-in-chief, they did not have the right to " 'levy war' in taking possession of their rights, any more than others should in opposing them" while they returned to their lands. [^42]

Without the protection of a militia and without a strong armed force of Latter-day Saints to defend them as they crossed the Missouri River, there was apparently no hope that the Saints would be able to return peacefully to their homes. The Saints recognized that an armed enemy was waiting to destroy all Mormons who dared immigrate into Jackson County. Angered and frustrated by the governor's decisions, the men of Zion's Camp resumed their march. [^43] As they traveled, they learned that their enemies were not only prepared to repulse any Saints who crossed the Missouri River, but were also planning a surprise attack on Zion's Camp. On June 19, shortly after entering Clay County, the army encamped near a hill overlooking Fishing River. While they were setting up camp, five men approached on horseback and swore that the Mormons would "see hell before morning." They warned that sixty men from Richmond and seventy from Clay County were coming to join with an army from Jackson County, and that this force would utterly destroy the Mormons.

According to one observer, when this alarm was sounded, there was not a cloud in the sky; but as the sun set, clouds quickly gathered and a violent thunderstorm struck the region. Some of the members of Zion's Camp sought shelter in a log Baptist meetinghouse near their encampment. The fury of the storm broke branches from trees, destroyed crops, and disrupted the plans of the mob to crush the Saints. Rain soaked the gunpowder of the enemy, and the swollen and turbulent Missouri River prevented the mob from crossing to the Saints' encampment. Latter-day Saints were not harmed, though they did get wet and some of their tents were blown down. However, members of the mob did not fare so well. Some of them "had holes made in their hats," some suffered damage to their rifle stocks, and many of their horses fled in fright and pain. [^44] Charles C. Rich recorded that the storm exceeded in severity any storm he had ever witnessed, [^45] while Heber C. Kimball concluded, "It was evident the Almighty fought in our defense." Elder Woodruff added that following the storm, Joseph Smith informed Zion's Camp that "God is in this storm." Another observer, Nathan Baldwin, wrote in his autobiography that "all were conscious that God was engaged in the conflict, and thankful that they were under his special care and kind protection." [^46]

Attempts to Reconcile the Land Disputes

The difficulties of the Latter-day Saints in Missouri became even more apparent when they failed to work out a satisfactory compromise with representatives from Jackson County at a meeting in Liberty, Missouri, on June 16. A committee from the county proposed to purchase within thirty days all property owned by Latter-day Saints in that area. The value of the land was to be determined by disinterested arbiters, with one hundred percent of the valuation to be added on condition that Latter-day Saints agreed never to settle within the limits of the county. An alternative plan was also proposed, under which the Latter-day Saints could purchase all the land of the non-Mormons in the county on the same financial terms. [^47] This proposal, however, was unrealistic for the Latter-day Saints, since they were not willing at that time to sell their land in Zion, and members of Zion's Camp had not brought sufficient funds west to purchase even a fraction of the non-Mormon land.

Church leaders in Missouri prepared a counterproposal. They suggested on June 23 that a disinterested committee of Mormons and non-Mormons determine the value of the property of those who refused to live with Latter-day Saints, and the Saints would pay full value of this land within one year of the adoption of this proposal. Moreover, the Saints promised that they would not return to their lands until payment had been made. The committee was also to determine the damages incurred by the mobs and deduct this amount from the land to be sold by the non-Mormons. [^48]

While representatives of the Latter-day Saints were involved in what proved to be futile negotiations with citizens from Jackson County, Joseph Smith received a revelation explaining that Zion could not at that time be redeemed. This revelation, received in Clay County near the Fishing River, stated:

Behold, I say unto you, were it not for the transgressions of my people, speaking concerning the church and not individuals, they might have been redeemed even now.

But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them;

And are not united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom;

And Zion cannot be built up unless it is by the principles of the law of the celestial kingdom; otherwise I cannot receive her unto myself.

And my people must needs be chastened until they learn obedience, if it must needs be, by the things which they suffer. . . .

Therefore, in consequence of the transgressions of my people, it is expedient in me that mine elders should wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion. [^49]

After the Prophet informed Zion's Camp that the Lord had accepted their sacrifices and they would not have to fight the Missourians to help the Saints in Missouri regain their lands, some of the men expressed deep disappointment. According to Nathan Tanner, some were so frustrated that they vented their feelings by attacking bushes with their swords and cutting the plants to shreds. Because Zion's Camp had marched west not only to transport money and supplies to the oppressed Saints in Missouri but also with the intention of redeeming Zion, a few immediately apostatized. As a result of the insurrection, the Prophet again warned the men that as a consequence of their complaints, a devastating scourge would strike the army. [^50]

After experiencing fatigue, fear, discouragement, and frustration, participants in Zion's Camp suffered a tragedy at the end of the march in the form of a dread disease. On June 21, Ezra Thayer and Joseph Hancock became ill with cholera. Three days later, while the army was encamped on the bank of Rush Creek, about two miles east of Liberty, some of the men who were standing watch were suddenly struck by the disease and fell to the ground as though they had been shot. The epidemic continued to spread, causing severe diarrhea, vomiting, and cramps. On the evening of June 26, three of the afflicted died. Before the epidemic ended, about seventy persons, including Joseph Smith, had been stricken and twelve of the soldiers as well as one of the women traveling with Zion's Camp, Betsy Parrish, had died. The epidemic spread also to some of the Missouri members, and Newel K. Whitney's business partner, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, died. [^51]

While the cholera epidemic raged, Joseph Smith traveled to Liberty. There, on July 2, he met with other members of Zion's Camp at the home of Lyman Wight and told them that "if they would humble themselves before the Lord and covenant to keep His commandments," the plague would be "stayed from that hour," and there would "not be another case of the cholera among them." The brethren, with uplifted arms, covenanted to keep the commandments, after which the Prophet certified, "The plague was stayed." [^52]

Zion's Camp Is Disbanded

On July 3, two months and two days after the first members of Zion's Camp left Kirtland for Missouri, the army disbanded when Joseph Smith authorized General Lyman Wight to discharge every member of the camp who had faithfully served during the long march west. After securing their releases, the men scattered. Some returned to their families in the East, others remained in Missouri, and some returned to the mission field. On that same day the Prophet organized a high council in Missouri to assist Bishop Edward Partridge in administering the affairs of the Church in that part of the country. [^53]

Accompanied by sixteen other men who had marched to Missouri, Joseph Smith began his journey back to Kirtland on July 9. The party had two horse-drawn wagons, a buggy, and several extra horses, and during the journey they camped at many of the same sites where they had stayed while traveling west. While crossing Indiana, Joseph, Hyrum Smith, William Smith, and Frederick G. Williams secured passage on a stage, leaving the wagons and horses with George A. Smith and other members of the group. The Prophet arrived in Kirtland about August 1, after a journey of some eighteen hundred miles. George A. Smith and his companions arrived home on August 4. [^54]

Anxieties in Kirtland

During the three months that the men of Zion's Camp were away from their families, their wives worked in the fields, cared for their children, and anxiously awaited news concerning the welfare of their husbands. Their fears were quickened when Roger Orton rode into Kirtland in early July and announced that cholera had struck Zion's Camp and many were dying. Since he had left western Missouri shortly after the epidemic began, he did not know how many men were victims of the plague. On July 25 the Painesville Telegraph reported that seventeen men (there were actually twelve) attached to the "crusading army" of Joseph Smith had died of cholera and that "the whole division was on the retreat back to this country." The article also stated that a former merchant of Painesville, A. S. Gilbert, was among those who had died from the disease. [^55]

In mid-July, Emma Smith and other members of the Church were shocked by the news that Joseph Smith had been killed in Missouri. According to a report in the Chadron Spectator and Geauga Gazette, which was widely circulated in northeastern Ohio and other states, the Prophet had led a body of well-armed Mormons into Jackson County, but his army had been repulsed by citizens from that county. As a consequence of this skirmish, the communique continued, Joseph Smith was wounded in the leg. Although his leg was amputated in an attempt to save his life, the report concluded, the Mormon Prophet had died three days after the operation. [^56] Since this report did not indicate a date for the supposed battle, Roger Orton might not have been able to alleviate all the fears of the Saints. But as news continued to come from the west, members learned that the announcement of Joseph Smith's death was not correct. On July 18 the Painesville Telegraph declared that, based upon the latest information (dated June 18) from Liberty, Missouri, fighting had not erupted. Consequently, the paper concluded, the rumor that Joseph Smith had been killed was without foundation. [^57]

Zion's CampHCThe Legacy of Zion's Camp

Zion's CampHCIn some respects Zion's Camp left a searing legacy. The Painesville Telegraph referred to this event as one of the wildest "goose chases" in history. Although only a few persons apostatized in 1834 because the army had failed to redeem Zion, as the years passed and as people viewed developments in the history of the Church, some claimed that this episode was an example that Joseph Smith was not a true prophet. Without recognizing that the revelation calling men to participate in the march included a warning that Zion would be built only upon the principles of righteousness, many of those in the army thought that with the help of the Almighty, they would be able to lead the exiled Saints back to Jackson County. Since Zion's Camp failed to redeem Zion, some critics accused Joseph Smith of being a false prophet and of "prophesying lies in the name of the Lord." [^58]

The march to Missouri also failed to lessen the problems of the Saints living there. Spurred to action by rumors that the Saints were planning an invasion and then a massacre of the citizens of Jackson County, some of the Missourians prepared for war, thereby intensifying antagonism against the Latter-day Saints. Moreover, the spread of cholera in Clay County by members of Zion's Camp did not lessen the hatred generated in western Missouri against the Mormons. As the antagonisms increased, the hope of a fair trial for the Saints diminished.

After Zion's Camp disbanded, the Saints in Missouri continued to follow the instructions of the governor and of Church leaders in Ohio by seeking redress in the courts of the land. But the trials proceeded slowly, and the legal machinery maneuvered the cases across the Missouri River. But after they had paid attorneys and waited for court action for three years, the Latter-day Saints left Clay County and settled farther north. They continued to seek restitution through legal channels, and their efforts continued to be unsuccessful. When Governor Dunklin attempted to assess the reasons for the plight of the Saints, in one succinct sentence he wrote, "I am fully persuaded that the eccentricity of the religious opinions and practices of the Mormons is at the bottom of the outrages committed against them." [^59]

The march west also created problems in Kirtland. After the soldiers returned to their homes, some disrupted the renewed serenity of the community by recalling the internal problems that had plagued the camp. In insulting and abusive language, Sylvester Smith accused the Prophet of improper conduct during the march, of lying, and of issuing false prophecies. Responding to these accusations, leaders of the Church convened a Church court the last week of August, consisting of Bishop Newel K. Whitney and members of the Kirtland high council. At the trial, the court reviewed accusations and problems that had erupted during the march of Zion's Camp, including the barking of Joseph Smith's dog, Sylvester Smith's failure to share a portion of his bread with Parley P. Pratt, disagreements concerning the selection of a site for a night's encampment, and other such incidents that had created cancerous feelings. Ten men who participated in Zion's Camp testified that Joseph Smith was not guilty of improper conduct, and witnesses disagreed with the defaming charges of Sylvester Smith. After reviewing the evidence, Sylvester admitted that he had been in error and had behaved improperly. In October he published in the Messenger and Advocate a statement clearing the Prophet of improper conduct during the march of Zion's Camp; however, his accusations created discord in Kirtland and provided enemies of the Church with additional propaganda against the Church. While Sylvester wrote that he hoped his confession would quell "the evil reports" that had originated from his complaints, the damage had been done. [^60]

Though Zion's Camp failed to help the Missouri Saints regain their lands and was marked by some dissension, apostasy, and unfavorable publicity, many members of the Church recognized positive results from the journey. Through the act of volunteering, the members demonstrated their faith in a living prophet and their earnest desire to harmonize their way of life with latter-day revelations. They showed their interest and concern for the exiled Saints in Missouri by traveling to their assistance and taking them money and supplies. Perhaps the history of the Church would have been different if all the members who had gathered in Zion and all of the participants of Zion's Camp could have lived a celestial life and if members in the East could have secured additional funds for the relief of Zion. Brigham Young recalled that the Prophet informed him that because of their lack of unity and humility, the men of Zion's Camp were not worthy to enter Jackson County. [^61]

The journey to Missouri also proved to be a test to determine those who could best serve in positions of ecclesiastical leadership. On Sunday, February 8, 1835, Joseph Smith invited Brigham Young and Joseph Young to meet with him in his Kirtland home. There he informed them of a vision he had received relating to the men of Zion's Camp who died of cholera. He said, with tears in his eyes. "Brethren, . . . if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more." According to Joseph Young, "When [the Prophet] had relieved himself of his feelings, in describing the vision, he resumed the conversation" and told Brigham Young that he was to be one of the twelve special witnesses who were "to open the door of the Gospel to foreign nations." Then he said to Joseph Young, "Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies." He further instructed these men to call a meeting of all the brethren within a reasonable distance from Kirtland. [^62]

The following Saturday, February 14, members of the priesthood crowded into the new schoolhouse next to the rising temple and listened to instructions from the Prophet. He told the men of Zion's Camp who were present that God had not "designed" all their trials and suffering "for nothing." "It was the will of God," he stated, "that those who went to Zion, with a determination to lay down their lives, if necessary, should be ordained to the ministry, and go forth to prune the vineyard." [^63]

A few days later, the Prophet again informed members of Zion's Camp that there was a significant purpose in their mission. He admitted that some of the men had been angry with him when he had notified the Saints that they would not cross the river into Jackson County. "But let me tell you," he said, "God did not want you to fight. He could not organize His kingdom with twelve men to open the Gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless He took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham." [^64]

In February 1835, two new quorums, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the First Quorum of the Seventy, were organized, with many of the men who had sacrificed by marching west called to serve in these priesthood bodies. In fact, nine of the original twelve apostles called in 1835, all seven presidents of the First Council of the Seventy, and all other sixty-three original members of that quorum had served in the army of Israel that marched to western Missouri in 1834. [^65]

The most enduring legacy of Zion's Camp was that it provided valuable training and experience for members of the Church. That the leaders benefited from this experience is evident by their application of principles they learned while marching west under the direction of a latter-day prophet. When the Saints later organized militias for their protection and united for their mass exodus across the plains to the Rocky Mountains, they adopted many of the organizational patterns formalized by the Prophet during the march of Zion's Camp in 1834. [^66] Upon his return to Kirtland, Brigham Young was asked by a skeptic, "What have you gained by this journey?" He promptly replied, "Just what we went for," adding, "I would not exchange the knowledge I have received this season for the whole of Geauga County; for the property and mines of wealth are not to be compared to the worth of knowledge." [^67]

The practical training and knowledge derived from participating in Zion's Camp was not considered by many of the men as valuable as the spiritual benefits they received during the march to Missouri. Since participants in this army had been gathered from different parts of the young nation, many had not previously seen a prophet of God. Many declared that they were blessed abundantly as they traveled under the direction and tutelage of such a man. Shortly before his death, Marshall Hubbard told his wife, Caroline, that he knew Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that he would not exchange the experience he had had on the journey to Missouri for all that the world could offer. [^68] Joseph B. Noble declared that prior to his participation in Zion's Camp, he had never experienced such "manifestations of the blessings of God." [^69] Wilford Woodruff supplemented these testimonies with his own recognition of the benefits of this march when he said, "We gained an experience that we never could have gained in any other way. We had the privilege . . . of traveling a thousand miles with him [the Prophet], and seeing the workings of the Spirit of God with him, and the revelations of Jesus Christ unto him. . . . Had I not gone up with Zion's Camp I should not have been here today" (as an apostle of the Lord). [^70]

For some participants, Zion's Camp was a failure. For many others, it was one of the most challenging, rewarding, and faith-promoting experiences of their journey through life.

Zion's Camp Marches West

---
Notas:
[^1] Painesville Telegraph, February 7, 1834, p. 3. Most of the ten members of the Kirtland committee who hired Hurlbut to gather derogatory information about the Prophet were large property holders in Kirtland, owning from 45 to 247 acres in 1833 and 1834. See Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1833. 1834. Solomon Spaulding's name is spelled differently in contemporary records. Sometimes it is spelled Spaulding and other times Spalding. I have employed in this work the spelling most commonly used in later histories and the one employed by his widow, Mrs. Matilda Davison. See Matilda Davison, "The Mormon Bible," The Family Magazine 7 (1840): 38-39.
[^2] HC 1:352, 354-55; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 21-22; Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 19. Sidney Rigdon wrote that Hurlbut was guilty of using obscene language in the presence of a young lady. Sidney Rigdon to editors of the Boston Journal, May 27, 1839, cited in Samuel M. Smucker, ed., The Religious, Social, and Political History of the Mormons, pp. 45-47.
[^3] HC 2:46-47; Ohio, Geauga County, Court of Common Pleas Records, Book P, pp. 431-32.
[^4] HC 1:475; E. D. Howe, Mormonism Unvailed, pp. 232-62; Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Joseph Smith's New York Reputation Reappraised," BYU Studies 10 (Spring 1970): 286-90.
[^5] HC 1:1, 6-7.
[^6] Alma 39:5.
[^7] Milton V. Backman, Jr., Joseph Smith's First Vision, p. 117; Orsamus Turner, History of the Pioneer Settlement of Phelps and Gorham's Purchase, and Morris' Reserve, p. 214.
[^8] William H. Kelley, "The Hill Cumorah, and the Book of Mormon . . . from late interviews," Saints' Herald (Plano, Illinois), June 1, 1881, p. 162.
[^9] Charles H. Whittier and Stephen W. Stathis, "The Enigma of Solomon Spalding," Dialogue 10 (Autumn 1977): 70-72; Davison, "The Mormon Bible," p. 429. See also Benjamin Johnson, "My Life's Review," pp. 19-20.
[^10] Whittier and Stathis, "The Enigma of Solomon Spalding," pp. 71-72.
[^11] Solomon Spaulding, manuscript, Oberlin College Archives, Oberlin, Ohio. One of a number of publications of this manuscript is The "Manuscript Story," of Reverend Solomon Spalding; or "manuscript found" (Lamoni, Iowa: Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, 1908).
[^12] Whittier and Stathis, "The Enigma of Solomon Spalding," p. 72.
[^13] Howe, Mormonism Unvailed, pp. 278-81.
[^14] Ibid.
[^15] Lester E. Bush, Jr., "The Spalding Theory: Then and Now," Dialogue 10 (Autumn 1977): 42-44.
[^16] Howe, Mormonism Unvailed, p. 289.
[^17] Public Discussion of the Issues between the Reorganized Church . . . and the Church of Christ (Disciples), p. 82.
[^18] Bush, "The Spalding Theory," p. 54; James H. Fairchild, Manuscript of Solomon Spaulding and the Book of Mormon, p. 197
[^19] Bush, "The Spalding Theory," p. 42; Howe, Mormonism Unvailed, pp. 287-88.
[^20] HC 2:269-70; Messenger and Advocate 2 (1835): 228; Elders' Journal 1 (August 1838): 59-60.
[^21] Howe, Mormonism Unvailed, pp. 288-90.
[^22] Ibid., pp. 102-4, 107.
[^23] Painesville Telegraph, November 28, 1834, p. 3; Ohio Repository (Canton), September 1, 1836, p. 2; Aurora, September 24, 1836, p. 4; Bush, "The Spalding Theory," pp. 49-53.
[^24] Bush, "The Spalding Theory," pp. 49-53.
[^25] Orson Hyde to George J. Adams, June 7, 1841, cited in John E. Page, The Spaulding Story, p. 10.
[^26] Sidney Rigdon to editors of the Boston Journal, May 27, 1839, cited in Smucker, History of the Mormons, pp. 45-47.
[^27] Benjamin Winchester, The Origin of the Spaulding Story, p. 13.
[^28] Fairchild, Manuscript of Solomon Spaulding, pp. 193-96. The Spaulding manuscript, which was located in Hawaii, is currently being preserved in the Oberlin College Library, Oberlin, Ohio.
[^29] Joseph F. Smith, "The Manuscript Found," The Improvement Era 3 (February, March, April 1900): 241-49; 351-57; 377-83.
[^30] Bush, "The Spalding Theory," pp. 56-63; Dean C. Jessee, "'Spalding Theory' Reexamined," Church News, August 20, 1977, pp. 4-6.
[^31] Pratt, Autobiography, pp. 114-15.
[^32] HC 2:79-80; Times and Seasons 6 (January 1, 1846): 1076; journal of Wilford Woodruff, 1834; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 79; autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 11; Kimball, "Journal," p. 788; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 20; diary of Moses Martin, pp. 7-8; journal of Reuben McBride, pp. 3-4.
[^33] HC 2:70; diary of Moses Martin, p. 5.
[^34] HC 2:69-70.
[^35] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 25.
[^36] Ibid., p. 12.
[^37] Ibid., p. 22; diary of Moses Martin, p. 4; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 80.
[^38] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 20; Kimball, "Journal," p. 788; autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, p. 8; autobiography of Harrison Burgess, pp. 2-3.
[^39] HC 2:88-89.
[^40] Daniel Dunklin to W. W. Phelps and others, February 4, 1834, cited in HC 1:476-78. See also Daniel Dunklin to W. W. Phelps and others, January 22, 1836, cited in HC 2:178-79.
[^41] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 115; HC 2:94.
[^42] HC 2:86.
[^43] HC 2:94-95.
[^44] HC 2:103-4.
[^45] Zion's Camp journal of Charles C. Rich, p. 5.
[^46] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, 1834, cited in HC 2:104n; autobiography of Nathan Baldwin, p. 12; autobiography of Joseph Holbrook, pp. 33-34; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 81.
[^47] HC 2:96-97; The Advocate (Newark, Ohio), July 19, 1834, p. 4.
[^48] HC 2:113-14.
[^49] D&C 105:2-6, 9.
[^50] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, p. 13; autobiography of William F. Cahoon, p. 43; Kimball, "Journal," p. 804. According to an article published in the Deseret News Weekly, October 19, 1864 (reprinted in Millennial Star 26 [December 10, 1864]: 792-94), two members of Zion's Camp left the Church because of their desire to fight in Jackson County. Very few members of this army immediately apostatized. An examination of the lives of 169 survivors of Zion's Camp (no information was located on 22 individuals, and 12 died of cholera) revealed that 132 died in the faith and 30 apostatized after being active in the Church for several years following their discharge; the dates when 7 others apostatized are unknown. Talbot, "Zion's Camp," pp. 113-14.
[^51] HC 2:114-20; Kimball, "Journal," pp. 804, 838-40; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 82; autobiography of Harrison Burgess, p. 3. The men who died of cholera were John S. Carter, Eber Wilcox, Seth Hitchcock, Erastus Rudd, Alfred Fisk, Edward Ives, Noah Johnson, Jesse B. Lawson, Robert McCord, Elial Strong, Jesse Smith, and Warren Ingalls. Evening and Morning Star (Kirtland edition) 2 (July 1834): 351-52; HC 2:120.
[^52] HC 2:120; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 9.
[^53] HC 2:122-23; autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, p. 9; journal of Wilford Woodruff, July 1834.
[^54] HC 2:135, 139; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 27.
[^55] Memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 29; Painesville Telegraph, July 25, 1834, p. 3.
[^56] Chardon Spectator and Geauga Gazette, July 12, 1834, p. 3; Ohio Repository (Canton), July 18, 1834, p. 2; Ohio Atlas and Elyria Advertiser (Elyria), July 17, 1834, p. 2; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 27.
[^57] Painesville Telegraph, July 18, 1834, p. 3.
[^58] Painesville Telegraph, August 8, 1834, p. 2; HC 2: 144.
[^59] Daniel Dunklin to Colonel J. Thornton, June 6, 1834, cited in HC 2:84-87.
[^60] HC 2:142-44, 150-60; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 58-72; Messenger and Advocate 1 (October 1834): 10-11.
[^61] Talbot, "Zion's Camp," pp. 121-22. See also Orson Pratt in JD 15:360.
[^62] Joseph Young, History of the Organization of the Seventies, pp. 1-2, cited in HC 2:181 n.
[^63] Joseph Young, History of the Seventies, p. 14, cited in HC 2:182n.
[^64] Ibid. See also autobiography of Harrison Burgess, pp. 2-3, and Kimball, "Journal," p. 840.
[^65] HC 2:187, 203-4. Of the original apostles, only Thomas B. Marsh, William E. McLellin, and John F. Boynton did not serve in Zion's Camp.
[^66] Klaus J. Hansen, Quest for Empire, pp. 48-49.
[^67] Brigham Young in JD 2:10. See also JD 20:20, 76.
[^68] Autobiography of Marshall M. Hubbard.
[^69] Autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, p. 9.
[^70] Wilford Woodruff in JD 13:158.
