Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 12

Persecution in OhioHCAn Attempt to "Unvail" Mormonism

Persecution in OhioHCDuring the construction of the Kirtland Temple, enemies of the Church sought to destroy Mormonism by subverting Joseph Smith's reports of visions and revelations. At a public meeting held in Kirtland early in 1834, angered citizens complained that the Prophet had gathered in that township an impoverished group that threatened the entire region with "an insupportable weight of pauperism." A committee of the aroused citizenry announced to the public, in an article in the Painesville Telegraph, that their only hope of future security was to expose Joseph Smith's claims of "self-pronounced" divine authority. They reported that they had therefore employed Doctor Philastus Hurlbut "to ascertain the real origin of the Book of Mormon, and to examine the validity of Joseph Smith's claims" of revelation. That this was not to be an objective fact-finding mission is strongly hinted at in Hurlbut's commission. The committee admitted that he had been hired to collect data that would "prove the 'Book of Mormon' to be a work of fiction" and would "completely divest Joseph Smith of all claims to the character of an honest man." They further declared that in the near future a book would be published that would prove the Book of Mormon had been written over twenty years before in New Salem, Ashtabula County, Ohio, by Solomon Spaulding. [^1]

An examination of several incidents in the life of Doctor Philastus Hurlbut (Doctor was a given name rather than a professional title) reveals that the man hired by the Kirtland committee to expose Mormonism was a vindictive apostate of the Church. In 1833 Philastus Hurlbut had been excommunicated by a Church council for immoral conduct. Following his excommunication on June 3, 1833, a council of high priests listened to his confession and decided that he should be reinstated. Three weeks later, on June 23, another tribunal was called into session, and this body agreed that Hurlbut's repentance was not genuine. He was therefore excommunicated a second time. [^2] After he was employed to collect damaging information against the Prophet, Hurlbut publicly threatened the life of Joseph Smith. This led to his arrest and a subsequent trial on March 31, 1834, in Chardon, county seat of Geauga County. The court issued an order restraining Hurlbut for six months from injuring the person and property of Joseph Smith. He was also ordered to post a bond of two hundred dollars to pay the costs of the proceedings, which amounted to $112.59. [^3]

In an attempt to gather information that would discredit the character of the Prophet, Hurlbut traveled to western New York, where the Smith family had resided. Prior to leaving for New York, he apparently wrote or obtained a series of affidavits that contained many common phrases and similar vocabulary, though they were signed by various individuals. A number of the affidavits specifically stated that Joseph Smith and members of his family were "indolent," "lazy," "intemperant," "money diggers," "adicted to various habits," and "entirely destitute of moral character." [^4]

Although those who signed the purported affidavits lived in the townships of Palmyra and Manchester, it is questionable whether any of them could be considered an authority on the character of Joseph Smith or his family. During most of their residence in western New York, the Smiths lived in a sparsely settled section of Genesee County. While they probably traveled periodically to Palmyra and Manchester, they probably gained only a casual acquaintance with inhabitants of those communities. After Joseph began reporting about his First Vision and subsequent visitations from heavenly messengers, in all probability the number of those who were formerly "intimate friends" diminished; furthermore, many who met the Prophet after 1821 had previously formulated opinions concerning his character based on vicious rumors. The affidavits gathered by Hurlbut, therefore, seem to serve as evidence of the "evil" stories circulated about the Smiths rather than as reliable assessments of their characters. [^5]

A legal investigation of the accusations of the Palmyra settlers exposed many inconsistencies in the affidavits. Most of the accusations were vague, undocumented, and unsubstantiated. The so-called witnesses relied on hearsay information or assumptions. For example, Joseph Smith was accused of being immoral, but no evidence was cited; in addition, such a charge conflicts with the teachings regarding morality that were published under Joseph's jurisdiction in the Book of Mormon. [^6] Moreover, some who charged Joseph Smith with being lazy contended also that he wrote the Book of Mormon, [^7] a contradiction in fact, since the writing of such a work would have been an exhausting task.

203Critics of the Smith family also failed to produce evidence that Joseph was intemperate or an alcoholic. An acquaintance of Joseph Smith, a Mr. Bryant, declared in a Michigan newspaper that the young man was "a lazy, drinking fellow, loose in his habits every way." When William Bryant was interviewed shortly after the account was published, he admitted that he had seen Joseph only once or twice. In answer to the question, "Were they [the Smiths] drunkards," he replied, "Everybody drank whiskey in them times," and denied that he had uttered the statement that had been attributed to him. [^8]

In addition to gathering derogatory information about the character of Joseph Smith, Hurlbut was hired to collect data that would support the theory that the Book of Mormon was a fictitious work based on the writings of Solomon Spaulding. The individual whom he sought to identify as the architect of the Book of Mormon was born in Ashford, Connecticut, in 1761. After graduating from Dartmouth College in 1785, Spaulding served as a Congregational minister for a few years in New England. He subsequently moved to Cherry Valley, New York, where he engaged in land speculation and in a mercantile business with his brother, Josiah Spaulding. He also became principal of the Cherry Valley Academy and occasionally preached in the local Presbyterian church. After his business enterprises failed, he moved in 1809 to New Salem (now Conneaut), Ohio, where, with the assistance of Henry Lake, he established an iron foundry. [^9]

While living in New Salem, Spaulding became interested in the Indian mounds located near his foundry, earthworks that had excited residents of the region. During the War of 1812 his business venture failed, but in the midst of financial ruin and broken health, he found solace in writing about the early inhabitants of this land. He also entertained his friends by reading to them portions of his romance. [^10] His story recounted the adventure of a group of Romans, led by Fabius, who during the age of Constantine (fourth century A.D.) headed for Britain. As they were sailing to the British Isles, they encountered a violent storm and were blown off course. They sailed across a large body of water and traveled up a mighty river. After they arrived in this new land, the refugees made no attempt to return to their homes but settled among the aborigines they found there. This novel then related the conflicts that divided the various tribes—the Delawares, Ohions, Kentucks, Sciotons, and Chiaugans. The leaders of these early Americans were also identified, including Bombal, powerful prince of the Kentucks (a nation that lived on the south side of the Ohio River); Kadokam, King of Sioto; Labaska; Hamboon; Ulipool; and Lamesa. [^11]

Following his failures and disappointments in Ohio in 1812, Spaulding moved to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he probably sought a recovery from some of his debts by publishing his romance. The work was not printed, however, and Spaulding settled in Amity, near Pittsburgh, where he died on October 20, 1816. [^12]

Learning that Spaulding had written a work that contained a description of a migration to America, a history of the early inhabitants of this land, and an account of their conflicts, Hurlbut sought affidavits that would reveal parallels in the Book of Mormon and the Spaulding romance. Like the affidavits collected in western New York, the new documents, reportedly signed by people who knew Solomon Spaulding, seem to have a common authorship. Eight individuals presumably signed statements to the effect that they had been introduced to the Spaulding manuscript through either reading the work or listening as Spaulding read it to them, and after examining the Book of Mormon, they affirmed that there seemed to be parallels in the two works. Three of the eight persons specifically stated that the "historical parts" of the two works were the same, while one said the "historical matter" was nearly the same. One person said that he found "many of the same passages" in the two works, while another claimed "many of the passages" in the two works to be verbatim. [^13]

Two of these witnesses, John Spaulding, the brother of Solomon, and John's wife, Martha, specifically stated that the Spaulding romance revealed that the American Indians were descendants of the Jews or the lost tribes of Israel, a theory that was supposedly held by Solomon Spaulding and other Americans of the early nineteenth century. John and Martha Spaulding further said that the Spaulding manuscript described the journey of these Israelites from Jerusalem by land and sea under the command of two men, whose names were Nephi and Lehi. The emigrants, as a result of quarrels and contentions between them, then divided into two nations, the Nephites and Lamanites. [^14]

Four of the eight individuals whose names are attached to the affidavits collected by Hurlbut stated that some names found in each of the two works were the same. This accusation was made twenty-two years after the individuals had read or had listened to Spaulding's fanciful story. The names found in the Book of Mormon would have been fresh on their minds, while they would have to dip back in their memories to recall the names mentioned by Spaulding. Possibly some of the names seemed similar after a lapse of two decades, for in Spaulding's manuscript there was a Moonrod (cf. Moroni); a Mammoon (cf. Mormon), a native term for woolly mammoth; a Lamesa (cf. Laman), who was a woman in the Spaulding romance; and a Hamelick (cf. Amaleki or Amalickiah). Although about three hundred possible names could have been selected from the Book of Mormon for comparison with the Spaulding manuscript, Hurlbut's witnesses used but a few specific examples. Four mentioned the name Nephi and three mentioned Lehi as names common to both histories. Only three additional names (plus Nephites and Lamanites) were given as examples of the common use of names in the two records, and these were Laban, Zarahemla, and Moroni. "Despite the elapsed decades, all recalled identical spellings for these odd-sounding names, spellings which matched exactly those found in the Book of Mormon." [^15] Even though Hurlbut's witnesses mentioned only five proper nouns found in the two works, Hurlbut concluded that "most of the names and leading incidents contained in the Book of Mormon, originated with Solomon Spalding." [^16]

The daughter of Solomon Spaulding, whose married name was Matilda McKenstry, recalled that she first became aware of parallels in the names appearing in the Book of Mormon and in her father's manuscript when several individuals asked her if she "did not remember" that the names were the same. After others had brought this similarity to her attention, she said she "thought" they were similar. Asked how she remembered after such a long time had elapsed since she had seen the names in her father's manuscript, she replied that she specifically remembered that one of the names, Lehi, began with an L and she recalled the name because of the fanciful manner in which her father made this capital letter. Although she claimed a similarity in the names of the two records, she admitted she had not read the Book of Mormon. [^17]

Another apparent defect in the Spaulding affidavits collected by Hurlbut was that five of the eight witnesses distinctly stated that the religious matter in the two books was different. Yet Hurlbut and E. D. Howe concluded that the principal source of the Book of Mormon was the Spaulding manuscript, despite the fact that the Book of Mormon is a religious record and religious concepts permeate nearly every page. [^18]

While gathering information to discredit the Church, Hurlbut searched widely for Spaulding's manuscript. In 1834, he traveled to Monson, Massachusetts, where Spaulding's widow, Mrs. Matilda Davison, resided. She told him she did not know where the manuscript had been deposited, but that it might have been left in Pittsburgh or in a trunk left in Harwick, New York. Hurlbut secured Mrs. Davison's permission to take the manuscript if he could locate it. He discovered it in Harwick, New York, and delivered it to Eber D. Howe, the anti-Mormon editor of the Painesville Telegraph.

Undoubtedly the two men were disappointed that there were no significant parallels between Spaulding's manuscript and the Book of Mormon—no reference to Israelites migrating to America and no names that matched those in the Book of Mormon. Moreover, they had not succeeded in gathering evidence that connected the writings of Joseph Smith with those of Solomon Spaulding. [^19] Nevertheless, they were prepared to launch a major attack against the Church.

Since Philastus Hurlbut's excommunication from the Church and his conviction at the trial at Chardon had discredited him, the information he gathered was not published under his name. Instead, it was published in 1834 under the authorship of Eber D. Howe. The book, titled Mormonism Unvailed [sic], was the first book of significance printed with the design of destroying the Church. [^20]

In Mormonism Unvailed, Hurlbut and Howe popularized their contention that most of the names and major incidents in the Book of Mormon originated with Solomon Spaulding. They admitted that they had found a manuscript written by Spaulding that was a romance written in modern style. They also briefly recounted the novel's plot about Romans who settled in America. Without producing any evidence, however, they also contended that Spaulding must have written another manuscript that paralleled the story in the Book of Mormon. Again without providing any sources, they claimed also that Sidney Rigdon must have secured the other Spaulding manuscript while he was living in Pittsburgh and then used this work as the basis of the Book of Mormon. They concluded, "We, therefore, must hold out Sidney Rigdon to the world as being the original 'author and proprietor' of the whole Mormon conspiracy, until further light is elicited upon the lost writings of Solomon Spaulding." [^21] This conclusion contradicted the historical portions of the book they produced, for in Mormonism Unvailed is an account based upon articles from the Painesville Telegraph of Sidney Rigdon's conversion to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Ohio in November 1830, seven months after the Book of Mormon was published in Palmyra, New York. Moreover, Hurlbut had neglected to include in the affidavits any reference to more than one Spaulding manuscript. [^22]

The first 175 pages of Mormonism Unvailed included articles from the Painesville Telegraph describing the Book of Mormon and the early history of the Restoration movement. These articles were frequently cited without any reference to sources and without the use of quotation marks (not an uncommon practice in that period). The Ezra Booth letters, initially published in the Ohio Star, were then reproduced in the volume, followed by Hurlbut's affidavits concerning the Smith family. The last major section of the book included the eight affidavits designed to substantiate the theory that Sidney Rigdon had written the Book of Mormon, using Solomon Spaulding's romance novel as a principal source.

Although few persons purchased copies of Mormonism Unvailed immediately following its publication, the information in the book became the basis for innumerable anti-Mormon books. Within a few years after its publication, newspapers in the country announced "it appears that Mormonism owes its origins to an individual named Solomon Spaulding; who wrote the historical part of the Book of Mormon." [^23] For more than half a century, beginning in the early 1840s, nearly every major anti-Mormon work contained this theory, even though no one ever found substantial evidence linking Sidney Rigdon with the Spaulding manuscript and then with Joseph Smith. Moreover, the parallels in the Spaulding novel and the Book of Mormon continued to be advanced even though no one was able to produce a manuscript like the Book of Mormon. [^24]

One of the Latter-day Saints living in Kirtland who decided to investigate the claims of Hurlbut and Howe regarding the origin of the Book of Mormon was Orson Hyde, a close associate of Sidney Rigdon who had lived with the Rigdon family in 1829. Based on his experiences with and knowledge of Sidney, Orson Hyde concluded that his former pastor would not have been involved in a scheme that included forgery and deception. He also recalled that when he had preached in New Salem in the spring of 1832 and had organized a branch of the Church there, he had met no one who claimed to have found parallels in the Book of Mormon and the Spaulding romance. After Mormonism Unvailed was published, Orson returned to New Salem and asked a number of people there if they had read Spaulding's novel and if there were similarities in that work and the Book of Mormon. Several who recalled hearing Spaulding read his manuscript insisted they were most surprised that anyone would claim the romance resembled the Book of Mormon. [^25]

Sidney Rigdon also vehemently denied throughout his life that he participated in the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. He insisted that while he was living in Pittsburgh, he neither saw nor obtained the Spaulding manuscript, and that he had never heard of such a romance until Hurlbut announced his theory. Throughout his life, Elder Rigdon maintained that he was converted to the Church after reading the Book of Mormon. [^26]

Another Latter-day Saint who investigated the charges regarding the Spaulding manuscript and the Book of Mormon was Benjamin Winchester. In a review of the controversy, he published the testimony of a man named Jackson who claimed that he had been a neighbor of Spaulding, that he was acquainted with the Spaulding manuscript, and that he had also read the Book of Mormon. Jackson insisted that the Spaulding manuscript contained a story about a group of Romans, and that there was no similarity in the two books. [^27]

After critics of the Church had propounded the Spaulding theory for half a century, his manuscript was located in 1884 in Hawaii among the papers of L. L. Rice, who had purchased Howe's business in 1839 and had taken the manuscript to Hawaii. Included with this manuscript was the following statement: "The writings of Solomon Spalding, proved by Aaron Wright, Oliver Smith, John N. Miller and others. The testimonies of the above gentlemen are now in my possession. [Signed] D.P. Hurlbut." The three persons whose names appeared on the certificate, which was written on a previously blank page of the manuscript, were among the eight individuals who had testified to parallels in the Book of Mormon and the Spaulding manuscript. [^28]

The manuscript discovered in Hawaii was Spaulding's Roman story and bore no significant resemblance to the Book of Mormon. The styles of the two manuscripts are completely different, and there are no common names and no historical similarities except for the fact that each account tells a history of a migration to America (by different peoples and at different periods of time), and each mentions conflicts that divided the native inhabitants. [^29]

Even after the Spaulding manuscript was located and printed, critics continued to insist that there must have been another Spaulding manuscript. In recent years, however, most critics have rejected this theory as well as the affidavits Hurlbut collected among Spaulding's friends and relatives. Nevertheless, the controversy is periodically revived, and some non-Mormons who have rejected the Spaulding affidavits continue to publish the affidavits Hurlbut collected in New York. [^30]

An Attempt to "Unvail" Mormonism

---
Notas:
[^1] Two distinct teachings of the Book of Mormon relate to the doctrines of the Fall and the Atonement. This scripture tells us how man benefits from the Fall and informs us that as a consequence of the Atonement, all men will be resurrected.
[^2] Earl E. Olson, "The Chronology of the Ohio Revelations," BYU Studies 11 (Summer 1971): 329-33.
[^3] Robert J. Matthews, "The 'New Translation' of the Bible, 1830-1833: Doctrinal Development During the Kirtland Era," BYU Studies 11 (Summer 1971): 420.
[^4] HC 2:477.
[^5] HC 5:402.
[^6] Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 43-44. Warren Foote wrote that some members left the Church because they could not accept the revelation relating to the three degrees of glory. Journal of Warren Foote, p. 5.
[^7] Richard P. Howard, Restoration Scriptures, p. 199.
[^8] Ibid., pp. 196-97. The Kirtland Revelation Book is preserved in the Church Archives.
[^9] HC 2:165; Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 76.
[^10] Melvin J. Petersen, "A Study of the Nature of and the Significance of the Changes in the Revelations as found in a Comparison of the Book of Commandments and Subsequent Editions of the Doctrine and Covenants," pp. 145-49.
[^11] Ibid., pp. 152-53.
[^12] Howard, Restoration Scriptures, p. 201.
[^13] Evening and Morning Star, Kirtland reprint 1 (January 1835): 16. Italics were not included in the initial publication of this editorial.
[^14] D&C 8:2; 9:7-9.
[^15] Richard Lloyd Anderson, "By the Gift and Power of God," Ensign 7 (September 1977): 83.
[^16] D&C 1:24. See also 2 Nephi 31:3; Ether 12:39.
[^17] Brigham Young in JD 2:314.
[^18] Orson Pratt, "Priesthood," Millennial Star 19 (April 25, 1857): 260.
[^19] HC 2:243-46; Kirtland Council Minute Book, pp. 98-106.
[^20] Two sections bore the number LXVI. The last section was numbered XCIX and was dated November 1834, which is section 106 in the current edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. The first section in the appendix is also counted in the 101 revelations; it is now section 133.
[^21] HC 2:246n; Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 106.
[^22] James R. Clark, Story of the Pearl of Great Price, p. 28.
[^23] A printed copy of chapter 24 of Matthew is found in the BYU Library. See Richard Lloyd Anderson, "Joseph Smith's Insights into the Olivet Prophecy," pp. 57-58.
[^24] Portions of what is today section 88 of the Doctrine and Covenants were printed in February 1833 in the Evening and Morning Star.
[^25] For many years, the most frequently cited account of the discovery and movement of the mummies from Egypt to America was an account by Oliver Cowdery that was published in the Messenger and Advocate in December 1835. This report, based on what Oliver learned from Michael Chandler, contains a number of factual errors. The most accurate account available today on this aspect of history is Jay Todd's The Saga of the Book of Abraham (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1969). Since this work was published, additional research by Dr. H. Donl Peterson of Brigham Young University, Dan Jorgensen, former president of the Northern Italian Mission, and others has brought forth additional knowledge concerning Lebolo and Chandler. Many details, however, remain unresolved, especially concerning the transporting of the mummies after they left Egypt and before they arrived in America. A copy of the death notice in Catholic parish records of Castillamonte, Italy, that identifies Lebolo's death date and place is found in Dan Jorgensen, "New Facts on the Life and History of Giovanni Pietra Antonio Lebolo," typescript and photocopies, Church Archives.
[^26] Todd, Saga of the Book of Abraham, pp. 123-34.
[^27] Joseph Coe to Joseph Smith, January 1, 1844, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives. Todd, Saga of the Book of Abraham, pp. 160-62; Painesville Telegraph, March 27, 1835, p. 3; Jay M. Todd, "The Historical Background of the Book of Abraham," Pearl of Great Price Symposium, November 22, 1975, p. 29. See also Times and Seasons 3 (May 2, 1842): 774-75.
[^28] Orson Pratt in JD 20:65.
[^29] HC 2:235.
[^30] HC 2:236.
