Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 13

Unfolding the Doctrines of the Kingdom

In the history of the restoration movement, one of the most productive periods in the disclosure of principles of the everlasting gospel was the 1830s. When The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized on April 6, 1830, the Book of Mormon had been available in print for less than two weeks, and there was no Doctrine and Covenants nor Pearl of Great Price to aid members in their understanding of the doctrines of God's kingdom. The basic beliefs of the first converts in New York and Pennsylvania were primarily the religious concepts described in the Book of Mormon, such as the first principles of the gospel, the resurrection of the body, a future state of happiness or misery, and a distinct belief concerning the antiquity of the gospel, the fall of Adam, and the atonement of Christ. As a consequence of Joseph Smith's early visions and revelations, members also shared a unique belief concerning the priesthood: that the power and authority to act in the name of God had been restored to the earth by the laying on of hands by angelic messengers. [^1]

An Unprecedented Era

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCAs Latter-day Saints matured in their capacity to comprehend the doctrines of the kingdom of God, additional doctrines were unfolded to them. Many doctrinal disclosures were made in response to questions that the Prophet asked the Lord; at other times the Prophet was moved to petition the Lord by members of the Church who recognized a problem or did not understand a theological principle. During the 1830s, more revelations that currently appear in the Doctrine and Covenants were given than during any other period, and more of these revelations were recorded in Ohio than in any other state. Of the 138 sections in the current edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, almost half, or 65 (47 percent), were recorded in Ohio; and of the 65 Ohio revelations, 54 (83 percent) were recorded between February 1831 and January 1834. [^2]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCMany of the revelations of the early thirties were received while Joseph Smith was working on his translation of the Bible. While reading and studying the Old and New Testament, he was stimulated to seek counsel from the Lord. One leading contemporary authority on this new translation of the Bible has written:

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCThe real purpose of the Bible Translation was not so much to have a new corrected edition of the Bible, but rather, to bring the Prophet to a greater understanding of the gospel. Consequently, the real product is not so much a new Bible itself, but the doctrines that were revealed in the process. Consequently, the Prophet's work with the Bible is an indispensable element in the unfolding of the gospel and the building of the dispensation of the fulness of times—much of which occurred while the Prophet lived in the vicinity of Kirtland, Ohio. [^3]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCAs doctrines of the restored gospel were gradually unfolded to the Prophet, he unveiled them to others. Sometimes when he received a revelation, he immediately told others what he had learned. He dictated some of the revelations in the presence of others. On occasions, however, he withheld from the Church members information he received through divine communication, often for months or even years. In an address to the Saints in the Kirtland Temple in 1837, he said that "if the Church knew all the commandments," they would condemn half of them "through prejudice and ignorance. " [^4] Six years later he said, "I could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them." [^5] The Prophet knew that when he unfolded concepts that were very different from popular beliefs of his age, some members would refuse to embrace the truth and would leave the Church. Consequently, he experienced the challenge of deciding what he should disclose and what he should withhold from the membership at any given time. [^6]

Joseph Smith not only had the challenge of deciding when some doctrines should be disclosed, but he also had the responsibility of determining the best methods of revealing to others principles of the everlasting gospel. Some doctrines were initially made known to individuals during private conversations, and sometimes religious truths were unfolded while members were attending schools in Kirtland or were listening to the Prophet's public discourses. Church publications such as the Evening and the Morning Star and Messenger and Advocate were established to help the Saints to better understand doctrines and responsibilities of the Church.

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCHistorical Background of the Doctrine and Covenants

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCSince the revelations given through Joseph Smith contained pertinent information concerning Church doctrines, procedures, and government, members of the Church desired to have access to them. Many of them copied down the early revelations, and copies were carried by missionaries into the mission field. Errors crept into these writings as they were copied and recopied. Some of the revelations were also read by the Prophet and others at gatherings in Kirtland, and some were published in Church periodicals as well as non-Mormon newspapers. [^7]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCIn 1833 a mob destroyed most of the sheets of the Book of Commandments as it was being printed in Independence, Missouri. By the mid-1830s Joseph Smith had received many new revelations that had not been recorded when the Book of Commandments was being compiled for publication. Forty-one revelations, nearly all of which were received while the Prophet was living in Ohio, were copied in a manuscript titled Kirtland Revelation Book. [^8]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCRecognizing a need to extend the availability of the revelations, it was agreed at a conference in Kirtland on September 24, 1834, that Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Frederick G. Williams should serve as a committee to select and prepare for publication revelations received by the Prophet. [^9]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCIn preparing the revelations for publication, Joseph Smith edited them, sometimes to correct errors that had been made by scribes, and sometimes to add information not included in the initial recording of the communications from the Lord. For example, he added surnames in some of the inspired writings; he also added words of instruction, clarification, and enlightenment. Some of the words that were changed related to Church organization. For example, before certain priesthood offices were made known in some of the early revelations, the term elder was used to designate all who had priesthood responsibility. As the organization expanded, revelations were edited to replace the general term of elder with a more specific office. [^10] This type of editing is illustrated by comparing the following sentences as they appeared in the Book of Commandments and in the Doctrine and Covenants (changes are in italics):

Book of Commandments Doctrine and Covenants (1835)

(chapter 44, verse 26) (section 13, verse 8; now 42:31)

They shall be laid before the bishop And they shall be laid before the

of my church, and two of the elders, bishop of my church and his coun-

such as he shall appoint and set apart selors, two of the elders, or high

for that purpose. priests, such as he shall appoint or

has appointed and set apart for that

purpose.

(chapter 44, verse 29) (section 13, verse 10; now 42:34)

And the residue shall be kept in my Therefore, the residue shall be kept

storehouse, to administer to the in my storehouse, to administer to

poor and needy, as shall be ap- the poor and the needy, as shall be

pointed by the elders of the church appointed by the high council of the

and bishop. church and the bishop and his council.

When this revelation was initially recorded early in 1831, there were no counselors to the bishop and a high council had not yet been constituted. [^11]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCSome persons left the Church because they did not understand the process of recording communications from the Lord. Oliver Cowdery recognized that Joseph Smith was editing the revelations and undoubtedly knew that some members would be concerned when they detected differences in the revelations as printed in Missouri and in Ohio. In fact, various changes had already appeared in the revelations when they were reprinted in Kirtland in 1835 in the Evening and the Morning Star. Twenty-four revelations had been printed in the Star while that paper was being printed in Missouri, and those revelations, along with forty others, were printed (with only a few typographical errors) in the Book of Commandments. [^12] When those same writings were reprinted in Kirtland with modifications, Oliver Cowdery explained some of the reasons for textual variations in the printed versions:

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCOn the revelations we merely say, that we were not a little surprised to find the previous print so different from the original. We had given them a careful comparison, assisted by individuals whose known integrity and ability is uncensurable. Thus saying we cast no reflections upon those who were entrusted with the responsibility of publishing them in Missouri, as our own labors were included in that important service to the church, and it was our unceasing endeavor to have them correspond with the copy furnished us. We believe they are now correct. If not in every word, at least in principle. For the special good of the church we have also added a few items from other revelations. [^13]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCAlthough Joseph Smith did not describe the precise method used to receive communications from the Lord (except to note that he received the revelation during a vision or through the instrumentality of the Urim and Thummim, and so on), two revelations directed to Oliver Cowdery in April 1829 seem to indicate that the Prophet's responsibility was to understand the ideas he received from the Lord and then to place the concepts into coherent wording. [^14] Nothing in the Doctrine and Covenants suggests that he was given perfect, final language as he recorded the word of God. Rather, he was inspired in fundamental thoughts. [^15] While Joseph Smith testified that the revelations were of God and were correct, the preface of the Doctrine and Covenants reads:

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHC "Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding." [^16]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCBrigham Young, who received one of the revelations included in the current edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (section 136), asserted that when messages were conveyed from God to man, the words were in the language of the recipient. "The revelations of God," he said, "contain correct doctrine and principle, so far as they go; . . . the Almighty . . . has to speak to us in a manner to meet the extent of our capacities. . . . If an angel should come into this congregation, or visit any individual of it, and use the language he uses in heaven, what would we be benefited? Not any, because we could not understand a word he said. When angels come to visit mortals, . . . they have to descend to our capacities in order to communicate with us." [^17]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCOne of the most succinct but comprehensive summaries of the Prophet's activities while arranging the revelations for publication was written by Orson Pratt. In an article published in the Millennial Star, he aptly described his observations:

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCJoseph, the Prophet, in selecting the revelations from the Manuscripts, and arranging them for publication, did not arrange them according to the order of the date in which they were given, neither did he think it necessary to publish them all in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, but left them to be published more fully in his History. Hence, paragraphs taken from revelations of a latter date, are, in a few instances, incorporated with those of an earlier date. Indeed, at the time of compilation, the prophet was inspired in several instances to write additional sentences and paragraphs to the earlier revelations. In this manner the Lord did truly give 'line upon line, here a little and there a little,' the same as He did to a revelation that Jeremiah received, which, after being burned by the wicked king of Israel, the Lord revealed over again with great numbers of additional words. (See Jeremiah XXXVI;32) [^18]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCIn 1835 Joseph Smith completed editing and compiling the revelations that were to be published. On August 17 these writings were presented for approval of the Church at a general conference held in Kirtland. Leaders of the various priesthood quorums testified that the revelations received and compiled by the Prophet were true. William W. Phelps also read the testimony of the Twelve Apostles concerning the veracity of the revelatory writings. The Twelve bore witness to the world that the Lord had manifest to them through the Holy Ghost that "these Commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true." Following these testimonies, "all of the members present, both male and female," with uplifted hands, unanimously voiced their approval of the revelations, and by this procedure the revelations became binding upon the membership of the Church. [^19]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCThe first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, published in 1835, had 101 revelations. [^20] The committee that had helped prepare them for publication introduced the work in a preface that stated that the writings contained "the leading items of the religion we have professed to believe." The first part of the book contained seven lectures on faith that had been delivered in Kirtland during the winter of 1834-35 to members of the priesthood. The second part contained one hundred revelations under the heading "Covenants and Commandments of the Lord to his Servants of the Church." The last part was an appendix that included a revelation dated November 3, 1831 (now section 133), a statement regarding marriage, a description of the beliefs of the Church regarding government and laws in general, and the minutes of two general assemblies of the priesthood. The first assembly authorized the publication of the Doctrine and Covenants, and the second recorded its approval of this work. At this time, the membership of the Church accepted only the one hundred revelations as inspired communications from the Lord; the statements on marriage, government, and laws were not endorsed as revelations but were accepted as correct expressions of the belief of the Saints on those subjects for that period. [^21]

Publication of the Doctrine and CovenantsHCSome of the revelations received by Joseph Smith before 1835 were not included in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants but were published in Church periodicals. For example, all of the writings that now constitute the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price had been recorded by the Prophet before March 1831, and except for chapter 8 of Moses, these writings had been recorded before he moved to Ohio. Portions of this segment of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible—Moses 5:1-16; 6:43-68; 7:1-69; and 8:13-30—were printed in the Evening and the Morning Star between August 1832 and the end of April 1833. [^22] One chapter from Joseph Smith's translation of the New Testament, chapter 24 of Matthew, recorded in 1831, was also published (probably in Kirtland) before 1839. [^23] Moreover, some of the revelations copied in the Kirtland Revelation Book, such as section 88 (the Olive Leaf), dated December 1832, were not included in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. [^24]

The Writings of Abraham

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCIn the same decade that Joseph Smith began publishing selections from his translation of the Bible, he purchased four mummies and some ancient papyri that contained the writings of the patriarch Abraham and his great-grandson Joseph. These mummies, along with others, had been discovered on the west bank of the Nile River across from the ancient city of Thebes (now Luxor) by Antonio Lebolo, an Italian who was licensed by the French government. Following his death in Castellamonte, Italy, on February 19, 1830, [^25] eleven of the mummies, along with some of the ancient writings on papyri, were shipped to the United States, where, in the spring of 1833, they were claimed by Michael H. Chandler. Chandler, who lived in Philadelphia and claimed that he was Lebolo's nephew, displayed the artifacts for a fee in various eastern cities. [^26] In the summer of 1835, he arrived in Kirtland with four mummies and some ancient scrolls. When Joseph Smith learned about Chandler's inheritance, he decided to purchase the objects. In the summer of 1835, with financial assistance from Joseph Coe, Simeon Andrews, and others, the Prophet secured the mummies and papyri for $2,400. [^27]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCDescribing the incidents preceding the Prophet's acquisition of the mummies and the rolls of papyrus, Orson Pratt said that Chandler had

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCobtained from learned men the best translation he could of some few characters, which however, was not a translation, but more in the shape of their ideas with regard to it, their acquaintance with the language not being sufficient to enable them to translate it literally. After some conversation with the Prophet Joseph, Mr. Chandler presented to him the ancient characters, asking him if he could translate them. The prophet took them and repaired to his room and inquired of the Lord concerning them. The Lord told him they were sacred records. . . . And he also enquired of the Lord concerning some few characters which Mr. Chandler, gave him by way of a test, to see if he could translate them. The Prophet Joseph translated these characters and returned them, with the translation to Mr. Chandler; and who, in comparing it with the translation of the same few characters by learned men, that he had before obtained, found the two to agree. [^28]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCAfter Joseph Smith had provided Michael Chandler with a translation of some of the characters, Chandler gave the Prophet a certificate that included the following statement:

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCKirtland, July 6, 1835

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCThis is to make known to all who may be desirous, concerning the knowledge of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., in deciphering the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic characters in my possession, which I have, in many eminent cities, showed to the most learned; and, from the information that I could ever learn, or meet with, I find that of Mr. Joseph Smith, Jun., to correspond in the most minute matters.

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCMICHAEL H. CHANDLER, Traveling with, and proprietor of, Egyptian mummies. [^29]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCEarly in July 1835, a few days after purchasing the ancient scrolls from Michael Chandler, Joseph Smith commenced translating the papyri, with William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery serving as his scribes. He wrote that "much to our joy [I] found that one of the rolls contained the writings of Abraham, another the writings of Joseph of Egypt." He also wrote in his diary that after further examination, he would unfold to others a more complete account of what he learned while translating the records. "Truly we can say," he said, "the Lord is beginning to reveal the abundance of peace and truth." [^30]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCSince Joseph Smith had not learned to read Egyptian characters in July 1835 when he used the term translation in connection with this record, he probably meant at least in part an explanation or the rendering of ideas from one language to another. Thus through revelation or inspiration from God, he dictated to a scribe the writings of ancient prophets. After he left the Church, Warren Parrish, a close associate of the Prophet in the mid-1830s, wrote that he had served as Joseph Smith's private secretary, had kept his journal, and had sat "by his side and penned . . . the translation of the Egyptian Hyeroglyphics [sic] as he claimed to receive it by direct inspiration from heaven." [^31] Orson Pratt also said he observed Joseph Smith as he translated the writings found in the Book of Abraham in the Pearl of Great Price: "I saw his countenance lighted up as the inspiration of the Holy Ghost rested upon him, dictating the great and most precious revelations now printed for our guide. I saw him translating, by inspiration, the Old and New Testaments, and the inspired book of Abraham from Egyptian papyrus." [^32]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCDuring Joseph Smith's remaining years of residence in Kirtland, he maintained an interest in translating the papyri he had purchased from Chandler. In the latter part of July 1835, he reported that he "was continually engaged in translating an alphabet to the Book of Abraham, and arranging a grammar of the Egyptian language as practiced by the ancients." [^33] On October 1, he wrote that while laboring on the Egyptian alphabet, he learned the principles of astronomy as understood by Abraham. [^34] One week later, he recorded in his diary that he had "re-commenced translating the ancient records." [^35] In November he spent a great deal of time working on this project; and in December, while discussing the Egyptian records with Brigham Young, Jared Carter, and William E. McLellin, he explained "many things concerning the dealing of God with the ancients, and the formation of the planetary system." [^36] By the fall of 1837, the Prophet had completed the translation of a portion of the ancient records and was preparing to publish it. [^37]

Translation of the Book of AbrahamHCWhile Joseph Smith was translating the ancient Egyptian records, the mummies and some of the scrolls were shown to many persons, both members of the Church and nonmembers. Frederick G. Williams and his sons exhibited them from one community to another around Kirtland, and others took ancient objects to Hiram and other parts of Portage County, where they were shown to many settlers. Following the completion of the Kirtland Temple, the mummies were exhibited in the upper story of this building. And later, after the Saints became established in Nauvoo, Joseph Smith and other members of his family showed the mummies and ancient parchments to a constant stream of visitors. [^38]

Patterns of Thought and Behavior

Many themes were touched upon in the revelations and instructions that were constantly being unfolded by the Prophet to members of the Church. Many of the revelations confirmed contemporary Christian conduct, dealing with such transgressions as pride, selfishness, idleness, dishonesty, stealing, killing, and committing sexual perversions. [^39] The Saints were also commanded to observe the Sabbath, identified as the first day of the week or the Lord's day. [^40]

Some of the principles revealed were not emphasized by most Christian ministers in that age. Every member had the responsibility of teaching the gospel to others, with priesthood holders directed to serve as traveling elders, preaching from community to community and from house to house. [^41] Members were also challenged to become acquainted with good books and to study history, geography, languages, and other disciplines. [^42] A number of revelations emphasized that the Saints were to impart of their substance to the poor and consecrate their material goods and talents for the building of God's kingdom. [^43]

The Age of Accountability

During the 1830s Latter-day Saints also learned the age at which children should be baptized and the reason for performing this ordinance when a child reached a particular age. While translating the Bible, the Prophet received instructions from the Lord concerning the age of accountability. Sometime between February 4, 1831, and April 5, 1831, while translating chapter 17 of Genesis (which describes the law of circumcision), the Prophet learned that children, when properly taught, are responsible before the Lord for their actions and are to be baptized when eight years old. [^44] This concept was later included in a revelation recorded in November 1831 and initially printed in the Evening and the Morning Star in October 1832. According to this revelation, parents have a responsibility to teach their children the principles of the gospel and to prepare them for baptism when they are eight years old, the age of accountability. [^45]

The Antiquity of the Gospel

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCSelections from Joseph Smith's translation of the first chapter of Genesis now constitute the Book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price. When these selections were initially published in the Evening and the Morning Star, the Saints' understanding of the antiquity of the gospel was enhanced. From the Book of Mormon, they learned that the Nephites and Jaredites understood long before his birth in mortality that Jesus Christ is the Redeemer, and that prior to the meridian of time, repentant believers were baptized by water and "of fire and of the Holy Ghost." They further learned that the plan of salvation was preached from the beginning and that all the holy prophets spoke about the Savior of mankind. [^46] Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible enlarged upon the doctrine of the antiquity of the gospel by explaining in greater detail the gospel as understood by Adam, Enoch, and Noah. When the earliest selections from the revised Bible were printed, the Saints learned that Adam, after being cast out from the garden of Eden, and subsequent patriarchs (including Enoch and Noah) understood the basic principles of the gospel, including faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, repentance for one's transgressions, and baptism in the name of the Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, "the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men." [^47]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCFrom the revelation now included in the Book of Moses, the Saints also learned that Adam and Eve were the first to offer "the firstlings of their flock for an offering to the Lord." The King James Version of the Bible has no reference to Adam's offering a sacrifice. In the article in the Evening and the Morning Star, members learned that this symbolic sacrifice was in "similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father." [^48]

Work on the Joseph Smith TranslationHCThe writings of Moses confirm and add to biblical and Book of Mormon teachings concerning Melchizedek. According to the Bible, Melchizedek, the king of Salem and the "priest of the most high God," received tithes from Abraham. The Book of Mormon enlarges upon this by teaching that after he preached the doctrine of repentance to the people, Melchizedek helped establish peace in the realm and was subsequently called the Prince of Peace. Expanding upon these teachings, Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible asserts that Melchizedek received the office of the high priesthood, according to the holy order of God. This priesthood "holds the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom of God, even the keys of the knowledge of God, and has power to pronounce blessings according to the will and commandment of the Lord." [^49] The excerpts from the new translation vividly demonstrated to the Saints that the gospel they were striving to live was not new, but had been taught to the children of God in every dispensation, beginning with the first man, Adam.

Premortal Life

During the 1830s Joseph Smith learned many principles relating to the eternal nature of man, but as with many other doctrines, the full scope of this belief did not become common knowledge for the Saints until after they later moved to Illinois. During the time Kirtland was a headquarters of the Church, the Saints did not publish any articles describing man's premortal existence. Parley P. Pratt wrote that he gained a new insight into his relationship to God during the winter of 1839-40 after the Prophet taught him the nature of the eternal family organization. When he learned that his wife might become his eternal companion and that the result of their eternal union could be offspring as numerous as the stars of heaven, Elder Pratt rejoiced and exclaimed, "I felt that God was my Heavenly Father indeed; [and] that Jesus was my brother." [^50]

Although Joseph Smith probably did not preach in public before 1839 the doctrine of man's premortal existence, he received many revelations that referred to this subject during the thirties. While working on the revision of the Bible, he learned that the Lord created all things spiritually before they were created naturally upon the face of the earth. [^51] In a revelation received in September 1830 (D&C 29), he learned that before the devil tempted Adam in the garden of Eden, he rebelled against God, saying, "Give me thine honor, which is my power." After leading one-third of the hosts of heaven against God, Satan was defeated. According to this revelation (and information published in the Book of Moses), Satan's rebellion included his effort to destroy the agency of man. [^52] The Prophet's understanding of this conflict was also enhanced when he learned (as recorded in August 1830) that the angel Michael was Adam; in the book of Revelation, John specified that Michael was one of those who waged war against Satan. Years probably passed before the Latter-day Saints connected Adam with the war that was waged prior to his temptation in the garden of Eden. Nevertheless, in the 1830s some of them learned that Adam was the angel Michael and that Noah was Gabriel. In a letter dated January 1, 1834, Oliver Cowdery included information that identified these two angelic messengers and added, "I just drop this because I supposed you would be pleased to know, and I have no disposition to keep back anything from my brethren that I am privileged to know." [^53]

Other references to man's premortal existence are found in the revelations received by Joseph Smith. A revelation received in Kirtland on May 6, 1833, and printed in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants states that "man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." [^54] While translating the Book of Abraham, the Prophet also learned that "intelligences . . . were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones," and that Abraham was one of the righteous spirits chosen before his birth in mortality to be a leader. These later writings, however, were not published until 1842. [^55]

Eschatology

The understanding of the Latter-day Saints concerning the doctrine of last things and man's ultimate destiny was enhanced during the thirties. The Book of Mormon served as a guide, helping the Saints to interpret properly many Bible passages relating to the second coming of Christ, the Millennium, the resurrection, and the future state of mankind. Before migrating to Ohio, the Saints understood that catastrophic developments would precede the Second Advent, that Israel would be gathered in Palestine, and that others would be gathered in a holy city (a place of refuge, a city of God, a New Jerusalem) in America. From the Book of Mormon they also learned that America was the place where the city of New Jerusalem would be built. [^56] Moreover, they learned that Christ would usher in a millennial era, a thousand years of peace during which Satan would have no power because of the righteousness of the people. [^57]

The Book of Mormon further instructed the Saints that there would be a universal resurrection; that as a result of the atonement of Christ, the body and spirit would be reunited; that the resurrected body would be a tangible, corporeal body; and that there would be two resurrections, the first a resurrection of the just and the second, of the unjust. [^58] This record also described the condition of the spirit between death and the resurrection. At death the righteous enter paradise, a state of rest and peace, and the wicked enter a spirit prison where the unrighteous suffer mental anguish. [^59]

The Last Days

The revelations that Joseph Smith recorded in the early 1830s gave the Saints an increased understanding of events that would occur in the future. In addition to learning that Independence, Jackson County, Missouri, was the location of the New Jerusalem that would be established in America, they learned that the city of Enoch, which was caught up into heaven, would descend and unite with the city of Zion in America. According to an excerpt from Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, "The Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us, and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other. [^60]

While Joseph Smith received many revelations in the thirties that confirmed biblical and Book of Mormon teachings concerning the wickedness and destruction that would occur in the last days, he received additional knowledge concerning the destructive forces that would plague mankind and the relationship between the abominations of the people and the catastrophic events. He learned that because mankind would not repent, the Lord would "take vengeance upon the wicked." These destructions would be so extensive, the revelations said, that the earth would be transfigured. Elements would melt with fervent heat. Mountains would be broken down. Valleys would be exalted. The earth would return to its state as it was before it had been divided, and a new earth and a new heaven would be created. [^61]

The Civil War Prophecy

The devastating forces that would plague mankind prior to the Millennium were emphasized in a prophecy recorded by the Prophet on December 25, 1832: "The inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." [^62]

Describing events that were occurring in the world at the time he received this prophecy, the Prophet wrote that a "rebellion" had erupted in South Carolina. [^63] The people of South Carolina at that time were experiencing a deteriorating economy; while cotton planters were faced with declining prices and exhausted soil, settlers in Charleston were finding it difficult to compete with more powerful trading centers in New York and other port cities. Meanwhile, many in South Carolina were concerned about increased agitation in the North against slavery. They also feared the growing political power of the North, which in time would enable that section of the country to impose its will over the South. Discontent in South Carolina eventually focused on protective tariffs that apparently favored the North at the expense of the South. Both the Tariff of 1828 and the Tariff of 1832 included provisions that, according to many southerners, channeled the wealth of the South into the hands of their political opponents. In November 1832, leaders of South Carolina, meeting in convention, declared the hated Tariff of 1832 null and void in their state beginning February 1, 1833. [^64]

With threats of nullification and possibly secession, President Andrew Jackson maneuvered forces in the nation's capital to try to prevent the citizens of South Carolina from carrying out their objectives. In December, after calling on Americans to demonstrate their loyalty to the Union, he asked Congress to pass an act permitting him to enforce the revenue laws in South Carolina by any means necessary. Congress responded by granting the President authority to use the national army and navy to crush the rebellion in South Carolina. [^65]

While Joseph Smith's prophecy on war was recorded during a period of crisis in American history, at a time when there was talk of war, there was no immediate threat of major civil war in 1832. No other state was willing to support South Carolina at that time. It is possible that if war had erupted at that time, the confrontation would have been between South Carolina and the combined forces of all other states. After Joseph Smith received the revelation on war, the crisis in South Carolina was temporarily resolved when Congress met in January 1832 and discussed lowering the tariff, and settlers in South Carolina suspended their nullification ordinance. In the spring of 1832 Congress enacted a compromise tariff, providing for a genuine downward revision of the tariff, after which South Carolinians rescinded a nullification ordinance that was never enacted. [^66]

When the prophecy on war is placed in its historical setting and statements in it are coupled with Joseph Smith's interpretation of what he learned from the Lord, it emerges as one of the most remarkable predictions recorded by the Prophet. He wrote that on December 25, 1832, while "praying earnestly on the subject," he learned that "the commencement of the difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the Son of Man will be in South Carolina." [^67] In addition to learning through revelation that there would be a rebellion in South Carolina, the Prophet learned that the northern states would be divided against the southern states (in 1832-33 no other state supported South Carolina in the nullification controversy); that the civil war would lead to the death and misery of many souls; that the South would call on other nations for help, even the nation of Great Britain (which South Carolinians were not considering in the early thirties); that the slaves would be marshaled and disciplined for war; and that following this irrepressible conflict, war would be poured out upon all nations. [^68] All these prophecies were later fulfilled to some extent.

Though nearly all of the predictions recorded in the prophecy on war have been realized, it also contains instructions to those who will be living during the turbulent days preceding the Second Coming of Christ. In the midst of the sorrow, suffering, death, and destruction that will occur in the last days, followers of the Lord are admonished, "Stand ye in holy places, and be not moved." [^69]

One year after this revelation was recorded, Joseph Smith received another revelation that explained, in part, the significance of the Lord's instructions. Latter-day Saints were to gather to the places appointed by the Lord, according to the parable of the wheat and the tares, in order that the wheat (the followers of Christ) might be secured in the granaries "to possess eternal life, and be crowned with celestial glory," when Christ rewards every man according to his works. [^70]

The Second Coming and the Millennium

While members of the Church in the latter days are urged by the revelations to live in harmony with the teachings of Christ at a time when wickedness is most evident and destructive forces will strike the earth, they have also learned through the revelations that when Christ returns, He will appear to those who have gathered in Zion (America) and Jerusalem. Moreover, the ten tribes of Israel will participate in this gathering and will come down from the land of the north, will be crowned with glory, and will receive special blessings from the children of Ephraim. [^71]

As he was working on the translation of the Bible, Joseph Smith learned the interpretation of various concepts recorded by John in the book of Revelation. These concepts teach many important doctrines concerning the last days and the Millennium.

For example, through revelation, the Lord has revealed that the seven seals mentioned in Revelation refer to the seven thousand years of the earth's temporal existence, and that "in the beginning of the seventh thousand years" the Lord will "sanctify the earth, . . . and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things." [^72] Moreover, the resurrection of the just will usher in the Millennium, there will be a separation of the righteous and wicked, and only the righteous will inhabit the earth during the thousand years of peace. [^73] At the time of judgment, the apostles who were with Him during His ministry in Jerusalem will stand by His side "to judge the whole house of Israel." [^74] After returning to the earth, He will make "a full end of all nations," become the king and lawgiver, and rule mankind from His two world capitals. [^75] Then, while Satan is bound, children will be born and will "grow up without sin unto salvation." When they become old they will die, but instead of sleeping in the dust, they will be "changed," or resurrected, "in the twinkling of an eye." [^76]

Through revelation the Prophet also learned that the restored Church, which possesses the priesthood and keys of the priesthood, is the kingdom of God on earth, the stone that, according to Daniel, is to roll forth gradually until it fills the whole earth. Eventually all living persons on the earth are to come to a "knowledge of the Lord." This truth is inseparably connected with the priesthood of God, for the knowledge of God is derived through the power of the priesthood. [^77] In fact, by revelation the Saints learned that during the Millennium there will be a significant expansion of knowledge and truth never before disclosed to mankind. [^78]

Early revelations recorded by the Prophet further instructed the Saints concerning events that will occur at the end of or following the Millennium. Satan is to be loosed for a brief season, after which the devil and his armies will again be defeated by the Lord and "cast away into their own place" where they will have no power over the Saints. A new heaven and a new earth will be created. After this earth becomes a celestial abode, "crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father," and the meek will inherit this kingdom. [^79]

The Heavenly Mansions

Vision of the Degrees of GloryHCPrimarily as a result of the vision of glories Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon received in Hiram, Ohio, in February 1832, and as a consequence of a revelation the Prophet recorded nearly a year later in Kirtland, the understanding of the Latter-day Saints regarding the resurrection and the mansions in heaven has been increased significantly. Through revelation they have been taught that there are four classifications of resurrected bodies and four destinations for mankind. Those who develop a sanctified body in this life through obedience to the principles and ordinances of the gospel will be resurrected in the first resurrection, receive a celestial body, and inherit a celestial glory. They will receive the fulness of the Father; they will become kings and priests of the Most High and "gods," even the sons of God," and will dwell in the presence of the Father. [^80]

A second group will be resurrected with terrestrial bodies. These include individuals who were not valiant in their testimony of Christ. "These are they who are honorable men of the earth," but who have been "blinded by the craftiness of man." They will receive of the Son's glory but not the fulness of the Father. [^81]

A third group of resurrected beings will be resurrected with telestial bodies. According to the revelations, these individuals will participate in the second resurrection, which will take place at the end of the Millennium. "These are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie." Although these children of God will not be caught up to meet Christ when He returns, and they will suffer everlasting punishment, meaning God's punishment, they will inhabit a kingdom of glory. While the glory of the celestial kingdom is likened in brightness to the sun, the telestial is likened to the stars. [^82]

A fourth group of resurrected beings is composed of the sons of perdition. These are individuals who have denied the power of the Holy Ghost after having received it, who have known the power of God but have denied it, and who therefore form an alliance with Lucifer. Following their resurrection, they will be cast into outer darkness with the devil and his angels. The revelations, however, do not reveal in detail the nature of their punishment. [^83]

Salvation for the Dead

Four years after Joseph Smith beheld the vision in which he learned about the three degrees of glory, he beheld another vision in which he gained his initial understanding of the principle of salvation for the dead. In this vision of the celestial kingdom, received in the Kirtland Temple on January 21, 1836, he learned that all who would have accepted the gospel in this life had they been granted an opportunity are heirs of the celestial kingdom. In light of this concept, he wrote in his diary that he also learned that children who died before they arrived at the age of accountability would be saved in the celestial kingdom. [^84]

In an article in the Messenger and Advocate in March 1837, Warren Cowdery stated that the gospel was preached to the dead, as described in 1 Peter 4:6, so that man might be granted the privilege of embracing or rejecting the gospel. "We feel," the article read, that the Lord will "condemn no one until he hears, and refuses to obey the mandates of heaven." And all "who love and obey him, will be received with this pleasing plaudit, well done [thou] good and faithful servant." [^85]

The Godhead

For some members of the Church, including Joseph Smith, some of the original members of the School of the Prophets, and some bearers of the priesthood who were in Kirtland at the time of the dedication of the temple, knowledge of the Godhead was in part based on visionary experiences during which individuals beheld God. [^86] In a conversation with Robert Matthias, also known as "Joshua the Jewish minister," a visitor to Kirtland in 1835, Joseph Smith described his first vision. He said that while he was engaged in a quest for religious truth, he called upon the Lord and beheld a glorious vision. "A pillar of fire appeared above my head," he explained, "and filled me with unspeakable joy. A personage appeared in the midst of this pillar of flame, which was spread all around and yet nothing consumed. Another personage soon appeared like unto the first: he said unto me thy sins are forgiven thee." [^87] During the 1830s the Prophet identified in his writings the two personages who appeared to him in the spring of 1820 as the Father and the Son. [^88] In addition to Joseph Smith, at least three other early members of the Church, Sidney Rigdon, Zebedee Coltrin, and Lyman Wight, testified that they not only beheld Jesus Christ in vision, but also saw God the Eternal Father. [^89] Thus, members of the Church in the 1830s understood that the Father and Son are two separate and distinct personages. [^90]

The Lectures on Faith, published in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, not only identified the Father and Son as two personages, but also stated that the Godhead consists of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost and implied that the Father and Son are material beings in a form like created man. These lectures declared that man is formed after the image and likeness of God and that Jesus Christ is a personage "of tabernacle" who is "the express image and likeness of the personage of the Father." [^91] Joseph Smith undoubtedly understood in the 1830s that spirit is matter and that the resurrected body is a spiritual body. A revelation recorded on May 6, 1833, declared that "man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy." [^92] The anthropomorphic nature of God was more clearly explained by the Prophet in the early 1840s, when he taught the Saints that "all spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure." He further stated that while the Holy Ghost "is a personage of Spirit," the Father and the Son have tangible bodies of flesh and bones. [^93]

The Reverend Truman Coe, a Presbyterian minister in Kirtland, recognized that one of the distinct teachings of the Latter-day Saints was a belief that God was a material being who created man in his physical likeness. After living among the Saints in Kirtland for about four years, he wrote a brief history of the Saints that included a description of some of their most unusual beliefs. "They contend that the God worshipped by the Presbyterians and all other sectarians is no better than a wooden god," he said.

"They believe that the true God is a material being, composed of body and parts; and that when the Creator formed Adam in his own image, he made him about the size and shape of God himself." [^94]

Another concept relating to the Godhead that Joseph Smith disclosed in the 1830s was that Jesus is Jehovah, the God of ancient Israel. The Book of Mormon strongly affirms that Jesus was the God of the Old Testament, and when Joseph Smith worked on the inspired translation of the Bible and translated the Book of Abraham, he learned that the ancient patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob knew the Lord by the name of Jehovah. [^95]

Plurality of Gods

With the printing in 1832 of the vision of the degrees of glory that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon beheld in the John Johnson home, Latter-day Saints were introduced to the concept of plurality of gods. According to this revelation, individuals exalted in the celestial kingdom will receive the title of "gods." In commenting on this vision in 1844, the Prophet said, "Every man who reigns in celestial glory is a God to his dominions. . . . They who obtain a glorious resurrection from the dead, are exalted far above principalities, powers, thrones, dominions and angels, and are expressly declared to be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, all having eternal power." [^96] He admitted that this might appear as a very strange doctrine to the Christian world; and in the 1830s, a large percent of the members of the Church probably did not fully understand the significance of the sentence in this revelation that related to this concept. [^97]

After the concept of the plurality of gods had been introduced to the Saints in February 1832, Joseph Smith received additional revelations disclosing information relating to this doctrine. In one dated September 22 and 23, 1832, members of the Church learned that Jesus Christ promised His Father's kingdom to those who receive His Father. "Therefore," the revelation read, "all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." [^98] Three months later, another revelation identified the blessings that await the righteous resurrected saints: they "shall be filled with his [God's] glory, and receive their inheritance and be made equal with him." [^99]

Lorenzo Snow observed that some Latter-day Saints were acquainted with the doctrine of plurality of gods in the mid-1830s. Shortly before his baptism in 1836, he attended a patriarchal blessing meeting in the Kirtland Temple. Following the service, he was introduced to Joseph Smith's father, the patriarch to the Church, who prophesied that Lorenzo would be baptized. Elder Smith told him, "You will be as great as you can possibly wish—even as great as God, and you cannot wish to be greater." [^100]

At least one non-Mormon understood that the Latter-day Saints embraced an unusual belief concerning blessings that would be extended to the righteous following their resurrection. In Mormonism Exposed and Refuted, published in 1838, LaRoy Sunderland accused the Saints of blasphemy for teaching that some of God's children would be filled with Christ's glory "and be equal with him." [^101] Parley P. Pratt responded to these accusations, defending his belief concerning the propriety of referring to resurrected saints as gods, "even the sons of God." He stated that the Bible taught this type of equality. Referring to Christ's petition that the saints might become one even as He and His Father were one, Elder Pratt suggested that there was a relationship between oneness, equality, and becoming gods. He noted that the Bible stated that the saints would become "joint heirs" with God and that the spirit would guide them into all truth. According to Elder Pratt, "knowledge is power," and when the saints were blessed to know the many truths that God knows, they would possess God's power and would therefore become gods. [^102]

The Word of Wisdom

Word of WisdomHCWhile Joseph Smith was unfolding to the Church guidelines for behavior and patterns of belief, he recorded a unique revelation that became known as the Word of Wisdom. When the Word of Wisdom was revealed to the Prophet on February 27, 1833, many members of the Church used tobacco, drank hard liquor, and regularly partook of tea and coffee. Many Americans recognized in the early nineteenth century that these stimulants were injurious to the body, and crusaders were campaigning against their consumption. The temperance crusade was rapidly gaining momentum in various parts of the United States, including the Western Reserve. Like many other revelations, the Word of Wisdom was given in response to a recognized need for additional insight on a specific subject. Brigham Young later commented on the events leading to Joseph Smith's inquiry that brought forth this revelation:

Word of WisdomHCI think I am as well acquainted with the circumstances which led to the giving of the Word of Wisdom as any man in the Church, although I was not present at the time to witness them. The first school of the prophets was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen in a house which belonged to Bishop Whitney, and which was attached to his store, which store probably might be about fifteen feet square. In the rear of this building was a kitchen, probably ten by fourteen feet, containing rooms and pantries. Over this kitchen was situated the room in which the Prophet received revelations and in which he instructed his brethren. The brethren came to that place for hundreds of miles to attend school in a little room probably no larger than eleven by fourteen. When they assembled together in this room after breakfast, the first they did was to light their pipes, and, while smoking, talk about the great things of the kingdom, and spit all over the room, and as soon as the pipe was out of their mouths a large chew of tobacco would then be taken. Often when the Prophet entered the room to give the school instructions he would then find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke. This, and the complaints of his wife at having to clean so filthy a floor, made the Prophet think upon the matter, and he inquired of the Lord relating to the conduct of the Elders in using tobacco, and the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was the result of his inquiry. [^103]

Word of WisdomHCBrigham Young noted that although Joseph Smith asked the Lord specifically regarding tobacco, he received not only an answer to that inquiry but also to many other concerns relating to health. The revelation includes prohibitions against the consumption of tobacco, wine, strong drinks, and hot drinks, as well as affirmative provisions regarding the use of wholesome herbs, fruits, grains, and meat. Fruits are to be used in their seasons "with prudence and thanksgiving," and grain is recommended as "the staff of life." The revelation promises that those who observe this word of wisdom will be blessed physically, mentally, and spiritually. It was given to the Saints "not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days." [^104]

Word of WisdomHCWhile many of the same principles related to health were being taught by others in the 1830s, the Word of Wisdom was unique in that Latter-day Saints were given a law of health through revelation. Sylvester Graham and many other reformers of the 1830s taught views that today are recognized either as incorrect or highly controversial. The Prophet Joseph Smith, however, recorded through revelation provisions relating to health that by and large have been substantiated in the twentieth century by leading authorities in this field of research. [^105]

Many of the religious concepts unfolded through Joseph Smith during the 1830s were distinct theological concepts taught by no other religious leader in the United States at that time. While some critics have suggested that he created a religion by copying from his contemporaries, a careful comparison of the Prophet's teachings with the theology advanced by others in that period clearly reveals that he could not be considered a popularizer. Through revelation, he restored many religious principles that had been forgotten during the long years following the disruption of the primitive Church of Christ. Thus the Lord was fulfilling his promise to the faithful that they would be given "line upon line, precept upon precept, " [^106] as the heavens continued to open and new principles were given. Truly the heavens resounded during the Saints' sojourn in Kirtland!

Unfolding the Doctrines of the Kingdom

---
Notas:
[^1] Lyman E. Johnson HC 4:541.
[^2] Brigham Young D&C 20:2-3, 38-64; 21:1.
[^3] Heber C. Kimball James R. Moss, "The Historical Development of the Church Court System," p. 75.
[^4] Orson Hyde D&C 42:3; autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 19; LeRoi C. Snow, "How Lorenzo Snow Found God," Improvement Era 40 (February 1937): 82-84; George A. Smith in JD 11:7; "Elder Daniel D. McArthur," Juvenile Instructor 27 (February 15, 1892): 128-29.
[^5] David W. Patten D&C 41:9-11; 42:30-36.
[^6] Luke S. Johnson John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 28; John Corrill, A Brief History of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints, p. 18; Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:219-21; 235-36.
[^7] William E. McLellin D&C 72:8-19.
[^8] John F. Boynton Diary of Reynolds Cahoon, 1832; HC 2:228.
[^9] Orson Pratt D&C 58:18.
[^10] William Smith D&C 84:112.
[^11] Thomas B. Marsh Kirtland Revelation Book, pp. 84-86. See also D&C 107:68-72, 87-88. This revelation, which was copied in the Kirtland Revelation Book, was later included in the Revelation on the Priesthood, which is now section 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants, beginning with verse 59 and continuing to verse 100 with the exception of verses 69, 70, 73, 76, 77, 88, 90, and 93-98.
[^12] Parley P. Pratt Far West Record, p. 3; JohnWhitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," pp. 27-28 (chapter VII); HC 1:176n.
[^13] D&C 68:19.
[^14] D&C 84:111.
[^15] D&C 107:1-19.
[^16] HC 1:243n. Joseph Fielding Smith taught that the President of the High Priesthood presides over all the priesthood of the Church, and since he holds the keys of that priesthood, he has the authority to regulate it. Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation 3:80.
[^17] "Duty of Bishops, March 1832," Newel K. Whitney Collection, BYU.
[^18] Kirtland Revelation Book, pp. 10-11; D&C, introduction to section 81.
[^19] Far West Record, p. 32; D. Michael Quinn, "The Evolution of the Presiding Quorums of the LDS Church," Journal of Mormon History 1 (1974): 23-24. Frederick G. Williams was serving as a counselor to the Prophet in January 1832. Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 6.
[^20] D&C 81:2. Initially this revelation was addressed to Jesse Gause. Kirtland Revelation Book, pp. 17-18. According to Joseph Fielding Smith, members of the First Presidency have a right to officiate in all the offices of the Church and "hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the Church." He further taught that the President of the Church is the presiding officer who presides over the membership of the Church. Church News, September 9, 1933, p. 4; Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation 3:80.
[^21] D&C 90:16.
[^22] D&C 107:22.
[^23] D&C 107:9, 80.
[^24] D&C 68:20-22. This information was inserted in section 68 after the First Presidency had been organized.
[^25] D&C 107:22; Quinn, "Evolution of the Presiding Quorums," p. 25. See also D&C 124:95 and Glen Mouritsen, "The Office of Associate President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," pp. 41-54.
[^26] HC 4:190; Quinn, "Evolution of the Presiding Quorums," p. 26; Book of Patriarchal Blessings, September 1835, Church Archives.
[^27] HC 3:381.
[^28] HC 3:381; D&C 86:8-10; 107:40; 124:91-92; Andrew F. Ehat and Lyndon W. Cook, The Words of Joseph Smith, p. 6; Earnest M. Skinner, "Joseph Smith, Sr.: First Patriarch to the Church," pp. 86-89.
[^29] D&C 107:40, 41, 57; Skinner, "Joseph Smith, Sr.," pp. 75, 96-103.
[^30] Quinn, "Evolution of the Presiding Quorums," p. 26; Earnest M. Skinner, "Joseph Smith, Sr., First Patriarch to the Church," chapter 6.
[^31] Edward Stevenson, "Incidents of My Early Days in the Church," Juvenile Instructor 29 (September 1, 1894): 551-52.
[^32] HC 2:446-47, 467; Journal History, May 10, 1836; Journal of John Smith, 1836. Following the death of Joseph Smith, Sr., in 1840, Hyrum Smith was ordained Patriarch to the Church (on January 24, 1841), followed by William B. Smith (ordained on May 24, 1845); after William B. Smith's excommunication, John Smith, brother of Joseph Smith, Sr., was ordained on January 1, 1849.
[^33] Isaiah 54:2. See also Isaiah 33:20.
[^34] 3 Nephi 22:2; Moroni 10:31; Sidney B. Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, pp. 201-2.
[^35] D&C 82:13.
[^36] D&C 94:1.
[^37] Kirtland Council Minute Book [KCMB], pp. 29-31; HC 2:25. There were at least fifteen members of this first high council: the Presidency of the Church and the twelve high councilors.
[^38] KCMB, pp. 29, 32; HC 2:28-31; D&C 102. The twelve high priests who were called to serve on the first high council of the Church were Joseph Smith, Sr., John Smith, Joseph Coe, John Johnson, Martin Harris, John S. Carter, Jared Carter, Oliver Cowdery, Samuel H. Smith, Orson Hyde, Sylvester Smith, and Luke Johnson.
[^39] KCMB, pp. 32-35; D&C 102; HC 2:28-29.
[^40] HC 2:124; Far West Record, pp. 46-47.
[^41] KCMB, p. 38.
[^42] KCMB, p. 206.
[^43] KCMB, pp. 48, 214-17, 245, 248.
[^44] KCMB, p. 211.
[^45] KCMB, pp. 108-10.
[^46] KCMB, p. 207.
[^47] KCMB, p. 239.
[^48] KCMB, pp. 251-52, 254.
[^49] KCMB, pp. 120, 135, 261-64.
[^50] KCMB, pp. 239, 261-64.
[^51] KCMB, pp. 24-25, 107, 136, 139.
[^52] KCMB, p. 108.
[^53] KCMB, p. 107.
[^54] KCMB, p. 252.
[^55] D&C 27:12. See also D&C 20:2-3; 21:1. This title of apostle did not have the same connotation as it does today.
[^56] D&C 18:9, 37.
[^57] HC 2:187, 195.
[^58] KCMB, p. 147; HC 2:181-82.
[^59] KCMB, p. 149; HC 2: 186-89; "Extracts from Heber C. Kimball's Journal," Times and Seasons 6 (April 15, 1845): 868; autobiography of Joseph B. Noble, p. 10.
[^60] KCMB, pp. 151-54; HC 2:189-93.
[^61] KCMB, pp. 157-58; HC 2:193-94; Wilburn D. Talbot, "The Duties and Responsibilities of the Apostles," pp. 16-17.
[^62] KCMB, pp. 158-64; HC 2:189-98; D&C 18:27. See also KCMB, pp. 86-88.
[^63] KCMB, pp. 187-88; HC 2:220, 382. The ranking of apostles according to their temporal ages pertained only to the initial organization of the Twelve. Prior to 1844, a combined criterion of chronological age and date of ordination was used for determining the relative positions of the members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Only when two apostles were set apart on the same day did age determine their seniority. Reed C. Durham, Jr. and Steven H. Heath, Succession in the Church, p. 46.
[^64] HC 2:372-74. Under the date of January 16, 1836, Joseph Smith recorded the following information in his diary: "I next proceeded to explain the subject of the duty of the twelve, and their authority, which is next to the present presidency, and that the arrangement of the assembly in this place, on the 15th instant, in placing the high councils of Kirtland next [to] the presidency was because the business to be transacted was business that related to that body in particular which was to fill the several quorums in Kirtland; not because they were first in office, and that the arrangement was [the] most judicious that could be made on the occasion; also the 12 are not subject to any other than the first presidency, viz., myself, S. Rigdon and F. G. Williams." Diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 122-23, cited in HC 2:373-74.
[^65] KCMB, p. 198; HC 2:209-10; D&C 107:1-58; Heber C. Kimball Papers, A Revelation Given at Kirtland (Book 94B), pp. 22-23.
[^66] HC 2:209, 222-26; Talbot, "Duties and Responsibilities of the Apostles," pp. 23-24.
[^67] HC 2:430-32.
[^68] Quinn, "Evolution of the Presiding Quorums," p. 28. During the Nauvoo period, the functions and jurisdiction of the apostles were expanded. The apostles began to regulate affairs within the stakes, for example, served as members of the city council, were placed in charge of Church publications, and were given the responsibility of preparing for a westward migration. Ibid., pp. 29-30.
[^69] Joseph Young, History of the Organization of the Seventies, p. 2; HC 2:181n.
[^70] HC 2:201-2.
[^71] Messenger and Advocate 2 (January 1836): 253; KCMB, pp. 99, 175-76, 187.
[^72] D&C 107:25-27, 34, 93, 97-99.
[^73] KCMB, pp. 98-99; HC 2:243-44, 388; Quinn, "Evolution of the Presiding Quorums," p. 32n.
[^74] HC 2:393. Minutes of the Seventies, Book A, pp. 6-9, Church Archives.
[^75] Minutes of the Seventies, p. 9; Journal of Wilford Woodruff, December 20, 1836; Dean C. Jessee, "The Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 375.
[^76] Minutes of the Seventies, p. 18; Joseph Young, History of the Seventies, pp. 4-5. The five high priests who were released as presidents of the First Quorum of Seventy were Hazen Aldrich, Leonard Rich, Zebedee Coltrin, Lyman Sherman, and Sylvester Smith (leaving Joseph Young and Levi Hancock in the council); and the five elders who filled the vacancies in the presidency were James Foster, Josiah Butterfield, John Gaylord, Daniel S. Miles, and Salmon Gee.
[^77] D&C 107:85-88. This revelation also stated that the president of the elders quorum was to preside over ninety-six elders. D&C 107:89.
[^78] Robert L. Marrott, "History and Functions of the Aaronic Priesthood," pp. 25-26.
[^79] HC 2:243, 246; KCMB, pp. 99, 105.
[^80] HC 2:411.
[^81] Journal of Edward Partridge, January 26, March 29, 1836; HC 2:430; George A. Smith in JD 2:214-15; Journal of Wilford Woodruff, April 3-4, 1837, Jessee, "Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," pp. 387-88.
[^82] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," pp. 19-20. For approximately one hundred years, the word conference had a dual meaning in the Church. It meant a local geographical area outside the organized stakes and also a meeting of the Saints. There was also no distinction in the early history of the Church between local and general conferences. Jay R. Lowe, "A Study of the General Conferences of the Church," pp. 14-15.
[^83] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," pp. 34-35; HC 4:393; Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 446.
[^84] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," pp. 32-34; Pratt, Autobiography, p. 42; Times and Seasons 1 (March 1840): 77-78; Elders' Journal 1 (November 1837): 22; Far West Record, p. 152.
[^85] Messenger and Advocate 2 (June 1836): 332.
[^86] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," p. 36.
[^87] D&C 107:78-82; 102:27.
[^88] D&C 134:1, 4-5, 7-11; Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants: Our Modern Scripture, pp. 204-5.
[^89] 3 Nephi 27:3-9. Many religious communities in the early republic used the title "Church of Christ." Local Congregational churches, for example, were called the Church of Christ of Middleboro or the Church of Christ of Plymouth. Some of the leaders of the restoration movement of the early nineteenth century also used this title, while the Presbyterians of Geneva, New York, referred to their church as the "Church of Jesus Christ." "Records of the Church of Christ, In the Joining borders of Bridgewater and Middleborough"; Records of the Church of Christ in Geneva, State of New York.
[^90] HC 2:62-63; Evening and Morning Star 2 (May 1834): 158-60; KCMB, p. 49.
[^91] KCMB, pp. 84, 134, 144, 180, 200; HC 1:483; 2:126, 146, 239, 246; John Smith to Elias Smith, October 19, 1834, copy in Special Collections, University of Utah.
[^92] D&C 115:4. When an extract of this revelation identifying the name of the Church was printed in the Elders' Journal, the title appeared as follows: "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints." Elders' Journal 2 (August 1838): 52.
[^93] Autobiography of Elizabeth Beswick Tanner, p. 1.
[^94] Journal History, May 26, 1835.
[^95] Joel H. Johnson, Voice from the Mountains, p. 12.
[^96] "The Word of Wisdom," Times and Seasons 3 (June 1, 1842): 800; Brigham Young in JD 13:277.
[^97] Minutes of the Salt Lake School of the Prophets, October 11, 1883, Church Archives; Constitution of the Kirtland Camp, Church Archives (see Appendix D).
[^98] KCMB, pp. 39-40; HC 2:34-35; Messenger and Advocate 3 (November 1836): 412. The position advocated by Orson Pratt in this controversy is the policy of the Church today.
[^99] Messenger and Advocate 3 (November 1836): 412.
[^100] Messenger and Advocate 3 (May 1837): 510-11.
[^101] HC 2:223-25.
[^102] Autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 3.
[^103] Messenger and Advocate 3 (May 1837): 511. Minutes of the Seventies, p. 21, 32.
[^104] HC 2:482.
[^105] Record of the First Quorum of Elders, October 19, 1837, Research Library and Archives, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.
[^106] HC 2:522-24; Far West Record, p. 87.
