Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 14

Organizational Changes in OhioHCChurch Policies, Programs, and Administration

Organizational Changes in OhioHCOne of the important and enduring developments in the 1830s related to the structure of Church government. In the early 1840s, Joseph Smith wrote, "We believe in the same organization that existed in the primitive Church, viz.: apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc." This basic pattern of church government was constituted before 1836. [^1] When the Church was organized on April 6, 1830, Joseph Smith was called to serve as first elder and Oliver Cowdery as second elder. The names and principal responsibilities of the three offices of the Aaronic Priesthood—priests, teachers, and deacons—were also known at that time. Although there was not a Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, Joseph Smith was designated not only as a prophet, seer, and revelator, but also as an apostle. [^2]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCAs the Church increased rapidly in membership, the Prophet continued to unfold through revelation the ordained offices in the priesthood. Within five years, he directed the calling and ordination of bishops and their counselors, high priests, a First Presidency, assistant presidents, a patriarch, high councils, seventies, and a Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, as well as organized in Kirtland the first stake of the Church. By 1835 a well-developed ecclesiastical judicial system had also emerged, and while its emphasis has changed in some respects, this basic judicial pattern has continued to the present day. [^3]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCDuring this formative period in the history of the restoration, many members learned that some of their presumptions regarding the role and conduct of a prophet were incorrect. Before they joined the Church, the only acquaintance that converts generally had with prophets was through reading the Bible; and in the view of some, Joseph Smith appeared and acted in a manner very different from their ideas of ancient prophets. He did not have a long, flowing beard and did not wear a long robe. Instead, he looked like his contemporaries. While laboring in the fields he wore the work clothes of the period; he played with his children; he wrestled with the strongest men in the communities where he lived; and he joked with friends. He was a man with imperfections as well as a prophet who recorded the word of God, and some early converts found it difficult to recognize or accept his dual role. When some claimed revelations pertaining to basic principles affecting the entire Church, Joseph Smith informed them that he alone had the authority to receive such messages. It was difficult for some of the early converts to accept this restricted form of revelation from an individual who appeared so human in some respects and yet whose spiritual authority encompassed the whole Church. [^4]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCWhile the Saints were learning about the functions and responsibilities of a prophet and their relationship to him, Joseph Smith also taught them about many other offices in the Church, which created various new challenges for the membership. In addition to learning about the duties of the new officers, the Saints had to become acquainted with the relationship of one office to another and to the place of each position in the broadening channel of jurisdiction and authority.

Organizational Changes in OhioHCOffice of Bishop

The first new office in the priesthood to be revealed shortly after Joseph Smith moved to Kirtland was that of a bishop. On February 4, 1831, the Prophet received a revelation directing that Edward Partridge be ordained a bishop, sell his merchandising interests, and devote all of his time to service in the Church. Five days later, the thirty-eight-year-old merchant from Painesville, who had been a Latter-day Saint for only two months, was given the responsibility of directing the Church's temporal affairs, including the law of consecration and stewardship, and was instructed to use the Saints' contributions and surplus properties to assist the needy and the poor. [^5]

On June 6, 1831, two men were called to assist Bishop Partridge—Isaac Morley as his first counselor and John Corrill as second counselor. Soon thereafter Edward Partridge journeyed to Missouri with Joseph Smith and other elders. There, with the assistance of various counselors, he served the Saints until they were expelled from that state during the winter of 1838-39. Since the law of tithing was not revealed until 1838, during most of the thirties Bishop Partridge used primarily the general free-will offerings and consecrations of the Saints to administer the financial affairs of the Church in western Missouri. [^6]

On December 4, 1831, a second bishop, Newel K. Whitney, was called to direct the temporal affairs of the Church in the East. At the time of his call, he was given additional knowledge through revelation concerning the responsibilities of a bishop. He was told to "keep the Lord's storehouse; to receive the funds of the Church in this part of the vineyard," and to assist the poor and the needy. By revelation, every elder was told to give an account of his stewardship to the bishop, while the bishop was instructed to issue certificates recommending those whom he deemed prepared and worthy to gather to Zion. [^7]

Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon were set apart on February 10, 1832, as counselors to Bishop Whitney, and the three men met frequently as a bishopric to discuss problems of the Saints and to consider actions that should be taken to help impoverished families. They visited and administered to the sick and counseled those who needed assistance. They also occasionally preached to the Saints, reminding them of their responsibility to identify and provide help for those in need. All these duties were filled while the men continued to labor to support their families. [^8]

The responsibilities of the bishoprics of Kirtland and Missouri increased as new revelations were received. In August 1831 the Prophet recorded a revelation in Missouri that stated the bishop was to "judge the people" according to the "laws of the kingdom . . . given by the prophets of God." [^9] In September 1832, Bishop Whitney was instructed to travel "among all the churches, searching after the poor to administer to their wants by humbling the rich and the proud." [^10] Another revelation, dated November 1831, stated that unless a bishop was a literal descendant of Aaron, he was to be chosen from the High (Melchizedek) Priesthood. In addition to his temporal responsibilities and service as a judge in Israel for those who transgressed the laws of the Church, the bishop was also to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood and serve as president of the priests quorum. [^11]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCOffice of High Priest

In the summer of 1831, four months after the first bishop was called, twenty-three priesthood bearers were ordained high priests or, as the office was initially designated, "to the high priesthood." At a general conference in Kirtland June 3 to 6, Joseph Smith ordained five of the men to the high priesthood and Lyman Wight ordained eighteen others. According to John Whitmer, who was then serving as Church historian, at the time of the ordinations the Spirit of the Lord fell upon Joseph Smith and Lyman Wight "in an unusual manner." Both men were blessed with the gift of prophecy, he said. "Joseph Smith prophesied that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel," and Lyman Wight "prophesied concerning the coming of Christ." Elder Wight then "saw the heavens opened and the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the Father, making intercession for his brethren, the Saints." At this conference, Satan exhibited his power, but the Prophet, recognizing his presence, commanded him in the name of Christ to depart. After the evil influence had left, John Whitmer declared, the Saints rejoiced and were comforted. [^12]

As Joseph Smith continued to receive revelations relating to Church government, high priests gained an increased understanding of their office and their responsibilities. In November 1831, a revelation declared that a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood "has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices" of the priesthood. [^13] In September 1832, another revelation told high priests of their responsibility to travel to preach the gospel. [^14]

In an important revelation on the priesthood dated March 1835, the Saints learned that there are in the Church two priesthoods—Aaronic, which includes the Levitical, and the Melchizedek, and that all offices in the Church are appendages to these priesthoods. The Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency and the authority to administer in spiritual concerns, while the Aaronic or lesser priesthood has power to administer in "outward ordinances." The revelation also taught that the office of a high priest was the highest ordained office of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and that high priests "have a right to officiate . . . in administering spiritual things." [^15]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCThe First Presidency

The highest or supreme council in the Church, the First Presidency, was organized in the early 1830s. At a conference held in Amherst, Lorain County, Ohio, on January 24, 1832, Joseph Smith was sustained and ordained as "President of the High Priesthood," meaning president of the priesthood. [^16] The following March, he learned (in an unpublished revelation) that the office of President of the High Priesthood is vested with the authority to preside, with the assistance of counselors, over all the concerns of the Church. [^17] On March 8, 1831, the Prophet selected and ordained Jesse Gause and Sidney Rigdon as his counselors. [^18] Sidney Rigdon probably served as first counselor and Jesse Gause as second counselor. After the latter, a convert from the Shaker religion, denied the faith and was excommunicated on December 3, 1832, Frederick G. Williams was called to serve as counselor in the presidency. [^19]

Various revelations recorded by Joseph Smith in the early 1830s clearly identified the First Presidency (a term used in 1835 to identify the presidency over the entire Church and not just the priesthood) as the supreme authority in the Church. In a revelation recorded in March 1832, the Saints learned that the keys of the kingdom belong always to "the Presidency of the High Priesthood." [^20] One year after the presidency of the High Priesthood had been organized, the Prophet received a revelation, dated March 8, 1833, asserting that this body was "to preside in council, and set in order all the affairs" of the Church. [^21] The revelation on priesthood recorded in 1835 further identified the authority and responsibilities of the First Presidency. "Three Presiding High Priests, chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office and upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church." [^22] The First Presidency "have a right to officiate in all the offices in the church, . . . for this is the highest council of the church of God," with authority to render "a final decision upon controversies in spiritual matters." [^23] The Church also learned by revelation that bishops must be approved by the First Presidency and shall be tried for alleged offenses before this quorum. [^24]

Although Joseph Smith was told by revelation that the quorum of the First Presidency was to be comprised of three men, prior to that date he had established a precedent of calling, in addition to the first and second counselors, "assistant presidents" and other counselors. This practice continued after the revelation was received, indicating that he, Brigham Young, and other presidents of the Church recognized the propriety of occasionally calling more than two counselors to assist the President. On December 5, 1834, for example, Oliver Cowdery was called to serve as "assistant president," and the following day Joseph Smith, Sr., and Hyrum Smith were appointed as counselors. Oliver Cowdery's role was typified as one of "joint leadership," and all three men served as counselors to the Prophet. [^25]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCThe First Patriarch to the Church

The first Patriarch to the Church in this dispensation was also called and set apart while the Saints were in Kirtland. On December 18, 1833, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams, and Oliver Cowdery ordained Joseph Smith, Sr., to that office. According to Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith held all the keys of authority in the Church including the right to bestow on others patriarchal blessings; and he conferred the authority which he held upon his father. While Joseph Smith, Sr., was presiding patriarch, or Patriarch to the Church, John Young, the father of Brigham Young, was also ordained a patriarch, but he had limited jurisdictional authority. [^26]

One of the unusual teachings of the Prophet relating to Church government was his explanation of the meaning of evangelist. While Christians of the 1830s referred to evangelists as revivalists or itinerant preachers, he taught that an evangelist is a patriarch. "Whenever the Church of Christ is established in the earth," he explained, "there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons." [^27]

The Prophet also taught that the patriarch was "the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham." Consequently, Joseph Smith, Sr., received his authority "by blessing and by right." He was not only ordained to that position, but he was also the oldest son of Ephraim (who was the head of the house of Israel) holding the priesthood in this dispensation. [^28]

Through revelation the Prophet learned of the order of the patriarchal priesthood, instituted during the time of Adam and passed from father to son until the days of Noah. According to this order, the presiding church officer was a high priest and a patriarch. This characteristic of ancient priesthood government was restored when Joseph Smith, Sr., was ordained Patriarch to the Church. He had previously been ordained a high priest, and now he was given a special patriarchal authority that was to pass from father to son. While patriarchs ordained in various stakes are not chosen on the basis of that ancient law of primogeniture, the right to the office of presiding patriarch, or Patriarch to the Church, is inherited. It belongs to the literal descendants of Joseph Smith, Sr. [^29]

Following his ordination as Patriarch to the Church, Father Smith began conferring patriarchal blessings upon Latter-day Saints, setting the pattern for patriarchal blessings that have been bestowed upon members of the Church since the time he received his calling. The blessings he gave to members designated their lineage from one of the twelve tribes of Israel, counseled them, and informed them of their potential and their future activities. [^30]

Though many Saints received their patriarchal blessings in Kirtland, others received these blessings from Father Smith in many other areas of North America. Edward Stevenson remembered the powerful spirit that penetrated a meeting held in 1834 in Pontiac, Michigan, during which Father Smith blessed the Saints in that region. [^31] On June 22, 1836, Father Smith, accompanied by John Smith, the Prophet's uncle, left Kirtland for a mission in the eastern states to confer patriarchal blessings upon members there. For almost five months, Joseph Smith, Sr., visited branches of the Church in New York, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Pennsylvania, bestowing blessings upon hundreds of Latter-day Saints. During this 2,400-mile journey, he and John Smith also preached to thousands, baptized many converts, and visited friends and relatives. [^32]

Organizational Changes in OhioHCThe First Stake and High Council

While the Saints were witnessing many changes in the pattern of Church government, the first stake was organized in Kirtland. As used in the Church the word stake probably originates from the poetic imagery of the prophet Isaiah. "Enlarge the place of thy tent," Isaiah wrote, "and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes [or tent pins]." [^33] The Book of Mormon also refers in symbolic terms to the church or Zion as a tent supported by cords and stakes. This ancient American scripture informs us that by lengthening the cords and strengthening the stakes, the tent (or church) can be enlarged, and spirituality and righteousness enhanced. [^34] Kirtland was designated as one of the locations where a stake of Zion would be established, [^35] and in the summer of 1833, the Saints were commanded "to commence a work of laying out and preparing" a "stake of Zion" there, in harmony with the pattern that had previously been revealed to the Prophet. [^36]

Less than a year later, a more formal organization of the first stake of the Church occurred with the creation of the first high council. On February 17, 1834, approximately sixty members of the Church gathered at the home of Joseph Smith to attend a special meeting. Following the invocation, the Prophet announced that the purpose of the meeting was to select twelve high priests to serve as members of a high council. The high council, he said, was to help settle difficulties arising in the Church that could not be resolved in a bishop's court or by other procedures. In preparation for the meeting, the Prophet had instructed the Saints five days earlier that no man was capable of judging others unless "his heart was pure." "We frequently are so filled with prejudice, or have a beam in our own eye," he warned, "that we are not capable of passing right decisions." [^37]

Under the direction of Joseph Smith forty-three members at the meeting (nine high priests, seventeen elders, four priests, and thirteen others) formed a council, and this body approved the twelve high priests, as well as the First Presidency, who were called to serve as members of this first high council. [^38]

The procedures for filling vacancies in the high council and for conducting trials were described in the meeting and recorded in the minutes, which were later included in section 102 of the Doctrine and Covenants. At least seven men and one of the presidency of the Church were to form a quorum of the high council, and these members had the power to appoint other worthy high priests to serve when members of the council were absent. Vacant offices were to be filled by the nomination of the president or the presidency and approval of the council of high priests. [^39]

The Kirtland high council was a unique body in the history of the Church, not only because it was the first—and for a while the only—high council, but also because the First Presidency served as the stake presidency of this "standing" high council. Later the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was formed as a "traveling" high council, and on July 7, 1834, the Prophet organized a second high council in Clay County, Missouri, with David Whitmer as president and William W. Phelps and John Whitmer as counselors. These first two high councils were constituted before there were wards and before stake presidents presided over bishops and quorums of high priests. [^40]

No single offense was consistently considered by the Kirtland high council; members were tried for a variety of improprieties of behavior. One member was accused of speaking (possibly praying) so loud during a prayer meeting that he disturbed others living in the vicinity and of not articulating so that he could be understood by those in attendance. His loud cries were considered by his accusers as disturbing rather than edifying. [^41] One man was excommunicated for abandoning his family and leaving his wife and children destitute and without sufficient food or firewood. [^42] Several persons were tried for breach of contract, two for lack of charity, and one for failing to attend meetings and to fulfill his promise to serve as a missionary. [^43] In 1836 one of the seventies was charged with "singing songs or ditties" in a store in Kirtland that were considered incompatible with the dignity of his office and calling; this same member was also accused of smoking his pipe and drinking rum, wine, and other alcoholic beverages in the Johnson tavern. [^44] Several persons were charged with publicly condemning the behavior of Joseph Smith. One person claimed that Joseph Smith was possessed of an evil spirit when he chastized a new convert, but the court ruled that the Prophet was justified in his criticisms. [^45]

Most individuals tried by the Kirtland high council were members of the priesthood, but a few women and some couples were asked to appear before this ecclesiastical body. Several women were charged with injuring the character of others by spreading malicious gossip. [^46] One brother and sister were found guilty of "unlawful matrimony." [^47] Most religious communities in America at that time believed that dancing was improper; since the Prophet had not published a revelation relating to that subject, it seemed natural that, while he was on a trip to Missouri in 1837, the high council would consider the actions of some of the Saints who had attended a ball and would rule that dancing "with the world," in which they had been engaged, was improper. [^48]

Some who appeared before the high council court were charged with teaching incorrect doctrines. One person was accused of rejecting the revelations and commandments received by Joseph Smith; another, of preaching "heretical" doctrines; and one small group, of embracing revelations allegedly received by one of the Saints who did not have the authority to receive revelation for the entire Church. [^49]

A high percent of those who were accused of transgressions and were asked to appear before the Kirtland high council complied with the request, and in nearly all instances members confessed their faults during the trial and agreed to correct their failings. Only a few members were excommunicated from the Church by this court, generally individuals who were found guilty of what were considered the most serious offenses, such as "unlawful matrimony" and apostasy. [^50] In nearly all instances the court ruled that fellowship would be withdrawn from those who had been found guilty until satisfaction had been made, and generally the accused persons, after admitting their mistakes and promising to correct them, retained their standing in the Church. The high council courts attempted to help rather than condemn individuals. The high councilors sought to correct the improper behavior patterns of the Saints, to reconcile contesting members, and to establish greater harmony in the Church. Disciplining members by exposing problems and withdrawing the hand of fellowship was considered necessary as a means of helping the Saints to better understand their failings and prompting changes that would enable them to strive more diligently for perfection.

The first high council of the Church was not merely a judicial body; it had administrative responsibilities as well. Acting under the direction of the presidency of the Church, the Kirtland high councilors approved men for ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood, assigned missionaries to labor in various parts of North America, and recommended that some members settle in Kirtland and that others migrate to Missouri. [^51] They agreed to encourage Emma Smith to proceed with the publication of a hymnal in compliance with a revelation that Joseph Smith had received. [^52] They recommended that Joseph Smith, Sr., be paid ten dollars a week plus expenses for his services as Patriarch to the Church, and that Frederick G. Williams be paid the same for serving as his scribe. [^53] And in October 1837, the high council appointed a committee to ask John Johnson, Jr., to desist from selling spirituous liquors to those who were in the habit of becoming intoxicated and to report to Church authorities the names of any Mormons who drank alcoholic beverages in his tavern. [^54]

Calling of the Twelve ApostlesOrganizational Changes in OhioHCThe Quorum of the Twelve Apostles

Calling of the Twelve ApostlesHCAlmost a year before the organization of the Church, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were ordained and confirmed apostles and special witnesses of Christ by Peter, James, and John. [^55] Shortly thereafter, in June, 1829, Joseph received a revelation that not only declared that Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer had received the same calling as that of the ancient apostle Paul, but also commissioned these men to select the original Twelve Apostles in this dispensation. [^56] Later Martin Harris was called to assist Elders Cowdery and Whitmer in this selection; this meant the three special witnesses to the Book of Mormon as a group were given the responsibility of choosing the Twelve Apostles. Oliver Cowdery said that the Three Witnesses constantly stretched their minds and frequently fasted and prayed, seeking the advice of the Lord concerning those who should be selected to serve as His twelve special witnesses. [^57]

Calling of the Twelve ApostlesHCAfter receiving a series of visions and revelations relating to the pattern of Church government, the Prophet invited the former members of Zion's Camp and many others living in and near Kirtland to a special meeting on Saturday, February 14, 1835, in the schoolhouse next to the rising temple. There he informed them that the meeting was being held in harmony with a commandment of the Lord. He reminded the congregation of the trials and sufferings of the members of Zion's Camp, explaining that their sacrifices had not been in vain. Then he noted that these men were now to "go forth to prune the vineyard." He promised the Saints that they would be involved in great accomplishments, would be blessed by the "whisperings of the Spirit of God," and would be "endowed with power from on high." [^58]

Calling of the Twelve ApostlesHCFollowing the Prophet's discourse and the customary prayers and singing of hymns, the meeting was adjourned for an hour. When it was reconvened, the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was organized. The presidency laid their hands on the heads of the Three Witnesses and blessed them, after which the names of the Twelve whom they had been selected were read in the following order:

Three of the newly appointed apostles—Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball—were ordained as apostles by the Three Witnesses, who took turns in offering the ordination prayers and blessings. The presidency then confirmed the ordinations and blessings, and also predicted "many things which should come to pass." [^59]

Nine of the Twelve Apostles were ordained soon after the February 14 meeting. The next day, Oliver Cowdery ordained Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, and Luke S. Johnson, after which William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton, and William Smith received similar blessings. At a meeting held February 21, Joseph Smith, David Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery ordained Parley P. Pratt. [^60] The last two men to be set apart were serving in the mission field at the time of their call and were subsequently ordained to the apostleship after they returned to Kirtland. Thomas B. Marsh was probably ordained on April 25 by Oliver Cowdery, and Orson Pratt was ordained on April 26. These last two elders were also blessed with a confirmatory ordinance by David Whitmer. [^61]

Like so many other individuals called to serve in the 1830s, the original Twelve Apostles knew very little about their responsibilities, and it is likely that Joseph Smith himself did not fully understand in 1835 all of the duties of these new officers. Consequently, the presidency periodically instructed the men concerning their new assignment.

After nine of the Twelve Apostles had been ordained, Oliver Cowdery delivered a general charge to them that is sometimes referred to as the "Oath and Covenant of the Apostleship." He read to the apostles a selection from a revelation received by the Prophet in June 1829 that specified that apostles were to take upon themselves the name of Christ "with full purpose of heart" and were "to go into all the world to preach" the everlasting gospel. President Cowdery encouraged them to cultivate humility; to avoid "worldly objects," to establish their ministry as a first priority in their lives; to gain a powerful conviction of the divinity of the Savior; and then, after receiving an endowment of power from God, to go forth as special witnesses of Christ into all the world. Then he grasped the hand of each of the apostles in turn and said to each one, "[Will] you with full purpose of heart take part in this ministry, to proclaim the Gospel with all diligence, with these your brethren, according to the tenor and intent of the charge you have received?" Each of them responded affirmatively. [^62]

Shortly after the calling of the apostles, a question arose concerning the jurisdiction of the Twelve in relationship to that of the two high councils that had recently been constituted. Joseph Smith considered this subject at a priesthood meeting in Kirtland on May 2, 1835. After the Twelve had taken their seats according to their age (with Thomas B. Marsh, who was then the oldest apostle, called as the first apostle to preside over that body), the Prophet instructed the priesthood that the apostles were to serve as a traveling high council and were to preside in areas outside of the stakes where there were standing high councils. He also stated that "no standing High Council has authority to go into the churches abroad, and regulate the matters thereof, for this belongs to the Twelve." Moreover, he said that high councils should be organized only in regions where stakes were formed. [^63]

Early in 1836 the Prophet instructed the apostles that they had an authority above that of the high council. At a meeting on January 16, the Prophet again explained to the Twelve their duties and emphasized that the authority of the Twelve Apostles was next to that of the First Presidency and was subject to them and to no other body in the Church. [^64]

In keeping with the initial guideline that the apostles were to regulate affairs of the Church outside the stakes, the Prophet called the Twelve in 1835 to preach, teach, and administer the affairs of the Church in Canada and the northern states. One evening, shortly before the Twelve departed for their missions, they met with the Prophet and asked him to inquire of the Lord whether it would be in harmony with His will to receive a revelation relating to their duties. They explained that such a revelation would be a means of comforting them and brightening their hopes while they were away from home. In response, the Prophet inquired of the Lord and received the first fifty-eight verses of what is now section 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants. In addition to identifying the distinctions between the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods, the revelation explains many of the duties of the various quorums and of the Church's presiding officers. [^65]

After receiving a charge to go forth and build up the kingdom of God, all of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles left Kirtland in May 1835 to preach and regulate the affairs of the Church in the East. Over the next six months, they conducted conferences in New York, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Maine, and helped determine boundaries for conferences (geographical regions) and branches. They counseled and instructed the presiding officers in these areas and attempted to resolve problems that had developed. They also encouraged the Saints to contribute to the building of Zion in Missouri and appointed others to continue promoting this program after they had departed. During their busy schedule, the apostles called individuals to serve as local leaders of the Church, preached at conferences, baptized and confirmed new members, administered the sacrament, and taught many members and nonmembers the basic principles of the gospel. [^66]

The Twelve returned to Kirtland for additional schooling and to receive their endowments in the temple. At a meeting in the temple on March 30, 1836, the Prophet said, "The Twelve are at liberty to go wheresoever they will, and if any one will say, I wish to go to such a place, let all the rest say amen." [^67] During the summer of 1836 most of the apostles served missions in the East. The following winter, ten preached in Ohio, while Thomas B. Marsh labored in Missouri. In 1837 two of the apostles were sent to England to introduce the gospel in that land and between 1839 and 1841 all but two of the apostles served in foreign lands. [^68]

The First Quorum of Seventy

Two weeks after the organization of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, the Prophet began to form the First Quorum of Seventy. Prior to this meeting, while discussing the vision he had received relating to the structure of Church government, the Prophet said to Joseph Young, "Brother Joseph, the Lord has made you President of the Seventies." Joseph Young was startled by the Prophet's remarks. He said that he knew about Moses and the seventy elders of Israel and that Jesus had appointed other seventies, but he had not known that seventies would serve in the restored Church. He also marveled when the Prophet informed him that he was to serve as one of the presidents, as though the event had already transpired. [^69] The first seventies in this dispensation were called on Saturday, February 28, 1835, from among those who had served in Zion's Camp. Some of them were ordained that day, and others were ordained at a meeting the following day. [^70]

Although some early members of the Church referred to the seventies as seventy elders who had received a special missionary call, [^71] specific information concerning the quorum of seventy appeared in the revelation on the priesthood dated March 28, 1835. This revelation stated that the seventies (referring to the First Quorum of Seventy) formed a quorum "equal in authority to that of the Twelve special witnesses or Apostles." Decisions made by each quorum were to be unanimous. Under the direction of the Twelve, the seventies were to preach the gospel throughout the world and to build up and regulate the affairs of the Church. Seven presidents selected from the seventies would preside over them. The revelation, printed in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, further stated that other officers of the Church were "not under the responsibility to travel among all nations," but were "to travel as their circumstances" allowed. Though the revelation did not identify all the responsibilities of the seventies and other bearers of the priesthood, it concluded that every man should learn his duty and act in all diligence in the office to which he was appointed. [^72]

The Prophet identified the seventies as a distinct quorum when, at various meetings, officers of the Church sat together according to their callings. At a general assembly in Kirtland on August 17, 1835, the seven presidents of the seventy elders occupied one section and twenty-seven of the seventy elders sat together. When some of the presidents were absent during special priesthood meetings, others were appointed to take their place, and alternates participated in the business conducted during the meetings. Under the direction of the Prophet, the seventies also met as a quorum in the Kirtland Temple in 1836 and received special blessings. [^73]

As the number of priesthood bearers called to serve as seventies increased, additional quorums were formed, with seventy members comprising each of the full quorums. On Sunday, February 7, 1836, the Prophet met with the presidency of the First Quorum of Seventy in the loft of the printing office and organized the Second Quorum of Seventy. [^74] Less than a year later, on December 20, 1836, the Third Quorum of Seventy was constituted in Kirtland. [^75]

Following the calling of the seventies, a controversy developed between the seventies and high priests concerning which group had preeminence. Joseph Smith resolved the difficulty in the spring of 1837 by reorganizing the seventies and asking the presidents of the seventies who had been ordained high priests prior to their ordination as seventies to unite with the high priests quorum. Then he called others to serve as presidents of the seventies. Five of the seven presidents were thereby released, and five other bearers of the priesthood were called and ordained presidents of the First Council of the Seventy. [^76]

The First Aaronic Priesthood Quorums

During the same decade that the offices of the Melchizedek Priesthood were revealed and presiding quorums were formed, members of the Aaronic Priesthood were also organized into quorums in harmony with information in the revelation on the priesthood, section 107 of the Doctrine and Covenants. The revelation stated that deacons, teachers, and priests were to be directed by presidencies and that there was to be a limited number in each quorum or organized body of priesthood holders. The president of the deacons quorum was to preside over twelve deacons, the teachers' president over twenty-four teachers, and the priests' president over forty-eight priests. [^77] While the bishop was to preside over the Aaronic Priesthood, including the priests quorum, during the 1830s presidents who were not bishops helped direct the activities of the priests. [^78]

By 1835, the first known deacons, teachers, and priests quorums had been organized in Kirtland. At a general conference on August 1, 1835, at which members approved the revelations included in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, Ira Ames acted as president of the priests quorum; Erastus Babbitt, the teachers quorum and William Burgess, the deacons quorum. [^79] One year later, on the day of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, leaders of the Aaronic Priesthood sat in the pulpits located on the east end of the chapel. The bishop of Kirtland and his counselors sat in the three highest pulpits, the bishopric of Zion in the second tier down, the presidency of the priests quorum in the third tier, and the presidency of the teachers quorum in the lowest level. Meanwhile, the presidency of the deacons quorum sat near the pulpits adjacent to the high councilors of Zion. [^80] Deacons, teachers, and priests also participated in the ordinances performed in the temple and received a special endowment. [^81]

No records are available indicating whether or not Aaronic Priesthood quorums were organized in the 1830s in branches or conferences outside the stakes of Zion. Since so few men were called to serve in the offices of the Aaronic Priesthood at that time, quorums were probably not formed, and regular meetings of those holding this priesthood were not held in the regions where few Latter-day Saints lived. [^82]

During this early period, there seems to have been no relationship between age and ordination to offices in the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods. Although mature men were generally ordained to the priesthood, there were exceptions to this practice. Don Carlos Smith, the youngest brother of the Prophet, was ordained to the lesser priesthood at fourteen years of age, and before he was twenty, he was called to serve as president of the high priests. Some of the younger members of Zion's Camp were also ordained to offices of the Aaronic Priesthood before marching to Missouri, and one father was ordained to the office of deacon while his son was ordained to the office of priest. [^83]

During the 1830s there apparently was no regular procedure for advancement from one office in the priesthood to another. Some converts were ordained to the office of elder on the day of their baptism. Others were ordained to the office of deacon, teacher, or priest on the day they were confirmed members of the Church. Some were ordained to the office of teachers and later advanced to elder or high priest, while others were initially ordained to the office of deacon and a few years later to elder. Some of these advancements occurred shortly after the initial ordinations, while others took place a number of years later. Orrin Porter Rockwell, for example, was baptized in 1830 but was not ordained a deacon until July 1838. [^84]

Members seemed to have been ordained to particular offices according to the needs of the Church as well as the guidance leaders received from the Holy Ghost. [^85] Though there seems to have been no established time between ordinations, there is no evidence that any member was ordained to a lower office in the priesthood after having received his first higher priesthood ordination, or that bearers of the Aaronic Priesthood, even those who served in the mission field, were authorized to ordain others to the priesthood. [^86]

Church Courts and Secular Governments

While the various priesthood quorums were being formed, the basic pattern of the judicial system of the Church was developed and the beliefs of the Saints concerning the relationship between religion and the state were clarified. By mid-1835 the three standing courts in the Church had been created: the bishop's court, the stake high council, and the council of the First Presidency. While the bishop's court was a court of original jurisdiction, the stake high council became not only a court of original jurisdiction, but also an appellate court to hear appeals from the bishop's court. According to the revelation on priesthood, the highest court in the Church is the council of the First Presidency. This body, coupled with twelve other high priests appointed by the First Presidency, forms a council with authority to consider any case arising in the Church; it may also review appeals from any other Church court and register decisions from which there is no appeal. [^87]

As the judicial system of the Church was expanding, so too were the beliefs of the Saints concerning government and law and the relationship between church and state. These were codified and set forth at the meeting on August 17, 1835, when the Saints approved the revelations published in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. At that meeting, Oliver Cowdery read a statement of belief describing the attitude of the Church toward civil government. This declaration was included in the appendix of the Doctrine and Covenants and is now section 134. According to this affirmation, "governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man," constitutional laws are designed to protect the rights and privileges of all, and the Latter-day Saints are obligated to obey and sustain the law of the land. Although this document declares that religious influences should not be mingled with civil government, it does not advocate total separation of church and state; rather, religion has the right to secure protection from the state. On the other hand, the secular government has no right to interfere with the religious beliefs of its citizens so long as such beliefs do not incite crime or infringe upon the rights of others. Concerning the relationship between civil and ecclesiastical courts, the declaration asserts that religious societies have the right to try members for infringing upon the rules and regulations of the religious community and to withdraw the hand of fellowship from disobedient members, but they do not have the right to inflict death or physical punishment upon their members nor deprive anyone of his property. Such actions fall under the jurisdiction of civil government. [^88]

The Name of the Church

During this formative era, the Latter-day Saints considered various names for their church organization, which had generally been referred to as the Church of Christ. Although the Book of Mormon states that the Church should be named after Christ, confusion developed because many religious communities in America and various local congregations also identified themselves as members of the Church of Christ or the Church of Jesus Christ. [^89] To differentiate the new church from others, some nonmembers began referring to it as the "Mormonites" (because of the Saints' belief in the Book of Mormon). After expressing displeasure at being identified in this way, members of the Church agreed at a conference in Kirtland on May 3, 1834, that the Church be known by the name of "The Church of the Latter-day Saints," and that this title be used in minutes of meetings. [^90] Although some members began using this new title, they continued to refer to the Church as the Church of Christ. Before 1838, many other names were used in records to identify the restored Church, such as Church of Christ of the Latter-day Saints. [^91] On April 26, 1838, shortly after he moved to Far West, Missouri, the Prophet received a revelation that identified the official name of the Church as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^92]

Word of WisdomHCThe Word of Wisdom

Word of WisdomHCSince new revelations were being received frequently in the new church, the Saints were constantly challenged to interpret correctly and then apply in their lives the principles revealed to them. One revelation that created such a challenge was the Word of Wisdom. The administration of this principle demonstrates not only the procedures used to guide the membership and clarify Church policy, but also the gradual process by which members integrated into their lives teachings that sometimes demanded substantial changes in their pattern of living.

There seems to have been no question among the Saints that strong drink meant alcoholic beverages, and members of the 1830s interpreted hot drinks as tea and coffee. Elizabeth Tanner, who lived in Kirtland, wrote that after learning about the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom, she and her husband discarded "tea, coffee, and spirituous liquors." [^93] When William W. Phelps wrote to his wife and informed her that the Saints in Kirtland were observing the Word of Wisdom, he specifically stated that they refrained from drinking tea and coffee. [^94] According to Joel H. Johnson, five months after the Word of Wisdom was revealed, Joseph Smith asked a congregation, "Now, what do we drink when we take our meals? Tea and coffee. Is it not?" Answering his own question, he said, "They are what the Lord meant when He said 'Hot drinks.'" [^95] Hyrum Smith and Brigham Young also defined hot drinks as tea and coffee, explaining that these two stimulants were the hot beverages that were most popular among Americans when the revelation was received. [^96] Zebedee Coltrin recalled that while many members gradually discontinued using tobacco, the Saints' fellowship "was jeopardised" if they did not immediately discontinue using tea and coffee; and in March 1838, those who desired to migrate west with the seventies in a group called Kirtland Camp signed their names to a constitution that included the following rule: each person would keep the commandments and heed the Word of Wisdom, "that is, no tobacco, tea, coffee, snuff, nor ardent spirits of any kind taken internally." [^97]

Although the Saints understood that the revelation proscribed smoking and chewing tobacco and drinking alcoholic beverages, tea, and coffee, questions arose concerning the relationship between Word of Wisdom observance and Church membership and service. Since many members were addicted to these habit-forming substances, observance of the law was sometimes gradual and sporadic.

In February 1834, one year after the Word of Wisdom was announced, a dispute occurred among members in Erie County, Pennsylvania. Some of them refused to partake of the sacrament because the elder who administered it did not observe the Word of Wisdom. Lyman Johnson, who was visiting the branch at the time, argued that because of the transgression of the elder the members were justified in not partaking the sacrament. However, Orson Pratt, another traveling elder who was also visiting the branch, disagreed. He argued that members were entitled to receive the sacrament from a bearer of the priesthood as long as the priesthood bearer retained his office and license. The issue was referred to Church officials in Kirtland. The Kirtland high council was at the time considering another related problem. On February 20, 1834, they discussed whether or not disobedience to the Word of Wisdom was a sufficient transgression to deprive a person who understood the revelation from holding a Church position. Following the discussion, Joseph Smith, as president of the high council, declared, "No official member in this Church is worthy to hold an office, after having the Word of Wisdom properly taught him, and he, the official member, neglecting to comply with, or obey" it. The council confirmed this decision. [^98]

Many members scattered throughout the country did not know about the high council's decision and consequently wrote letters to Kirtland for clarification of the revelation. In response to these inquiries, Church leaders printed the high council's decision in the November 1836 issue of the Messenger and Advocate. [^99] The essence of this decision was repeated in an editorial printed in the same periodical in May 1837:

If, as the Lord has said, strong drinks are not to be taken internally, can those who use them thus be held guiltless? We ask, if hot drinks are not to be used, if those who make use of them do not transgress his commands, or at least set at nought his counsel? Most assuredly they do.

Have not the authorities of the church in council in this place, decided deliberately and positively that if any official member of this church shall violate or in any wise disregard the words of wisdom which the Lord has given for the benefit of his saints, he shall lose his office? What official member does not know this? Brethren, either we believe this to be a revelation from God, or we do not. [^100]

While Church leaders encouraged the Saints to refrain from undesirable habits, many members continued to struggle in their attempts to discontinue habits that were difficult to control. During their first extended mission in 1835, the apostles instructed the Saints to incorporate in their lives the principles outlined in the Word of Wisdom revelation. Upon their return to Kirtland, they reported that some members failed to have the Spirit because they neglected to observe the Word of Wisdom. [^101] Mary Ann Stearns Winters recalled that her mother, Mary Pratt, habitually used snuff before she learned about the Word of Wisdom. But after she learned about the revelation and also after she was told in her patriarchal blessing that she should observe the Word of Wisdom, she accepted the challenge to discontinue this troublesome habit. When she was tempted, especially in the evenings, she would read the Book of Mormon until the desire had passed. According to Mary Winters, it was only after years of struggle that her mother overcame the habit. [^102]

In 1837 there was a renewed effort to encourage the Saints to live in harmony with the Word of Wisdom. In April and July, the seventies agreed that they would not fellowship (by recognizing their right to preach) any member of the quorum who indulged in the "use of ardent spirits." [^103] In May the First Presidency, the high council of Missouri, two of the twelve apostles, and ten seventies held a priesthood meeting in Far West, Missouri, and resolved unanimously that they would not fellowship any ordained member who did not observe the Word of Wisdom "according to its literal reading." [^104] In October, the First Quorum of Elders agreed unanimously that all traveling elders who preached the gospel were "to observe and teach the Word of Wisdom." They further agreed to revoke the licenses of elders who did not comply with the policy. [^105] And on November 7, at a priesthood meeting in Far West, the congregation "voted not to support stores and shops selling spirituous liquors, tea, coffee, or tobacco." [^106]

Except for the offense of habitual drinking of hard liquors, the policies adopted by the priesthood in 1837 regarding Word of Wisdom observance were not rigidly enforced. Some persons justified the occasional use of tea and other stimulants for medical purposes or as stimulants in cases of stress or unusual fatigue. Sidney Rigdon proposed in December 1836 that the Saints discontinue using liquor during periods of sickness, [^107] but there apparently was little or no significant change in the habits of the Saints as a result of this proposal. In fact, so many writings of members in the thirties casually mention the drinking of wine that it is apparent a sizeable number of members did not consider moderate wine drinking in the same category as the use of strong drinks. [^108] Sometimes members justified their own breaking of the Word of Wisdom by pointing out that some Church leaders failed to observe all aspects of that revelation. One such case was brought before the high council in Kirtland, and the person who had used this as his excuse for not keeping the Word of Wisdom was rebuked and instructed to "observe the Word of Wisdom, and commandments of the Lord in all things." [^109]

Except for excessive drinking, members of the Church in the thirties were generally not disfellowshipped or excommunicated for violating provisions in the Word of Wisdom. In all cases in which the Word of Wisdom was mentioned as a factor leading to an excommunication, other more serious infractions were cited as reasons for expelling the members from the Church. One elder in New York was expelled "for breach of covenant and not observing the Word of Wisdom." [^110] Another elder was removed from office because he neglected his family and used strong drink. [^111] One of the accusations that led to the excommunication of David Whitmer in 1838 was that he violated the Word of Wisdom. Included among the more serious problems of Elder Whitmer was his refusal to acknowledge the Word of Wisdom as a revelation. [^112]

In 1913 President Joseph F. Smith reviewed the gradual embracement of the Word of Wisdom by many members of the Church, stating, "The reason undoubtedly why the Word of Wisdom was given—as not by 'commandment or restraint' was that at that time, at least, if it had been given as a commandment it would have brought every man, addicted to the use of these noxious things, under condemnation; so the Lord was merciful and gave them a chance to overcome, before he brought them under the law." [^113]

In the 1830s, Joseph Smith received many revelations related to various gospel principles, moral conduct, patterns of ecclesiastical government, and Church programs. As they were instructed, the Saints had the challenge of embracing these new patterns of religious thought, of altering some of their opinions and habits, of accepting new calls of leadership and service, and of magnifying their callings. As they harmonized their actions with the new directions they received from the Prophet, they were promised that they would reap joy, find great treasures of knowledge, obtain internal peace, and receive a special blessing in the House of the Lord. [^114]

Church Policies, Programs, and Administration

---
Notas:
[^1] "History of the Life of Joseph Smith, Jr.," pp. 1-2, Kirtland Letter Book, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives.
[^2] Brigham Young in JD 13:176.
[^3] Orlen Curtis Peterson, "A History of the Schools and Educational Programs of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Ohio and Missouri, 1831-1832," p. 3; Messenger and Advocate 1 (February 1835): 80.
[^4] D&C 55:4.
[^5] D&C 93:36.
[^6] D&C 93:40, 24.
[^7] D&C 131:6; Peterson, "History of the Schools in Ohio and Missouri," p. 5.
[^8] Elders' Journal 1 (August 1838): 53.
[^9] Robert E. Chaddock, Before 1850, pp. 140, 144-46; W. W. Boyd, "Secondary Education in Ohio Previous to the Year 1840," Ohio Archaeological and Historical Publications 25 (1916): 119.
[^10] History of Geauga and Lake Counties, Ohio, p. 246; Journal of Levi Hancock, pp. 47-48; Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 15; Crary, Reminiscences, pp. 45-46; Kirtland Township Record Book, March 30, 1834; February 13, 1836.
[^11] D&C 88:117-41; HC 1:316-17. A copy of this letter from Joseph Smith to William W. Phelps is in the Church Archives.
[^12] D&C 88:118, 79.
[^13] D&C 88:118.
[^14] D&C 90:15.
[^15] D&C 88:70-74, 85.
[^16] HC 1:322-24; Journal History, February 18, 1833; Minutes, School of the Prophets, October 3, 1883; October 11, 1883, Church Archives.
[^17] D&C 88:127-41; Minutes, School of the Prophets, 1870-74; October 3, 1883; October 8, 1883.
[^18] HC 1:323-24.
[^19] Minutes, School of the Prophets, November 12, 1870.
[^20] Minutes, School of the Prophets, June 3, 1871.
[^21] HC 1:334.
[^22] HC 1:316. A copy of this letter is in the Church Archives.
[^23] KCMB, p. 17; HC 1:334-35; Times and Seasons 5 (December 15, 1844): 738; Joseph Smith, History, Book A-1, p. 281, Church Archives.
[^24] Minutes, School of the Prophets, October 3, 1883.
[^25] Journal of John Murdock, 1833.
[^26] Minutes, School of the Prophets, October 3, 1883; October 11, 1883; Brigham Young in JD 12:158; journal of Levi Hancock, p. 74; HC 1:323.
[^27] HC 2:169-70, 175-76, 200, 287, 301.
[^28] HC 2 176, 218, 315, 430-33, 476.
[^29] HC 2:218; autobiography of William Draper, p. 2.
[^30] HC 2:169-70. Henry Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio (1848), p. 282.
[^31] HC 2:218.
[^32] HC 2:376.
[^33] HC 2:436.
[^34] HC 2:175-76; Oliver Cowdery to William Frye, December 22, 1835, copy in Church Archives; Peterson, "History of Schools in Ohio and Missouri," p. 35; H. S. Salisbury, "History of Education in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints," Journal of History 15 (1922): 264-65.
[^35] HC 2:176n; Messenger and Advocate 1 (May 1835): 122-26.
[^36] HC 2:200; Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 16; Journal History, November 14, 1835.
[^37] HC 2:287, 309, 318, 430-32.
[^38] Journal of Lorenzo Barnes, pp. 41-43, 54.
[^39] HC 2:376.
[^40] HC 2:299-300, 318-19; Burton E. Levinson, "The Western Reserve: Its Hebrew Influence," pp. 73, 129-30.
[^41] HC 2:355-56; LeRoi C. Snow, "Who Was Professor Joshua Seixas?," Improvement Era 39 (1936): 67-71. See also Louis Zucker, "Joseph Smith as a Student of Hebrew," Dialogue 3 (Summer 1968): 41-55.
[^42] HC 2:356.
[^43] HC 2:382, 384.
[^44] Snow, "Professor Seixas," pp. 69-70.
[^45] HC 2:385-86, 390-91; H. S. Salisbury, "History of Education in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints," Journal of History 15 (1922): 266; journal of Lorenzo Barnes, p. 42 (February 9, 1836); Hyrum Smith to Elias Smith, February 27, 1836, Church Archives.
[^46] HC 2:396-97.
[^47] Autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1836.
[^48] William W. Phelps papers; Orson Pratt Journals, p. 74; HC 2:396.
[^49] Messenger and Advocate 1 (February 1835): 80; Heber C. Kimball, "Journals," 6 (April 15, 1845): 867; HC 2:200.
[^50] "Our Village," Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 444; autobiography of George A. Smith, pp. 87-88; HC 2:474-75.
[^51] Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 16; autobiography of Eliza R. Snow, p. 7.
[^52] HC 2:317-18, 334, 340.
[^53] HC 2:356, 407, 409, 412, 474; autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1836.
[^54] Orson Pratt Journals, p. 74.
[^55] Journal of Lorenzo Barnes, December 9, 1835.
[^56] Autobiography of Eliza R. Snow, p. 7.
[^57] D&C 59:9-12.
[^58] Autobiography of Zadoc Knapp Judd, p. 5.
[^59] High Priest Minutes, Spanish Fork, February 5, 1878, Church Archives; Joseph Smith to Vienna Jacques, September 4, 1833, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, pp. 47-48; memoirs of George A. Smith, pp. 10-11; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 226.
[^60] Autobiography of Nancy Alexander Tracy, 1835; Lucius A. Goldsmith, "Rigdon the First Mormon Elder," Manuscript, Western Reserve Historical Society; autobiography of Truman O. Angell, p. 2.
[^61] Sketch Book of Oliver Cowdery, January 24 and 31, February 7 and 28, and March 6, 1836; journal of Lorenzo Barnes, p. 2; HC 2:312, 319.
[^62] HC 2:291-92, 299, 304, 312, 322, 330, 345, 363, 399, 408, 480.
[^63] HC 2:376.
[^64] HC 2:290, 396; autobiography of William Burgess, Jr., p. 1.
[^65] HC 2:347. See also HC 2:301, 316, 344.
[^66] HC 2:346-47.
[^67] HC 3:362. See also journal of Samuel H. Rogers, pp. 5-7, and autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 27.
[^68] "History of Brigham Young," Deseret News, February 10, 1858, p. 385, reprinted in Millennial Star 15 (1863): 439. For additional accounts of this meeting, see Levi Ward Hancock statement, November 1832, Church Archives; and autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 6, manuscript, Church Archives. Elder Kimball wrote that this was the first occasion when Joseph Smith heard someone speaking in tongues. Prior to this meeting, however, this gift had been manifest among members in Columbia, Pennsylvania, and Mendon, New York. This gift was later manifest among the Saints in Missouri in June 1983. John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 39.
[^69] Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 21.
[^70] E. R. Snow, comp. , Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 12; Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, pp. 99-101; autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 3.
[^71] "Our Village," Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 444.
[^72] Ibid.; HC 2:399.
[^73] A Collection of Sacred Hymns for the Church of the Latter Day Saints: Selected by Emma Smith, p. iii.
[^74] D&C 25:11-12.
[^75] Ibid.; HC 1:270, 390; Evening and Morning Star 1 (June 1832). Hymns were also printed on the last page of each issue of the Star throughout 1832 and from February through July 1833, the latter being the last issue of this monthly publication. Ten of the thirty-three hymns printed in the initial Evening and Morning Star are included in the hymnal currently used in the Church. Six of these hymns were written by Church members. William W. Phelps wrote "Redeemer of Israel," "Earth with Her Ten Thousand Flowers," "We're Not Ashamed to Own Our Lord," "Now Let Us Rejoice," and "Awake, O Ye People, the Savior Is Coming." The other hymn written by a Latter-day Saint was Philo Dibble's "The Happy Day Has Rolled On." The four hymns in our present hymnal that were printed in Missouri and were written by non-Latter-day Saints are John Newton's "Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken," Isaac Watts's "He Died! The Great Redeemer Died" and "Joy to the World," and Robert Robinson's "Guide Us, O Thou Great Jehovah." Newell B. Weight, "The Birth of Mormon Hymnody," Dialogue 10 (Spring 1975-76): 41.
[^76] HC 2:273. "Gently Raise the Sacred Strain" was one of the hymns by William W. Phelps that was printed in the June 1835 issue of the Messenger and Advocate. The following month the first hymns that included tunes were printed. These hymns were also written by Phelps: "Awake, for the Morning Is Come" (set to "Chinese Chant") and "O God, the Eternal Father" (set to "From Greenland's Icy Mountains"). Weight, "Birth of Mormon Hymnody," p. 42.
[^77] For additional information on this hymnal and early Latter-day Saint hymns, see J. Spencer Cornwall, Stories of Our Mormon Hymns; N. B. Weight, "An Historical Study of the Origin and Character of Indigenous Hymn Tunes of the Latter-day Saints"; William Leroy Wilkes, Jr., "Borrowed Music in Mormon Hymnals"; Lowell M. Durham, "The Role and History of Music in the Mormon Church"; Lowell M. Durham, "On Mormon Music and Musicians," Dialogue 3 (summer 1968): 19-40; William E. Purdy, "Music in Mormon Culture 1830-1876"; and Ruth Alene Symons, "The Song of the Righteous: An Historical and Literary Analysis of the Latter-day Saint Hymnal, 1835-1871."
[^78] HC 2:320. See also HC 2:369, 376-78, 398, 408.
[^79] HC 2:400, 402, 405, 503; autobiography of Zadoc Knapp Judd, p. 5; autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 2.
[^80] Robert Riegel, Young America 1830-1840 (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1949), pp. 345, 351-59; KCMB, pp. 251-53, 256-58.
[^81] HC 2:345.
[^82] Autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 6. Mary Ann was about six or seven when this incident occurred.
[^83] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," pp. 34-35; HC 4:393; Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 446.
[^84] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," pp. 32-34; Pratt, Autobiography, p. 42; Times and Seasons 1 (March 1840): 77-78; Elders' Journal 1 (November 1837): 22; Far West Record, p. 152.
[^85] Messenger and Advocate 2 (June 1836): 332.
[^86] Marrott, "History of the Aaronic Priesthood," p. 36.
[^87] D&C 107:78-82; 102:27.
[^88] D&C 134:1, 4-5, 7-11; Richard O. Cowan, Doctrine and Covenants: Our Modern Scripture, pp. 204-5.
[^89] 3 Nephi 27:3-9. Many religious communities in the early republic used the title "Church of Christ." Local Congregational churches, for example, were called the Church of Christ of Middleboro or the Church of Christ of Plymouth. Some of the leaders of the restoration movement of the early nineteenth century also used this title, while the Presbyterians of Geneva, New York, referred to their church as the "Church of Jesus Christ." "Records of the Church of Christ, In the Joining borders of Bridgewater and Middleborough"; Records of the Church of Christ in Geneva, State of New York.
[^90] HC 2:62-63; Evening and Morning Star 2 (May 1834): 158-60; KCMB, p. 49.
[^91] KCMB, pp. 84, 134, 144, 180, 200; HC 1:483; 2:126, 146, 239, 246; John Smith to Elias Smith, October 19, 1834, copy in Special Collections, University of Utah.
[^92] D&C 115:4. When an extract of this revelation identifying the name of the Church was printed in the Elders' Journal, the title appeared as follows: "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints." Elders' Journal 2 (August 1838): 52.
[^93] Autobiography of Elizabeth Beswick Tanner, p. 1.
[^94] Journal History, May 26, 1835.
[^95] Joel H. Johnson, Voice from the Mountains, p. 12.
[^96] "The Word of Wisdom," Times and Seasons 3 (June 1, 1842): 800; Brigham Young in JD 13:277.
[^97] Minutes of the Salt Lake School of the Prophets, October 11, 1883, Church Archives; Constitution of the Kirtland Camp, Church Archives (see Appendix D).
[^98] KCMB, pp. 39-40; HC 2:34-35; Messenger and Advocate 3 (November 1836): 412. The position advocated by Orson Pratt in this controversy is the policy of the Church today.
[^99] Messenger and Advocate 3 (November 1836): 412.
[^100] Messenger and Advocate 3 (May 1837): 510-11.
[^101] HC 2:223-25.
[^102] Autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 3.
[^103] Messenger and Advocate 3 (May 1837): 511. Minutes of the Seventies, p. 21, 32.
[^104] HC 2:482.
[^105] Record of the First Quorum of Elders, October 19, 1837, Research Library and Archives, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.
[^106] HC 2:522-24; Far West Record, p. 87.
[^107] 107. Journal of Wilford Woodruff, December 4, 1836; Jessee, "Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," p. 373.
[^108] 108. Far West Record, pp. 139-41; Paul H. Peterson, "An Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom," p. 26.
[^109] 109. HC 2:252.
[^110] 110. HC 2:218.
[^111] 111. HC 2:442.
[^112] 112. HC 3: 18-19; Far West Record, p. 92; Des Moines Daily News, October 16, 1886, cited in Peterson, "Historical Analysis of the Word of Wisdom," p. 20.
[^113] 113. Joseph F. Smith, Eighty-Fourth Semiannual Conference Report, October 13, 1913, p. 14.
[^114] 114. D&C 43:16; 66:11; 87:8; 89:18-21; 95:8; 98:1-2, 18, 24; 101:65.
