Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 15

Life among the Early Saints

The Saints in Kirtland lived in an agrarian society. Not all of their time, however, was spent in plowing, planting, harvesting, cutting wood, making clothes, preparing foods for the winter, and constructing buildings. During the 1830s they also found time for study, attending school, worship, and prayerful meditation. Their daily lives were generally centered around the family, and families enjoyed long evenings together.

In some respects life in the 1830s was very different from that of individuals in the twentieth century, but in other respects the pattern of living was similar to that encountered by later generations. Like people of today, the early Saints experienced sorrow and suffering, faced constant challenges, and felt joy in working, worshiping, learning, relaxing, and partaking of the beauties of the world in which they lived.

Educational Opportunities

During the 1830s, Kirtland became an educational center, providing schools for missionaries, members in general, and nonmembers, for men and women, young and old alike. Educational opportunities for many persons in the early nineteenth century were meager. Joseph Smith wrote that while he was living in Manchester, New York, he was unable to attend school as often as most teenagers because of the poverty of his family. His early formal education was limited, he said, to a study of the rudiments of reading, writing, and arithmetic. [^1] Brigham Young attended school for approximately eleven days before joining the Church. [^2] Others who settled in Kirtland had received more formal education. For example, Oliver Cowdery, Orson Hyde, Sidney Rigdon, and William E. McLellin had all taught school before learning about the restoration. [^3]

Many of the revelations Joseph Smith received in Ohio not only commanded Church leaders and missionaries to study various subjects, but also emphasized the importance of education for all members. In June 1831, William W. Phelps and Oliver Cowdery were commanded by revelation to select and write books that could be used in the schools established to provide a general education for the Latter-day Saints. [^4] In a revelation received in 1833, the Prophet learned that "the glory of God is intelligence." [^5] This same revelation instructed the Saints to "bring up [their] children in light and truth," with truth being defined as "knowledge of things as they are, as they were, and as they are to come." [^6] Another revelation taught that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance." Some members of the Church concluded from this that salvation itself depended on education of the spirit, if not of the mind as well. [^7]

In 1838, Church leaders explained that one of the principal reasons for gathering to Kirtland was to provide members with educational advantages. "Intelligence is the great object of our holy religion," the Saints were told. Therefore, "It is of all things important, that we should place ourselves in the best situation possible to obtain it. . . . Intelligence is the result of education, and education can only be obtained by living in compact society; so compact, that schools of all kinds can be supported." They were assured that it did not matter how much they had learned before joining the Church, for it would always be a major challenge to everyone to increase his intelligence and enlarge his knowledge and understanding of all things relating to his peace and happiness. [^8]

Latter-day Saints were not the only Christians in Ohio in the 1830s who promoted education among their members. All advanced schools (those going beyond the training received in public and private elementary and secondary schools) were controlled to a large extent by religious groups. Since there was no state aid for education at that time, each community was responsible to provide schools for its citizens. With the influx of thousands of Latter-day Saints into Kirtland, a definite need arose for the Church to provide educational opportunities for the converts who gathered in that area. [^9]

A few schools were scattered about the township of Kirtland when the first Latter-day Saints began gathering there. One of these was located on a hill north of the Isaac Morley farmhouse. Another school was situated on the flats east of the Newel K. Whitney store, on the south side of the road near the creek that ran into the east branch of the Chagrin River. These schools provided an elementary education for the children of all faiths living in Kirtland township. [^10]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe School of the Prophets

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe first school established by Latter-day Saints—and the forerunner of all formal educational efforts by the Church—was a seminary for missionaries and Church leaders called the School of the Prophets.

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCOn December 27, 1832, Joseph Smith received a revelation, known as the "Olive Leaf," which commanded the Church to organize this school and provided instructions concerning the curriculum, the operation of the school, the student body, and the blessings to be derived from complying with the commandment. [^11]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe revelation specified that the Saints should not only learn the doctrines of the kingdom by seeking wisdom "out of the best books," but that they should also study "things both in heaven and in the earth, and under the earth; things which have been, things which are, things which must shortly come to pass; things which are at home, things which are abroad; the wars and perplexities of the nations, and the judgments which are on the land; and a knowledge also of the countries and of kingdoms." [^12] The Olive Leaf revelation emphasized that individuals were to "teach one another" and to learn by "study and also by faith." [^13] Knowledge was to be derived not only by reason, but also by revelation. A few weeks later, Joseph Smith recorded another revelation in which members of the Church were told to "become acquainted with all good books, and with languages, tongues, and people." [^14]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCNot all priesthood members were invited to participate in the first session of the School of Prophets. Only those who were considered "the first laborers in the last kingdom" gathered for this instruction. While these men assembled in Kirtland for a season, other missionaries were told to continue laboring "in the vineyard." [^15] When the School of the Prophets was officially organized in January 1833, fourteen individuals—twelve high priests and two elders—attended. Orson Pratt was admitted to the school a few weeks later. Zebedee Coltrin, one of the original fourteen students, later recalled that when the Word of Wisdom was initially read to this group, twenty-one elders were in attendance. [^16]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCAlthough most rules governing the actions of those who attended the School of the Prophets were gospel principles that all Latter-day Saints were expected to follow, some policies of the school marked it as a distinct educational system. The students frequently gathered at sunrise in the spirit of fasting and prayer. The teacher preceded the students into the classroom and, after offering a personal prayer, admitted the others into the room. When the students had gathered, the instructor saluted them with uplifted hands and cited an oath that had been received by revelation. The students repeated this oath, which included a promise that they were keeping all the commandments of God. The classes often continued until about four o'clock in the afternoon. The students usually fasted during the day and broke their fast before leaving for home by partaking of the sacrament together, eating some bread (often freshly baked, about the size of a man's fist according to Zebedee Coltrin), and drinking a glass of wine, in harmony with the pattern practiced by Jesus and his disciples. [^17]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCAnother unusual aspect of the School of the Prophets was that members were admitted only after participating in the ordinance of washing of feet. On January 23, 1833, a select group of elders assembled in Kirtland and, "after much speaking, singing, praying, and praising God, all in tongues," followed the procedure outlined in the thirteenth chapter of John's Gospel and participated in this sacred ordinance. According to Joseph Smith, ''Each Elder washed his own feet first, after which I girded myself with a towel and washed the feet of all of them, wiping them with the towel with which I was girded." Before washing the feet of his father, the Prophet requested and received a father's blessing. Frederick G. Williams washed Joseph Smith's feet, after which the Prophet pronounced the elders "clean from the blood of this generation." The meeting continued throughout the day and concluded after all present had partaken of the Lord's Supper. [^18]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCDescribing one of the major objectives of the School of the Prophets, Orson Pratt said that the men gathered so that they might learn about "the operations of the Spirit upon the mind of man." [^19] John Taylor reported that Joseph Smith counseled the elders not to hesitate in expressing their thoughts, for, the Prophet said, "it was very common for the Holy Spirit to reveal some things to obscure individuals" that were not known to others. Consequently, an exchange of ideas and reflections was considered profitable to all. [^20] Joseph noted in his history that because of "the things revealed, and our progress in the knowledge of God," great joy and satisfaction enriched the lives of the members of the school. [^21]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCOne of the blessings promised to members of the School of the Prophets was a knowledge of the Savior. When the students went forth to preach, they were endowed with a special witness of the living Christ. In a letter written in January 1833 to William W. Phelps in Independence, Missouri, Joseph Smith referred to the Olive Leaf revelation and then stated that if the members complied with the commandments included in that revelation, they would receive unusual blessings, "even a visit from the heavens." They would be honored, he wrote, with God's presence. [^22] This promise was partially realized in March 1833. Two months after the School of the Prophets was organized, the Prophet instructed the students to prepare themselves for a day of "revelation and vision." After the students gathered at sunrise, Joseph Smith counseled them to prepare their minds, for "the pure in heart should see a heavenly vision." For a brief period, the elders offered personal prayers. Then a powerful spiritual experience occurred. According to minutes kept by Frederick G. Williams, which were later included in the History of the Church, "Many of the brethren saw a heavenly vision of the Savior, and concourses of angels, and many other things, of which each one has a record of what he saw. [^23]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCIn addition to Joseph Smith and Frederick G. Williams, two other persons, Zebedee Coltrin and John Murdock, testified that Christ appeared to members of the School of the Prophets. Elder Coltrin declared that while the men in the school were praying, he saw a personage pass through the room. Joseph Smith asked if the men knew who had appeared to them. Before anyone could answer, the Prophet replied that it was "Jesus, our elder brother, the Son of God." The men resumed praying, and once again, Elder Coltrin said he beheld a person in the room "whose glory and brightness was so great" that he likened it to the burning bush Moses saw. "Its power was so great," he said, "that had it continued much longer I believe it would have consumed us." After this second personage disappeared, Zebedee Coltrin recalled, Joseph Smith announced that they had just seen "the Father of Jesus Christ." [^24]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCJohn Murdock, who was boarding with the Prophet during the spring of 1833, described in his journal the experience he had while attending one of the meetings in the Prophet's home:

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe Prophet told us if we could humble ourselves before God, and exercise strong faith, we should see the face of the Lord. And about midday the visions of my mind were opened, and the eyes of my understanding were enlightened, and I saw the form of a man, most lovely, the visage of his face was sound and fair as the sun. His hair a bright silver gray, curled in most majestic form. His eyes a keen penetrating blue, and the skin of his neck a most beautiful white and he was covered from the neck to the feet with a loose garment, pure white, whiter than any garment I have ever before seen. His countenance was most penetrating, and yet most lovely. And while I was endeavoring to comprehend the whole personage from head to feet it slipped from me, and the vision was closed. . . . But it left on my mind the impression of love, for months, that I never felt before to that degree. [^25]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCFor approximately three months, members of the priesthood gathered in Joseph Smith's home to attend the School of the Prophets. At that time he was living in an apartment built in the Newel K. Whitney store, and the school met in a room above the kitchen. There the men were taught the doctrines of the kingdom by the Prophet. It is probable that Sidney Rigdon, Orson Hyde, and other students attending the school also instructed the students in areas in which they had special knowledge. [^26]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe School for the Elders

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCDuring the winter of 1834-35, one year after the School of the Prophets was organized, the Church sponsored two educational institutions in Kirtland: the School for the Elders and the Kirtland School. The School for the Elders, organized in November 1834, replaced the School of the Prophets. Although Joseph Smith sometimes referred to this new school as the School of the Prophets, there is no evidence that members of the priesthood involved in it participated in the footwashing ordinance. [^27] As with the School of the Prophets, a major purpose of this institution was to train the men who were enrolled to be more effective missionaries and ministers of the gospel. [^28] Another important function was to prepare the men to receive an endowment in the temple after its completion. [^29] The school was initially held in a thirty- by thirty-eight-foot room below the printing shop in a building on the lot west of the temple. [^30]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThe School for the Elders convened during the winter months, when there was not as much work to be done on the farms and when the elders were not as actively involved in missionary work. The first term ran from November 1834 through March 1835, after which the elders were instructed to go forth and proclaim the gospel. [^31] Another session began on November 3, 1835, and continued in the schoolroom below the printing office until January 18, 1836, when the school moved into rooms on the third floor of the temple. [^32] About April 1, as the priesthood bearers again began to prepare to return to the mission field, the second session terminated. [^33]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCThose who attended the school studied such subjects as English grammar, writing, philosophy, government, literature, geography, and ancient and modern history. Among the texts they used were Richard Watson's Theological Institutes or a View of the Evidences, Doctrines, Morals, and Institutions of Christianity (1834) and Royal Robbins's The World Developed in Its History and Geography Embracing a History of the World (1832). Although the students explored a variety of disciplines, religious topics received the main emphasis. Under the date of December 1, 1834, the Prophet recorded that the School for the Elders was well attended and lectures on theology were delivered regularly. He also said that the school absorbed nearly all the time of the students. [^34]

Kirtland School of the ProphetsHCSeven of the lectures on theology that were delivered to the School for the Elders during the winter of 1834-35 were published in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, under the title "Lectures on Faith." These discussions contained information on such Church doctrines as faith, miracles, sacrifice, the existence of God, the attributes and character of the Father and the Son, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. From 1836 to 1921 this information was included in all editions of the Doctrine and Covenants published by the Church. Though lectures were not regarded as equal in authority to the revelations, they were considered profitable for the gaining of a better understanding of the doctrines of the kingdom. [^35]

In harmony with the commandment to teach one another words of wisdom, several individuals served as instructors in the School for the Elders. Joseph Smith presided over the school and taught various subjects, including theology. Sidney Rigdon was also one of the principal teachers. Frederick G. Williams and William E. McLellin also probably assisted in directing the studies of the elders in what was one of the first schools for adults organized in the United States. [^36]

As priesthood bearers gathered in Kirtland in the fall of 1835 to receive an endowment and attend dedicatory services of the temple, the numbers who attended the School for the Elders increased rapidly. Accommodations were so crowded in Kirtland that some persons stayed in nearby communities or farms and traveled to Kirtland to attend classes or meetings in the temple. [^37]

After the Kirtland Temple was completed, various educational organizations of the Church began to meet there, some concentrating on theological subjects and others on secular knowledge. In 1836 the School for the Elders was reorganized under the name School of the Prophets. Within the walls of the temple, the students participated again in the ordinance of washing of feet, partook of the sacrament, received counsel from the Prophet, and obtained a special endowment or gift of knowledge and power. Then many of them went forth to serve as missionaries of the Church. [^38]

Hebrew School

On January 4, 1836, Church leaders separated from the elders' school a Hebrew class that had been included in that body and created a new educational institution, which they named the Hebrew School. Students attending the new school met in the translating room or presidencies room on the west end of the third floor of the temple, while those attending the elders' school gathered in an adjoining room. [^39]

In the fall of 1835, Church leaders searched for a scholar who could teach this subject. When Oliver Cowdery was sent to New York to purchase a book bindery, he was told also to secure Hebrew textbooks. Returning to Kirtland in November 1835, he brought a Hebrew Bible, lexicon, and grammar, plus a Greek lexicon. Joseph Smith immediately commenced studying Hebrew, and his desire to secure help in learning the language intensified as he read. Dr. Daniel Piexotto, a professor at the Willoughby Medical College, was hired, but he failed to arrive in Kirtland on the date he was expected to begin teaching. The search continued for a suitable Hebrew scholar. [^40]

At that time Eliza R. Snow was living with the Prophet's family in Kirtland, and she had been corresponding frequently with her brother Lorenzo, a student at Oberlin College. In the fall of 1835 Lorenzo had studied Hebrew privately with a visiting professor, Joshua Seixas, who had an excellent reputation as a teacher and scholar. The first week of January, Joseph Smith sent Orson Hyde and William E. McLellin to Hudson, Ohio, some twenty-eight miles southwest of Kirtland, to meet with Professor Seixas. They returned and reported that they had hired the scholar at a fee of $320 to teach forty students for seven weeks. [^41]

While members of the school were waiting for Professor Seixas to arrive in Kirtland, Joseph Smith attempted to teach the Hebrew class, but progress was slow. The first day of the Prophet's instruction, he engaged in a heated debate with Orson Pratt over the correct pronunciation of a Hebrew letter. The next day was spent in resolving the problems. [^42] Their studies were also interrupted one day when class members spent their time discussing some powerful spiritual manifestations in the temple. The students were more interested in discussing the visions they had witnessed than trying to learn to read Hebrew. Nevertheless, while the men were working during the day to complete construction of the temple and holding meetings in the evenings, they spent many hours each week studying Hebrew. [^43]

Enthusiasm to learn Hebrew reached a new peak on January 26, 1836, when Joshua Seixas arrived in Kirtland. Although the scholar was young, only a few years older than Joseph Smith (who was thirty at that time), he was an experienced teacher. He had previously taught Hebrew, Spanish, and Portuguese in New York; had studied and taught in Andover, Massachusetts; and had taught Hebrew at Oberlin College and at the Western Reserve College in Hudson, Ohio. [^44]

Soon after Professor Seixas commenced teaching the forty enrolled class members, others expressed an interest in attending his classes. Consequently, three other classes were formed, each with from thirty to forty students, so that this young Hebrew scholar taught about 120 persons. Since the enrollment in the Hebrew School was much larger than anticipated, there were not sufficient textbooks for everyone. Therefore, some of the Hebrew Bibles were divided into sections, and students studied different portions of the Old Testament. In addition to reading from a Hebrew Bible, the classes studied Moses Stuart's A Grammar of the Hebrew Language (1835), A Hebrew Grammar (1821), and a Supplement to J. Seixas' Manual of Hebrew Grammar (1836), which contained a preface written by Oliver Cowdery. While classes were held daily from 10:00 to 11:00 A.M. and from 2:00 to 3:00 P.M., members often gathered before and after class to read to one another. According to Lorenzo Barnes, a student at the school, tuition was approximately six dollars. [^45]

Hebrew classes were held for almost three months under the tutelage of Joshua Seixas. Following the first three weeks, a few persons were selected by Professor Seixas to receive advanced instruction to this subject, including Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, William W. Phelps, William E. McLellin, Edward Partridge, and Sylvester Smith. Professor Seixas stated that the elders were the most forward of any class he had instructed for the same length of time. [^46]

Although no women were enrolled in the Hebrew School, some of them decided to learn the language and studied with their husbands. Caroline Crosby recalled that after her husband returned home each day, he taught her what he was learning, and eventually she learned to read Hebrew. [^47]

After Professor Seixas left Kirtland, some persons continued to study Hebrew and periodically applied some of the language skills they had developed. William W. Phelps occasionally included in letters to Brigham Young a translation of chapters from a Hebrew Bible that were of particular interest to the Saints. Orson Pratt also maintained his interest and studies in Hebrew and received a certificate from Professor Seixas stating that he was capable of teaching the language. Joseph Smith also never lost his interest in this or in other languages. "My soul delights in reading the word of the Lord in the original," he wrote. "I am determined to pursue the study of the languages, until I shall become master of them, if I am permitted to live long enough." [^48]

Other Kirtland Schools

While members of the priesthood attended the School for the Elders, other persons, both young and old, male and female, attended another school established by Church leaders. Originally called the Kirtland School, this institution was similar in many respects to the first high school organized in America (in Boston, twelve years earlier) as well as some of the academies and private schools organized in various parts of the nation. When the winter term began in December 1834, students of all ages were invited to attend; but after the enrollment increased to 130, the trustees realized that the facilities were inadequate, and they dismissed the younger and less advanced students. In February 1835, some one hundred students attended the school, which was taught by William E. McLellin. They studied geography, writing (penmanship), arithmetic, and English grammar. In addition to using Noah Webster's dictionary as a text, they studied Samuel Kirkham's Grammar, J. Olney's Geography, and T. Burdick's Arithmetic. Tuition and fees were comparable to those at other educational institutions in the area. Tuition for a term of English grammar (about six weeks) was one dollar, while the cost of studying other subjects ranged from two to four dollars. Young men and women living outside that community obtained room and board with "respectable families" for one dollar or so per week. [^49]

Because they were needed to work on the farms during the summer, the children and many adults received most of their formal education during winter time. When the Kirtland School began its second winter term in November 1836, classes were held in the attic of the temple. About 140 students were enrolled. The school was divided into three departments: languages were taught in the department of classics, English grammar, geography, mathematics, and arithmetic in the department of English, and basic courses in the "juvenile department." H. M. Graves, professor of Greek and Latin languages, was principal of the school, and he was assisted in the teaching by two other instructors. George A. Smith recalled that when he was twenty, he attended school in the upper story of the temple and studied Samuel Whelpley's Compend of History, Kirkham's Grammar, Olney's Geography, and Jacob's Latin Grammar. He received free tuition and was given the responsibility of teaching for one hour a day a beginning grammar class in Greek and Latin. [^50]

Additional Educational Opportunities

In addition to the formally organized schools in Kirtland, the Saints had various other opportunities to learn. Benjamin F. Johnson recalled attending a geography class one evening. William W. Phelps wrote to his wife that he had attended a writing school. Eliza R. Snow stated that during the spring of 1836 she "taught a select school" for young ladies in Kirtland. [^51] Debating was a popular activity in America at that time, and many of the Saints studied the art of persuasion and techniques of communication. They often participated in debates that lasted for three hours or more. Joseph Smith attended one of these long verbal confrontations in which some young elders discussed the question "Was it, or was it not, the design of Christ to establish His Gospel by miracles?" Following the debate, the judge ruled in favor of those who argued for the negative position, which, according to the Prophet, was "a righteous decision." Although the Prophet noted that much congeniality was displayed during the evening, he was concerned that some were determined to argue a case whether it was right or wrong. "I therefore availed myself to drop a few words upon this subject, by way of advice," he said, that they might "improve their minds and cultivate their powers of intellect." He cautioned the elders not to incur the displeasure of heaven when they discussed sacred topics, that whatever they did should always be "with an eye single to the glory of God." [^52]

Another educational opportunity for the Saints in Kirtland was a singing school. A committee was appointed on January 4, 1836, to organize it. Shortly thereafter, members began to gather in the temple two evenings a week to learn to improve their singing. During the first year, M. C. (probably Marvel Chapin) Davis served as instructor. The next year, Luman Carter and Jonathan Crosby provided instruction on principles of vocal music. Since singing was a regular part of services conducted by the Church, participants in this school had many opportunities to sing in meetings in the House of the Lord. [^53]

Several schools were established in Kirtland where Church members studied elementary subjects. On December 2, 1835, for example, Orson Pratt delivered a lecture on English grammar and afterwards proposed to teach a grammar school from one to four evenings per week. Because of his involvement in other activities, this school was closed after being in session only fifteen days. [^54] Lorenzo Barnes refers in his journal to another grammar school that was taught by Sidney Rigdon and Vinson Knight in December 1835. [^55]

Though there were a number of schools in Kirtland, the home was the basic institution for learning religious and secular truths. While they worked long hours together to provide for their families, Latter-day Saint parents heeded the counsel of their leaders to teach their children. Some families also invited others into their homes to help direct the studies of their young ones. For example, while she was living with the Prophet's family in 1837, Eliza R. Snow taught his children. [^56]

Early Latter-day Saint Meetings

The Saints in Kirtland not only spent many of their waking hours earning a living and attending school; they also participated regularly in worship and Church meetings. In 1831 Joseph Smith learned through revelation that the Lord's day—which was Sunday, the first day of the week—was to be a day of rest: a day for the Saints to "go to the house of prayer and offer up [their] sacraments," and to pay their "devotions unto the Most High." [^57] In preparation for the Sabbath, members sometimes collected wood and endeavored to complete other routine activities on Saturday, so that Sunday would be a day devoted to religious activity. One convert remembered that as a youth, before his family joined the Church, he was instructed not to play with his knives, whistles, balls, and other such objects on Sunday, and to be as sober and serious as possible. Many Christian families in the early 1800s spent their time together on the Lord's day, reading, relaxing, conversing, and attending meetings. [^58]

As Church membership in Kirtland grew during the 1830s, the locations of meeting places changed. The first converts gathered on the Morley farm to worship. After Joseph Smith arrived in Kirtland, meetings continued to be held on the Morley farm, but the homes of other settlers (including John Smith's residence), and schoolhouses were also used. Sometimes, when weather permitted, the Saints gathered out-of-doors to worship. Soon after the Church purchased the lot on which the temple was to be built, meetings were held there. As the temple walls began to rise, worshipers took advantage of the shade. On Sunday, May 4, 1834, the Prophet preached to members meeting in the shade created by the new schoolhouse under construction west of the temple. [^59]

Before the temple was completed, some meetings were being held in it. Nancy Tracy recalled attending a Sunday service there. Members and visitors often had to sit on the center pews and on workmen's benches, while the floors were covered with wood shavings. [^60]

Even after the temple was finished and available for full use, members continued to hold meetings in homes, in the schoolroom below the printing office, and in the schoolhouse on the flats. And since the temple was the only house of worship built by the Saints during the 1830s, members who lived in branches outside of the Kirtland area met in homes throughout the 1830s. [^61]

By the mid-1830s a basic pattern had been established in Kirtland for Sunday worship. Members gathered at 10:00 A.M. for their morning meeting. The service opened with congregational singing and a vocal prayer. This was usually followed by one or two sermons. Then the congregation sang another hymn, and one of the members offered benediction. A second service was usually held in the afternoon. In addition to following the pattern of the morning meeting, the afternoon service generally included the ordinance of the Lord's Supper. On occasion, this ordinance was also administered between the Sabbath services, on Sunday evenings, and during the week in the homes of the Saints. Initially the emblems of the sacrament were bread and wine. The first reference in Joseph Smith's history to members receiving bread and water was recorded under the date April 6, 1837. [^62]

Sunday services sometimes included confirmations of new members or marriage ceremonies. On January 17, 1836, Joseph Smith married three couples during the afternoon service; since the congregation was unusually large that day, creating an unpleasant crowded condition, following the marriage and the administration of the sacrament the Prophet dismissed the congregation. [^63] Individuals who had recently been baptized were often confirmed at Sunday meetings. William Burgess recalled that during the week in which he was baptized, about thirty other individuals received this ordinance. The following Sunday, the converts occupied the first three rows, and one by one they were confirmed members of the Church. [^64]

Early photograph of Joseph Smith, Sr., home in Kirtland

Joseph Smith, Sr. home as it appears today

Meetings held on week nights in Kirtland often occupied the time of the Saints. In 1835 a weekly meeting was held on Tuesday evenings in the schoolhouse on the flats, where Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and other leaders expounded the principles of the gospel. On one occasion the Prophet spoke for a reported three hours, but sermons that lengthy were the exception. [^65] Sometimes members attended patriarchal blessing meetings. On Tuesday, December 29, 1835, for example, a large group crowded into Oliver Olney's home, and following an opening hymn and prayer, Joseph Smith, Sr., bestowed patriarchal blessings upon fifteen individuals. [^66] A few days later, on Thursday, January 7, 1836, a similar meeting was held in the home of Bishop Newel K. Whitney. The meeting opened with singing and prayer, after which Father Smith blessed Bishop Whitney's parents and a few others who had requested a patriarchal blessing. Before adjourning, the group sang more hymns. Then "a bountiful refreshment" was served. Summarizing the events of that day, the Prophet recorded in his diary, "Our hearts were made glad." [^67]

Occasionally, special meetings were held in the homes of the Saints. Brigham Young recalled that during the week he was visiting Kirtland to become acquainted with Joseph Smith, meetings were held nearly every night. The first evening he was in Kirtland, in early November 1832, some of the brethren gathered in the Prophet's home to discuss "the things of the kingdom." After Joseph called upon Brigham to pray, the young convert from Mendon commenced speaking in tongues. When the men arose from their kneeling position, some asked the Prophet his opinion concerning this gift. Some thought he would condemn the manifestation, but, according to Brigham Young, he told the brethren that "it was of God," and that Brigham had spoken "the pure Adamic language." Later that same evening, while Brigham Young was absent, the Prophet prophesied, "The time will come when bro. Brigham Young will preside over this church." [^68]

Four buildings of Latter-day Saints in Kirtland in 1830s: Top left, William Marks home; left, Sidney Rigdon home (center portion); bottom left, John Johnson home; bottom right, John Johnson tavern

After the Kirtland Temple was dedicated, many different types of meetings were held there. In addition to the Sunday morning and afternoon services, special meetings were sometimes held on Sunday evenings. The youth of the Church not only attended school in the temple during the week, but also participated in a Sunday School. [^69]

On the first Thursday of each month a fast and testimony meeting was held in the temple. Joseph Smith, Sr., who presided over these fast meetings in 1837, regularly entered the temple about sunrise to prepare himself through prayer. The meeting usually commenced at ten o'clock in the morning and continued until four in the afternoon. During most of these meetings, the white cloth curtains were lowered, dividing the main floor of the temple into four compartments. Consequently, what had been one meeting became four, each presided over by an elder. Members sang, prayed, and bore their testimonies, describing manifestations of the power of God in their lives and exhorting others to live the gospel. Usually at about three o'clock, the curtains were raised and all in attendance would continue worshipping under the direction of Father Smith. According to Mary Ann Stearns Winters, it was generally known that on Thursday "Father Smith, the Patriarch, would not break his fast and partake of food til the sun went down." [^70]

On weekdays, the Kirtland High School met in the rooms on the third floor of the temple. On Tuesday evening, the seventies met in the temple, and on Wednesday evenings, the elders gathered there. Occasionally, but not on a regular basis, the high council and apostles also met in the temple. [^71] The priesthood meetings generally followed a common pattern. After an opening prayer and the singing of a hymn, quorum leaders, especially the presidents of each quorum, instructed the men in Church doctrines and procedures. The meetings then ended, as they began, with a song and a prayer. [^72]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCMusic was an important part of the worship of the Kirtland Saints. They sang at the beginning and end of nearly all their meetings, organized a choir that sang in the temple, and, in 1835, published a hymnal that contained a collection of hymns "adapted to their faith and belief in the gospel." [^73] In July 1830, five years before the publication of the hymnal, Emma Smith was commanded by revelation to select hymns to be included in this work. "My soul delighteth in the song of the heart," the revelation read; "yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." [^74]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCBy the spring of 1832, Emma Smith had selected a number of hymns considered appropriate for enriching Latter-day Saint services. On May 1, Joseph Smith instructed William W. Phelps to correct and print the hymns she had collected. The first (June 1832) and subsequent editions of the Evening and the Morning Star, printed in Missouri, included hymns considered appropriate for use by the Saints. The publication of a hymnal at that time, however, was delayed by the printing of the Book of Commandments and the destruction of the press in July 1833. [^75]

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCFollowing the expulsion of Latter-day Saints from Jackson County in November 1833, William W. Phelps traveled to Kirtland, where he continued to assist Emma Smith in preparing the hymnal for publication. The Evening and the Morning Star resumed publication in Kirtland in December 1833 and was succeeded in September 1834 by the Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate. Hymns continued to be printed in that paper, indicating that the program of gathering hymns was continuing.

Other Important Events in Ohio, 1831-1838HCOn September 14, 1835, the high council urged Emma to fulfill the responsibility she had been given by revelation and appointed William W. Phelps to revise and arrange for publication the items she selected. [^76] Later that year a small book, measuring three inches by four inches, was printed in Kirtland. The hymnal had ninety selections (text only), of which thirty-nine had previously been printed in the Star or the Messenger and Advocate. More than half of the poems included in the hymnal were by members of the Church, including William W. Phelps, Eliza R. Snow, and Parley P. Pratt. Other hymns were selected from popular Protestant hymnals of that age, especially hymnals of Presbyterian, Congregational, Methodist, and Eastern Christian (a Protestant faith) congregations. Fifteen of the hymns selected were compositions of Isaac Watts, a Congregational minister who served as pastor in London, England, from 1702 until his death in 1748. The authors of the hymns were not credited for their contributions. Since there was no musical score, the hymns were sung to borrowed tunes, and congregations sometimes adopted different tunes for the same hymns. The hymnal currently used in the Church contains twenty-eight hymns from the 1835 collection. [^77]

Occasionally, the daily life of the Latter-day Saints was interrupted by funerals and weddings. On November 24, 1835, Joseph Smith solemnized the marriage of Newel Knight and Lydia Bailey Goldthwaite. Friends of the couple gathered in the home of Hyrum Smith. Following an invocation, Joseph Smith asked the couple to stand and to join hands. Then he spoke to them concerning the importance of marriage, an institution, he said, that is ordained by heaven and should be solemnized by the authority of the priesthood. "You covenant to be each other's companions through life, and discharge the duties of husband and wife in every respect," he said. When they responded affirmatively, he declared them husband and wife, after which he pronounced upon them the blessings the Lord had conferred upon Adam and Eve in the garden of Eden, told them to multiply and replenish the earth, and further blessed them that they would experience a long and prosperous life. [^78]

Leisure Hours

Though the Kirtland Saints were involved almost daily in physical labor, studying, and attending meetings, they also found time to enjoy recreational pursuits. Among the most popular leisure activities were hunting, fishing, swimming, sleighing, skating, wrestling, horseback riding, and riding in carriages. There was generally a close association among members of the family, and parents and children spent many evenings together conversing, singing, studying, and playing. The children had few toys, but they enjoyed playing with balls, marbles, whistles, and homemade dolls. In the wintertime they played in the snow, building forts and figures and having snowball fights. [^79]

Since Joseph Smith had not outlined in detail what might be considered proper or improper leisure pursuits for members of the Church, the Kirtland Saints generally retained the same attitudes on this subject as they had had prior to joining the Church. Most religious denominations in New England, western New York, and Ohio at that time denounced dancing, card playing, horse racing, and attending the theater. In Kirtland, the Saints seem to have shared these beliefs with members of other Christian faiths. [^80]

In the 1830s, holiday observances were not nearly as important as they later became. The annual parades, holiday feasts, and family outings so popular in the twentieth century were absent in most nineteenth-century settlements. There were few national, state, or even regional holidays. Even Christmas was little more than a routine day. Seldom did Joseph Smith refer in his diary to special activities on December 25, though in 1835 he did note, "Enjoyed myself at home with my family, all day, it being Christmas, the only time I have had this privilege so satisfactorily for a long period." [^81]

Mary Ann Stearns Winters remembered being with her family in New York City on Christmas day. As she walked down the hall in the apartment where she was staying, she met a neighborhood friend who asked her, "What did Santa Claus bring you?" Mary, confused by this question since she had never heard of such a person, replied, "Nothing." "Didn't you hang up your stocking?" the friend asked. Still perplexed, Mary asked her friend to explain the meaning of her questions. She soon learned that all the children in that area who had hung up their stockings on Christmas Eve awoke the next day to find them filled with toys and other wonderful presents. Mary admitted that at that time she could not understand why Santa Claus would enter one home and fill the stockings, while in other homes where stockings had not been left out for him, he would neglect to leave any presents for the children. [^82]

Life among the Early Saints

---
Notas:
[^1] HC 2:287, 309, 380-82; William W. Phelps to Sally Phelps, November 14, 1835, Journal History, November 14, 1835; autobiography of Milo Andrus, p. 5; autobiography of Levi Jackman, pp. 8-17.
[^2] Orson Pratt in JD 18:132.
[^3] HC 2:309, 432; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 34-35, 189, holograph, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives.
[^4] Oliver Cowdery, Sketch Book, January 16, 1836, Church Archives, reproduced in Leonard J. Arrington, "Oliver Cowdery's Kirtland-Ohio 'Sketch Book,'" BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 410-26. See also diary of George Burkett, p. 6.
[^5] Cowdery, Sketch Book, January 21, 1836. Cowdery mentioned that John Corrill also attended this meeting. HC 2:379; Joseph Smith diary (1835-36), p. 135. When the Prophet used the term presidency, he referred to various individuals who held positions of presidency, including his two counselors in the First Presidency, Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, and three other counselors, Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, and Joseph Smith, Sr. Three other men in Kirtland at that time were also called by the title of president: David Whitmer, president of the high council and the Church in Missouri, and his two counselors, William W. Phelps and John Whitmer. HC 2:124, 126, 176, 219, 239, 283, 364, 366.
[^6] Journal of Edward Partridge, January 21, 1836; autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 33.
[^7] HC 2:356, 379; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 135-36.
[^8] HC 2:379-81; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 135-38.
[^9] HC 2:379-81; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 135-36; journal of Edward Partridge, January 21, 1836.
[^10] HC 2:380; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, p. 136; journal of Edward Partridge, January 21, 1836.
[^11] HC 2:380-81; D&C 137; diary of Joseph Smith, pp. 137-38.
[^12] HC 2:28, 124, 356-57, 366-67; KCMB, pp. 200-203; journal of Edward Partridge, January 7, 1836.
[^13] HC 2:382; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, p. 139; journal of Edward Partridge, January 21, 1836.
[^14] HC 2:382; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, p. 139.
[^15] Journal of Edward Partridge, January 21, 1836; Cowdery, Sketch Book, January 21, 1836.
[^16] HC 2:382; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, p. 139; journal of Edward Partridge, January 21, 1836.
[^17] HC 2:382-83; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 140-41; journal of Edward Partridge, January 22, 1836.
[^18] A Record of the First Quorum of Elders Belonging to the Church of Christ in Kirtland, Geauga County, Ohio, 1836-1870, January 25, 28, 1836; Cowdery, Sketch Book, January 25, 1836.
[^19] HC 2:386-87; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 143-44.
[^20] High Priests Minute Book of Spanish Fork, Utah, April 29, 1866, to December 1, 1898, Church Archives.
[^21] Autobiography of Harrison Burgess, pp. 3-4. See also diary of Stephen Post, January 1836.
[^22] HC 2:387; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, p. 144.
[^23] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 35.
[^24] HC 2:391-92; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 151-52.
[^25] Cowdery, Sketch Book, March 26, 1836.
[^26] HC 2:410. Joseph Smith's account of the dedicatory service as printed in his History of the Church is based on a record he wrote in his diary. See diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 173-85.
[^27] HC 2:411.
[^28] HC 2:410-11, 433; journal of Edward Partridge, March 31, 1836.
[^29] HC 2:412-13.
[^30] HC 2:413-15. An account of the dedicatory service written by Oliver Cowdery was printed in the March 1836 edition of the Messenger and Advocate. Cowdery, Sketch Book, March 27, 1836; Messenger and Advocate 2 (March 1836): 274-81.
[^31] Snow, Eliza R. Snow: An Immortal, p. 59.
[^32] HC 2:416.
[^33] HC 2:417-18; Messenger and Advocate 2 (March 1836): 276-77.
[^34] HC 2:419.
[^35] HC 2:420-26; Messenger and Advocate 2 (March 1836): 277-80. This prayer was initially included in the 1876 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants as section 109 (the same section in the current edition of this work) and included the following introductory statement: "The following Prayer was given by revelation to Joseph Smith, the Seer, and was repeated in the Kirtland Temple at the time of its dedication, March 27th, 1836." See also Orson Pratt in JD 18:132.
[^36] HC 2:426. This hymn was included in Emma's hymnal, published in 1835.
[^37] HC 2:427-28; Messenger and Advocate 2 (March 1836): 281; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 184-85; diary of Stephen Post, March 27, 1836.
[^38] Autobiography of Truman O. Angell, p. 5; Heber C. Kimball in JD 9:376; George A. Smith in JD 2:10; journal of Edward Partridge, March 27, 1836.
[^39] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball (enlarged version), p. 66; Heber C. Kimball in JD 9:376.
[^40] HC 2:427-28; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, p. 185.
[^41] HC 2:428; Messenger and Advocate 2 (March 1836): 281.
[^42] George A. Smith in JD 2:215 and 11:10; Cowdery, Sketch Book, March 27, 1836; diary of Stephen Post, March 27, 1836.
[^43] Orson Hyde Elliott, Reminiscences, in the Life of Orson Hyde Elliott, p. 44; George A. Smith in JD 2:215; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, p. 4.
[^44] Benjamin Brown, Testimonies for the Truth; autobiography of A. L. Hale, pp. 4-5; George A. Smith in JD 2:215; Cowdery, Sketch Book, March 27, 1836.
[^45] Autobiography of William Hyde, p. 7.
[^46] Benjamin Brown, Testimonies for the Truth, pp. 10-11.
[^47] Snow, Writings, pp. 58, 62.
[^48] Autobiography of Nancy Alexander Tracy, p. 9.
[^49] HC 2:308-9.
[^50] HC 2:429-30; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 186-87; journal of Edward Partridge, March 27, 1836.
[^51] HC 2:430-33; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 187-90; journal of Edward Partridge, March 30, 1836. George Burkett recorded in his diary (p. 6) that he attended a pentecostal feast in the temple on April 16, 1836, during which he participated in the ordinance of washing of feet. Summarizing his experiences in the Kirtland Temple, he wrote, "Great are the blessings that the Saints enjoy in this place."
[^52] HC 2:434-36; diary of Joseph Smith, 1835-36, pp. 191-93. This is the last entry in Joseph Smith's Kirtland diary of 1835-36.
[^53] HC 4:211; 6:184, 251-52.
[^54] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball (enlarged version), pp. 36-37.
[^55] Autobiography of William Draper, p. 2; autobiography of A. L. Hale, April 4-6, 1836. Aroet Hale quotes from the journal of his father, Jonathan H. Hale.
[^56] Ebenezer Robinson, "Items of Personal History," The Return 1:88-91.
[^57] Autobiography of Ira Ames, 1836; autobiography of Luke Johnson, Millennial Star 26 (1864): 834-36; Millennial Star 27 (1865): 5-7; autobiography of Chapman Duncan, p. 3.
[^58] "Minutes of a Conference," Millennial Star 26 (January 1864): 51.
[^59] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, 1836.
[^60] Autobiography of George A. Smith, p. 82.
[^61] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 130. See also autobiography of Milo Andrus, p. 5.
[^62] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 12; autobiography of Joel Hills Johnson, p. 2.
[^63] Newel Knight, Scraps of Biography, p. 94.
[^64] E. R. Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 11. See also B. F. Johnson, "Show Us a Sign," in Early Scenes in Church History, p. 11.
[^65] Autobiography of Nancy Alexander Tracy, pp. 9-10.
[^66] Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 12-13; autobiography of Eliza R. Snow, p. 7; Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, pp. 65, 99, 100; Mary Fielding to Mercy R. Thompson, July 8, 1837, typescript, Church Archives.
[^67] Tullidge, Women of Mormondom, p. 207.
[^68] Ibid., pp. 207-8.
[^69] Ibid., pp. 208-9.
[^70] Journal of Wilford Woodruff, April 2-4, 1837. Portions of this record have been reproduced in Dean C. Jessee, "The Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 365-99.
[^71] Jessee, "Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," pp. 389-91.
[^72] Ibid., pp. 391-92.
[^73] Ibid., pp. 392-93.
[^74] Ibid., p. 396.
[^75] Ibid., p. 397.
[^76] Daniel Tyler, "Incidents of Experience," Scraps of Biography, pp. 32-33.
[^77] Benjamin Winchester, "Primitive Mormonism," Salt Lake Tribune, September 22, 1889, p. 2. After leaving the Church, Benjamin Winchester claimed that at the time of the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, a number of Latter-day Saints became intoxicated and the dedicatory service "ended in a drunken frolic." Such an accusation conflicts with many other contemporary accounts and is inconsistent with the Latter-day Saint attitude toward intemperance. If such behavior had been manifest, individuals would have undoubtedly recorded the information in their diaries or letters in 1836, but the negative reports emerged long after the events had transpired and among vindictive critics who had become enemies of the Church.
[^78] Autobiography of Nancy Alexander Tracy, p. 9.
[^79] HC 2:400, 402, 405, 503; autobiography of Zadoc Knapp Judd, p. 5; autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 2.
[^80] Robert Riegel, Young America 1830-1840 (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1949), pp. 345, 351-59; KCMB, pp. 251-53, 256-58.
[^81] HC 2:345.
[^82] Autobiography of Mary Ann Stearns Winters, p. 6. Mary Ann was about six or seven when this incident occurred.
