Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 16

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCA Pentecostal Season

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCKirtland was crowded in 1836. In addition to the constant stream of Latter-day Saint immigrants settling there, hundreds of visitors were gathering for the dedication of the temple. Leaders of the Church from Missouri were there, as well as many other members of the priesthood from other parts of the country. The newcomers crowded into the small homes of the Saints, and when the homes and the boarding houses near the temple were filled, the visitors sought accommodations in adjacent communities. But whether the Saints lived in Kirtland or were there for the dedication, they shared much of the same kind of anticipation. Because of their offerings and sacrifices during the building of the temple, they were told, the Lord would bestow upon them "great and choice blessings," including a special gift or "endowment with power from on high." [^1]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCRecalling the events that transpired during the period of the temple's dedication, Orson Pratt declared:

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCGod was there, his angels were there, the Holy Ghost was in the midst of the people, the visions of the Almighty were opened to the minds of the servants of the living God; the veil was taken from the minds of many; they saw the heavens opened; they beheld the angels of God; they heard the voice of the Lord; and they were filled from the crown of their heads to the soles of their feet with the power and inspiration of the Holy Ghost. . . . In that Temple, set apart by the servants of God, and dedicated by a prayer that was written by inspiration, the people were blessed as they never had been blessed for generations and generations. [^2]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCDuring a fifteen-week period, extending from January 21 to May 1, 1836, probably more Latter-day Saints beheld visions and witnessed other unusual spiritual manifestations than during any other era in the history of the Church. There were reports of Saints' beholding heavenly beings at ten different meetings held during that time. At eight of these meetings, many reported seeing angels; and at five of the services, individuals testified that Jesus, the Savior, appeared. While the Saints were thus communing with heavenly hosts, many prophesied, some spoke in tongues, and others received the gift of interpretation of tongues.

The Kirtland Endowment

Most of the unusual spiritual manifestations occurred in the Kirtland Temple at meetings in which members of the priesthood were receiving or were preparing to receive the endowment. Joseph Smith taught that the endowment was a gift of knowledge derived from revelation, a gift of power emitting from God. This gift consisted of instructions relating to the laws of God, including the principle of obedience, and was partially designed to help missionaries to serve with greater power and to give them greater protection. The Prophet said that many would not comprehend the endowment, but that bearers of the priesthood should prepare for this gift by purifying themselves, by cleansing their hearts and their physical bodies. "You need an endowment, brethren," he said, "in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things." After instructing the Saints for about three months, the Prophet concluded that the brethren of the priesthood had received "all the necessary ceremonies" relating to that endowment. He then challenged those who had received the gift to "go forth and build up the kingdom of God." [^3]

A Washing Ceremony

While unfolding principles of the endowment, Joseph Smith introduced a number of ordinances designed to purify those who would receive it. The first known preparatory rite unfolded in 1836 was the ordinance of washing the body. Under the date of Saturday, January 16, Oliver Cowdery noted in his diary that he and John Corrill had met in the home of Joseph Smith, where the three men had washed and perfumed (with cinnamon) their bodies, confessed their sins, and covenanted to be faithful to God. Elder Cowdery remarked that they had participated in the ordinance so that they would be clean before the Lord for the Sabbath. Before they completed this purification, he added, Martin Harris entered the Prophet's home and was also washed. [^4]

A similar purification occurred five days later. On Thursday afternoon, January 21, the Presidency gathered in the attic of the printing office adjacent to the Kirtland Temple, and there they washed their bodies with pure water and perfumed them in the name of the Lord, preparatory to receiving their anointings. [^5]

The Ordinance of Anointing

Some of the reports of communion with heavenly beings in Kirtland occurred while bearers of the priesthood were participating in a second ordinance revealed through the Prophet in January 1836, the ordinance of anointing with sacred or consecrated oil. This ceremony, like the washing of the body, was designed to purify the Saints in preparation for receiving the endowment; it was performed in the temple after they had cleansed their bodies in their own homes or in other buildings in the community. When the first group in this dispensation to receive their anointings gathered on Thursday, January 21, 1836, little did they realize that that night, one of the great visions of the ages would be unfolded, and many would commune with the hosts of heaven. [^6]

As the sun was setting that evening, approximately forty men entered the large doors of the nearly completed Kirtland Temple. The outside plastering of the building had been finished, but masons were still at work on the interior. The men passed the entrance of the large unpainted room on the main floor and began climbing the winding stairs. They passed by the second floor, which resembled the first, with four tiers of pulpits on either end of the room, and continued climbing to the third floor, or attic, which was divided into five rooms. About sixteen of the men gathered in the west room, which was being used as a classroom for the study of Hebrew. Called the translating room by Joseph Smith and the president's room by Oliver Cowdery, it had been dedicated on January 4 by Joseph Smith, Sr., as a place of learning. [^7] Those assembled in this room included the Presidency of the Church, members of the two bishoprics (Kirtland and Missouri), and the Prophet's scribe, Warren Parrish. The twenty-four members of the high council gathered in two adjoining rooms. [^8]

While members of the high council waited and prayed, the others participated in an ordinance of anointing their heads with holy oil. As the Presidency encircled Joseph Smith, Sr., the Prophet held a bottle of oil in his left hand and raised his right hand toward heaven. Then the Presidency raised their right hands, and the Prophet blessed and consecrated the oil in the name of Jesus Christ. After the oil had been consecrated, the Prophet anointed his father with it and invoked the blessings of heaven. All of the presidency, according to age, then laid their hands upon Father Smith and asked that the blessings of heaven be poured upon him. The Prophet then prayed to the Lord, requesting an acceptance of the anointing, after which the Presidency, according to Edward Partridge's account, raised their right hands toward heaven and said, "Amen." [^9]

Following this initial ordinance, others were anointed. Father Smith placed his hands on the heads of each of the Presidency, beginning with the oldest, and anointed and blessed them. When he blessed his son Joseph, he sealed upon him "the blessings of Moses, to lead Israel in the latter days" and "the blessings of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." "All of the Presidency laid their hands upon me," the Prophet said, "and pronounced . . . many prophecies and blessings." Edward Partridge added that after the Presidency had received their anointings, Bishop Whitney and his counselors, Bishop Partridge and his counselors, and Warren Parrish participated in the ordinance and were subsequently given blessings by the laying on of hands. [^10]

A Vision of the Celestial Kingdom

After the men had received their anointings, Joseph Smith testified that "the heavens were opened upon us," and he "beheld the celestial kingdom of God, and the glory thereof." He saw "the blazing throne of God, whereon was seated the Father and the Son." He saw "the beautiful streets of that kingdom, which had the appearance of being paved with gold." He saw "Fathers Adam and Abraham" and others who were then living or who had recently died, including his father (who was with him at that time), his mother, and his deceased brother, Alvin. He saw the twelve apostles who had recently been called, sustained, and ordained to that office, and Jesus was standing in their midst. He also saw in his vision all of the Presidency and many others who were present with him there in the temple. The Prophet wondered how his brother, Alvin, who had died before the Church was restored and before he had had an opportunity to be baptized for the remission of sins, could have obtained an inheritance in that kingdom. In answer to his question, he received a remarkable revelation concerning salvation for the dead and for children.

The Prophet reported that during this vision angels ministered not only to him but also to many others who had received their anointings. "The power of the Highest rested upon us," he said, and "the house was filled with the glory of God." He further declared (in an account that he dictated and that was written in his Kirtland diary by his scribe, Warren Parrish), "My scribe . . . saw, in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and many things which I saw." [^11]

Before this remarkable series of visions ended, the high councilors of Kirtland and Missouri entered the west room of the temple. Since some of the original members of these quorums had died, had been called to other positions, or were not in Kirtland in January 1836, other leaders had been selected to fill the vacancies. A major reorganization had occurred between January 6 and January 13, so on that day (January 21), there were in Kirtland two full quorums of twelve men each who were acting as high councilors. Members of the high council of the Missouri stake were Simeon Carter, John Hitchcock, Levi Jackman, Peter Whitmer Jr., George M. Hinkle, Elias Higbee, Elisha H. Groves, Calvin Beebe, Newel Knight, Lyman Wight, Alva Beaman, and Isaac McWithy (the latter two were representing Solomon Hancock and John Murdock, who were absent). The standing high council of Kirtland consisted of John Smith, John Johnson, Orson Johnson, Martin Harris, Samuel H. Smith, Jared Carter, Joseph Coe, Samuel James, Noah Packard, Joseph Kingsbury, Thomas Grover, and John P. Greene. [^12]

President's room in temple, where Joseph Smith received the Vision of the Celestial Kingdom (D&C 137)

After joining the other Church leaders in the translating room, the high councilors received their anointings. Hyrum Smith anointed the head of John Smith, president of the high council of Kirtland; and David Whitmer anointed Simeon Carter, president of the high council of Missouri. Then the presidents of the two high councils anointed the heads of the members of their respective councils, beginning with the oldest individuals. [^13]

Following this ordinance, Joseph Smith said, "the visions of heaven were opened to them also. Some of them saw the face of the Savior, and others were ministered unto by holy angels, and the spirit of prophecy and revelation was poured out in mighty power." He added, in conclusion, "We all communed with the heavenly host." [^14]

In addition to Joseph Smith and his scribe, Warren Parrish, other witnesses recorded the spiritual manifestations of that night. Edward Partridge wrote: "A number saw visions. Others were blessed with the outpouring of the Holy Ghost." Oliver Cowdery also bore his testimony of the experience. "The glorious scene" was "too great to be described," he wrote. "I only say that the heavens were opened to many, and great and marvelous things were shown." [^15]

During this spiritual feast, the silence that usually permeated the winter darkness of the unfinished rooms of the Kirtland Temple was periodically pierced with vibrations emanating from the west room of the third floor. The men who gathered that night not only communed with the heavenly hosts, but on several occasions they joined in shouting, "Hosanna! Hosanna! Glory to God in the highest!" The meeting ended in the same manner in which it began—with singing and prayer. The head of each quorum offered prayers at the beginning of the meeting, and Joseph Smith offered the invocation and final benediction. The solemn assembly probably continued until after midnight, for the Prophet recorded in his diary that he retired between one and two o'clock in the morning. [^16]

Friday, January 22, the day after the vision of the glories of heaven, was another memorable day in the history of the Church. Some of the men who were studying Hebrew gathered in their classroom at the usual hour, but instead of pursuing their lessons, they spent the morning discussing the visions of the preceding night. That evening the same leaders who had met the previous night again assembled in the temple, joined by members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles, presidents of the First Quorum of the Seventy, and Don Carlos Smith, who had been called to preside over the high priests. After the apostles, the seventies, and Elder Smith had received their anointings, the heavens were again opened and many saw visions. The Prophet declared, "The gift of tongues fell upon us in mighty power, angels mingled their voices with ours, while their presence was in our midst, and unceasing praises swelled our bosoms for the space of half-an-hour." Edward Partridge wrote, "During the evening more especially at the time of shouting a number saw visions as they declared unto." [^17]

West side of Kirtland Temple, showing upper windows of the president's room

These rich outpourings of the Spirit continued as additional members of the priesthood received their anointings and as Joseph Smith unfolded principles relating to the sealing of the anointing. After instructing the high priests and elders on Thursday, January 28, the Presidency anointed the leaders of these groups, who in turn anointed the men over whom they presided. The scribe who kept the minutes for the elders wrote, "The Lord poured out His spirit and some spoke in tongues and prophecied." [^18]

While the high priests and elders were receiving their anointings, Joseph Smith met with the apostles and seventies and told them that they should call upon God with uplifted hands to seal the blessings that had been promised them during their anointings. He also declared that others had professed seeing heavenly beings at the same time that he was beholding a glorious vision. Sylvester Smith, who was temporarily serving as scribe because of the illness of Warren Parrish, proclaimed that he beheld a pillar of fire resting upon the heads of the apostles. Roger Orton reported that he saw "a mighty angel riding upon a horse of fire, with a flaming sword in his hand, followed by five others, [who] encircled the [temple], and protected the Saints, even the Lord's anointed, from the power of Satan and a host of evil spirits." Zebedee Coltrin stated that he saw the Savior "crowned with glory upon his head above the brightness of the sun." [^19]

Others who attended this meeting verified the descriptions of visions recorded in Joseph Smith's diary and later in the History of the Church. Zebedee Coltrin, for example, substantiated the Prophet's account by testifying that he also beheld the Savior in the Kirtland Temple. He said that he saw in the temple "the power of God as it was in the day of Pentecost," including the speaking in tongues as the Spirit gave men utterance. [^20] William Harrison Burgess was probably also referring to this meeting when he recalled that the Spirit of the Lord rested upon him. It seemed as though the interior of the temple had been illuminated by a power from God, he said, adding that the Prophet, his brother Hyrum, and Roger Orton seemed to have been engulfed in this light. Then, he wrote, Joseph Smith exclaimed aloud that he beheld the Savior; Hyrum Smith said that he saw the angels of heaven; and Roger Orton testified that he saw the chariots of Israel. Concluding his description of this solemn assembly, Elder Burgess affirmed that the power of God was manifest, and many prophesied. [^21]

After these visions had ended, Joseph Smith instructed the seven presidents of the seventies to anoint the other members of their quorum. He then returned to the room where the high priests and elders were meeting and instructed them concerning the sealing of their anointings. [^22] Describing the ceremony in which he participated, Heber C. Kimball wrote that the First Presidency laid their hands upon his head and sealed his anointing. After the members of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles had received this blessing, they responded in unison with a loud "Amen," repeated three times. [^23]

Zebedee Coltrin

Sealing Their Blessings

Another series of remarkable visions occured in the Kirtland Temple on February 6 while Joseph Smith was again instructing the priesthood concerning sealing. On this occasion, the high priests and elders met again in the west room of the temple's top floor, the seventies and the twelve in the second room, and bishops in the east room. On that night the Prophet told the priesthood members the precise order God had shown him concerning the sealing of their blessings. First, he said, the men should engage in solemn prayer. President Sidney Rigdon was to offer the sealing prayer, after which "all the quorums were to shout with one accord a solemn hosanna to God and the Lamb," followed by three amens. Then all were to "take seats and lift up their hearts in silent prayer to God." If anyone beheld a vision or received a prophecy, that individual, he advised, should "rise and speak" so that all might rejoice and be edified.

Some of the elders did not comply with these specific instructions, evidently believing that the precise order and wording were not essential. Consequently, the Prophet observed, "This caused the Spirit of the Lord to withdraw," depriving the quorum members of blessings they otherwise might have received. Members of other quorums followed the instructions and enjoyed a great flow of the Holy Spirit. "Many arose and spoke, testifying that they were filled with the Holy Ghost, which was like fire in their bones, so that they could not hold their peace, but were constrained to cry hosanna to God and the Lamb, and glory in the highest," the Prophet declared. He also affirmed that William Smith saw in vision the Twelve Apostles laboring in England; Zebedee Coltrin saw a vision of the Lord's host; and others, filled with the Spirit of God, spoke in tongues and prophesied. "This was a time of rejoicing," he concluded, "long to be remembered." [^24]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCThe Dedicatory Service

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCNot all the spiritual manifestations that occurred in Kirtland in 1836 followed the administration of ordinances. Some of the most memorable events occurred on Sunday, March 27, the day the temple was dedicated. On the preceding day, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Oliver Cowdery, Warren Cowdery, and Warren Parrish met in the president's room on the third floor of the temple to make final preparations for the solemn assembly to be held on Sunday. Oliver Cowdery reported that during this meeting he assisted the Prophet "in writing a prayer for the dedication" of the Lord's House. [^25]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCOn the morning of the dedication, long before the doors of the temple were opened, a large crowd gathered. Joseph Smith estimated that by 7:00 A.M. more than five hundred persons were waiting near the temple doors. Between seven and eight o'clock a number of Church leaders and ushers entered the building, after which Joseph Smith, assisted by other members of the priesthood, dedicated the pulpits and consecrated them to the Lord. [^26]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCAt eight o'clock the temple doors were opened, and, as members of the First Presidency helped to seat the congregation, perhaps eight hundred or more people gathered in the main hall of the temple. The public sat in pews on the main floor of the temple, with Church leaders occupying benches and pulpits at the eastern and western ends of the hall. Presidents Frederick G. Williams, Joseph Smith, Sr., and William W. Phelps sat on the highest tier of pulpits at the east end. Directly below them sat Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Sidney Rigdon, with presidents of the high priests quorum occupying other seats in the Melchizedek Priesthood pulpits. Members of the Quorum of the Twelve, the presidency of the elders quorum, members of the high council, and Warren Cowdery and Warren Parrish, the two scribes assigned to keep minutes of the meeting, occupied the front seats on the east end of the building. At the west end, where the Aaronic Priesthood pulpits were located, were the bishoprics of Zion and Kirtland and the presidencies of the Aaronic Priesthood quorums (priests, teachers, and deacons). [^27]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCAfter every available seat had been occupied, the Presidency instructed the ushers to close the massive doors of the House of the Lord. Hundreds, including some who had sacrificed much of their time and material wealth for the building of the temple, were unable to crowd into it. Recognizing the disappointment of those who were standing outside, Joseph Smith recommended that they hold a meeting in the schoolhouse west of the temple. Many promptly gathered there in the room where the School of the Elders often met, but soon that hall also was filled to capacity, and many persons remained outside. Since so many had been unable to attend the solemn assembly, the service was repeated the following Thursday, March 31. [^28]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCThe dedicatory service began at 9:00 A.M. with President Sidney Rigdon conducting. After he read Psalms 96 and 24, the choir, led by M. C. Davis, raised their voices in the four corners of the temple to sing "Ere Long the Veil Will Rend in Twain," a hymn by Parley P. Pratt. Following the invocation by President Rigdon, the choir sang a hymn composed by William W. Phelps, "O Happy Souls, Who Pray." [^29]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCPresident Rigdon then spoke eloquently for two and a half hours, using as a text Matthew, Chapter 8, verses 18 to 20, especially verse 20, which reads, "And Jesus saith unto him [a scribe], the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay his head." According to the Prophet, Elder Rigdon spoke "in his usual logical manner" and complimented the Saints for sacrificing amid privations and persecution to build a house for the Lord. Then he reminded the congregation of the trials of Jesus, including the rejection of His teachings by most of the people who lived in the meridian of time. Today, he said, people continue to reject His revelations and power. President Rigdon also explained that while people of various faiths had built many spacious buildings where they could worship God, this temple was different from all other houses of worship. It was the only building on earth, he declared, "that was built by divine revelation." He concluded by saying that if the Redeemer appeared "in this day of science, this day of intelligence," he might repeat to those who deny his revelations, the same phrase he uttered while he walked the earth, "The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His head." [^30]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCReferring to President Rigdon's discourse, Eliza R. Snow commented that "he drew tears from many eyes, saying, these were those who wet those walls with their tears, when in the silent shades of the night, they were praying to the God of heaven to protect them, and stay the unhallowed hands of ruthless spoilers, Lower auditorium of temple, showing curtains that could be lowered from ceiling who had uttered a prophecy when the foundation was laid that the walls should never be erected." [^31]

Lower auditorium of temple, showing curtains that could be lowered from ceiling

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCFollowing his long discourse, President Rigdon called upon the respective quorums of the priesthood to acknowledge Joseph Smith as "Prophet and Seer" and to support him with their prayers. The quorums unanimously accepted the motion by rising, after which President Rigdon called upon the congregation to stand and indicate their acceptance of this motion. Everyone in the congregation stood. Then the choir and congregation sang another hymn by William W. Phelps, "Now Let Us Rejoice in the Day of Salvation." [^32]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCFollowing an intermission of about fifteen or twenty minutes, during which most people remained in the building (except mothers who left to care for their infants), the service continued with the congregation singing "Adam-ondi-Ahman" by William W. Phelps. The Prophet made a few brief remarks, after which he presented the names of officers of the Church for the sustaining vote of the priesthood quorums and the congregation. He first presented the Twelve Apostles, who were sustained by standing vote as prophets, seers, revelators, and special witnesses of Christ. Next he presented the presidents of the seventies; the high councils of Kirtland and Zion; the bishops of Kirtland and Zion and their counselors; the presidency of the elders; and finally the presidencies of the priests, teachers, and deacons in the Aaronic Priesthood. In each case the vote was unanimous in the affirmative. "I prophesied to all," the Prophet later said, "that inasmuch as they would uphold these men in their several stations, (alluding to the different quorums in the Church), the Lord would bless them; yea, in the name of Christ, the blessings of heaven would be theirs." [^33]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCAfter the congregation sang a hymn written by Isaac Watts, "How Pleased and Blest Was I," [^34] Joseph Smith offered the dedicatory prayer, which had been revealed through revelation. After expressing gratitude to God for His mercy, he asked the Lord to accept the temple, which had been built in obedience to His commandment and through great tribulation. "We have given of our substance," he said, "to build a house to Thy name, that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest Himself to His people." The Prophet prayed that the Lord would bless the Saints in attendance at the solemn assembly as well as those who would worship in the temple. He prayed for many others, including the leaders of the Church and all other Latter-day Saints, the leaders of nations, the children of Judah, and all of Israel. [^35]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCFollowing the dedicatory prayer, the choir sang a hymn that had been written for that occasion by William W. Phelps, "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning." The Prophet then asked the individual priesthood quorums, then the congregation, if they accepted the dedication prayer. After the congregation had manifested its approval, Don Carlos Smith blessed the bread and wine, and elders passed the sacrament to members of the Church. [^36]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCAs the dedication services continued, the Prophet testified of his prophetic mission and of his being blessed with visitations from angelic beings, after which several others bore their testimonies. Don Carlos Smith bore witness of the truth of the Book of Mormon and of the work of the Lord in which he was engaged. Frederick G. Williams testified that during the dedicatory service he had seen a heavenly messenger enter the temple and sit between himself and Father Smith. David Whitmer testified that he also had beheld heavenly beings during the services. [^37]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCSome who attended the solemn assembly declared that the Savior was present. Truman O. Angell recorded in his journal that as Elder Rigdon was offering the opening prayer, "a glorious sensation passed through the House," and many felt a sensation that elevated their souls. During the afternoon meeting, he reported, Joseph Smith arose and informed the congregation that the personage whom President Williams had seen was the apostle Peter, who had come to accept the dedication. [^38] Heber C. Kimball also declared that apostle Peter attended and accepted the dedicatory service. He declared that the heavenly being who had sat near President Williams and Father Smith was a tall personage with white hair who wore a long garment that extended to his ankles. [^39]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCFollowing some closing remarks by Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon and a short prayer by President Rigdon, the congregation sealed the proceedings of the meeting with the Hosanna Shout, shouting "Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna to God and the Lamb" three times, and sealing each series of hosannas with three amens. [^40]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCAfter the congregation had participated in the Hosanna Shout, Brigham Young arose and spoke briefly in an unknown tongue, which was interpreted by David W. Patten, after which Elder Patten also delivered a short exhortation in tongues. Then the Prophet blessed the congregation, and at about four o'clock the seven-hour dedicatory service was concluded. [^41]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCThe unusual outpouring of the Spirit manifest during the dedicatory service continued that evening at a priesthood meeting in the temple at which several men saw visions, prophesied, and spoke in tongues. George A. Smith declared that during this assembly he saw the temple filled with the hosts of heaven. He also recalled that David Whitmer reported that he saw three angels proceed along the south aisle of the temple. [^42]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCIn addition to these reports of visions, prophesying, and speaking in tongues within the walls of the temple, many persons described other unusual developments that took place during the period of the dedication. Several witnesses reported that they saw an unusual light on the top of the temple. Others mentioned that they heard heavenly singing coming from the roof of the building. [^43] Several Latter-day Saints who were in Kirtland that night observed that angels were seen hovering around the outside of the temple, and that during the priesthood meeting a vibrant sound was heard, like a mighty rushing wind, that penetrated the House of the Lord. [^44]

Dedication of the Kirtland TempleHCIt was a challenge for Latter-day Saints who attended the meetings to express in words the feelings of joy and spiritual ecstasy that overpowered them. William Hyde wrote that "this was, by far, the best meeting I had ever attended." The gifts of the gospel, he added, were enjoyed in a marvelous manner. [^45] Benjamin Brown recalled that the Spirit of God was poured out profusely, as on the day of Pentecost. "We had a most glorious and never to be forgotten time." [^46] When Eliza R. Snow recorded her impressions of the dedicatory service, she wrote that "no mortal language" could "describe the heavenly manifestations of that memorable day." The congregation, she said, felt the "sweet spirit of love and union," "a sense of divine presence," and "each heart was filled with joy inexpressible and full of glory." [^47] Nancy Alexander Tracy wrote that this was one of the happiest days in her life. Heavenly influences, she said, rested upon the Lord's House and heavenly beings appeared to many. [^48]

The Ordinance of Washing of Feet

The season of unusual spiritual manifestations continued as Joseph Smith unfolded the last of the ceremonies connected with the Kirtland endowment, the ordinance of washing of feet. Like the anointing and the sealing of the anointing, this rite was originally performed in the temple and was restricted to members of the priesthood. Joseph Smith declared that one reason for the construction of the temple was so that members of the Church could "attend to this ordinance aside from the world." The rite, he taught, was as necessary in the latter days as when the Savior walked the earth. The Latter-day Saints needed to receive the ordinance to make the foundation of the Church complete and permanent and to prepare them for various blessings. "It is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us," he said. [^49]

Two days after the temple dedication, on Tuesday, March 29, the presidency met with the bishops and their counselors in the temple to participate in the ordinance of washing of feet. When they had gathered, Joseph Smith informed them that since they would spend the night there, they should send for anything they needed. He further said that the men were to cleanse their feet and partake of the sacrament in order that they might be qualified to participate in this ordinance when other elders of the Church assembled the following day. They then cleansed their faces and feet and proceeded to wash one another's feet. After they had partaken of the sacrament of bread and wine, the Prophet attested, "the Holy Spirit rested down upon us, and we continued in the Lord's House all night, prophesying and giving glory to God." Edward Partridge noted that they prophesied and some "spoke in tongues and shouted hosannas." [^50]

At nine o'clock the next morning, some three hundred men gathered in the temple. Preaching from one of the pulpits in the main hall, the Prophet instructed them concerning the ordinance they were preparing to receive. Some of the curtains were lowered, creating several large compartments, with the priests, teachers, and deacons meeting in one corner of the temple and other members of the priesthood occupying the remainder of the hall. Tubs, water, and towels were placed in the chambers. Then the Presidency washed the feet of the apostles, "pronouncing many prophecies and blessings upon them in the name of the Lord Jesus." Throughout the morning, the presidency moved from one section of the hall to the other, instructing the men and supervising the administration of the ordinance. By noon all had participated in this ceremony. In the afternoon, Joseph Smith and Edward Partridge later reported, many began to prophesy and speak in tongues, with shouts of hosanna and amen.

In the evening, after a day of fasting, the men partook of bread and wine. Then they testified concerning the gifts of the spirit which they enjoyed. Although Joseph Smith retired to his home at about nine o'clock that evening (having already spent more than twenty-four hours in the temple) and did not witness all of the proceedings of that night, he summarized in his diary some of the developments that transpired after the men had partaken of the sacrament. "The Savior made His appearance to some," he said, "while angels ministered to others, and it was a Pentecost and an endowment indeed, long to be remembered." [^51]

Restoration of Keys of the Priesthood

One of the most significant visions of the ages took place in the Kirtland Temple seven days after its dedication, on Sunday, April 3, 1836. In the morning, a congregation of more than eight hundred heard sermons delivered by Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten. That afternoon the Presidency and the apostles participated in administering and passing the sacrament. Then Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery retired behind the curtains, which had been lowered near the pulpits, and knelt in prayer, and the heavens were opened. The Prophet testified that they beheld a series of glorious visions. Jesus Christ appeared to them and accepted the temple and the sacrifices of the people. He told them that some members had been blessed by an endowment, and that the Saints would continue to receive blessings if they kept His commandments and did not pollute that sacred house. Then, Moses appeared and conferred upon the two men the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. Elias appeared and conferred upon them the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, after which Elijah appeared in fulfillment of the prophecy of Malachi, committing to the men the keys he held, preparing mankind for the Second Coming of the Savior. [^52]

Later, while Joseph Smith was living in Nauvoo, he explained to the Saints on a number of occasions the significance of the appearance of Elijah in the Kirtland Temple. Elijah, he said, holds "the keys of the authority to administer in all the ordinances of the Priesthood; and without [this] authority . . . the ordinances could not be administered in righteousness." Explaining Elijah's mission of turning children to fathers and fathers to children, the Prophet said that this binding or sealing could be accomplished by the Latter-day Saints serving as saviors on Mount Zion. He asserted that by building temples, erecting baptismal fonts, and performing "all the ordinances, baptisms, confirmations, washings, anointings, ordinations and sealing powers upon their heads, in behalf of all their progenitors who are dead," Latter-day Saints could redeem others so that they might come forth during the first resurrection. [^53]

More Unusual Spiritual Manifestations

At two additional priesthood meetings held in the spring of 1836, members reported that they beheld the hosts of heaven and enjoyed various spiritual gifts. On both of these occasions, on April 6 and May 1, men who had recently been ordained as well as priesthood bearers who had arrived in Kirtland after the dedication of the temple gathered in the temple for the ordinance of washing feet. Those who received the ordinance on April 6 had been washed in their homes and had been anointed in the temple the preceding day, while the seventies and elders who gathered on May 1 attended to both the ordinance of anointing and that of the washing of feet in a solemn assembly in the temple.

Approximately four hundred priesthood members met throughout the night of April 6, and after those who had not previously participated in the ceremony of washing feet received this ordinance and were pronounced clean, Heber C. Kimball recalled, the "spirit of prophecy was poured out upon the assembly." "Angels ministered to many," he said, "for they were seen by many." [^54]

Another witness of these proceedings, William Draper, testified that the Spirit of the Lord entered the temple "like a mighty rushing wind and filled the house." "Many," he explained, "spoke in tongues and had visions and saw angels and prophecied." It was a general time of rejoicing, he said, "such as had not been known in this generation." [^55]

Ebenezer Robinson's description of the May 1 meeting resembles in many respects accounts of the April 6 gathering and of other meetings in the House of the Lord. After partaking of the sacrament, he wrote, many anxiously awaited and received powerful spiritual experiences. While some professed the gift of prophecy, others testified that the heavens were unveiled and they beheld angelic messengers from God. [^56]

Other contemporaries wrote in their diaries or journals general impressions of the gifts they received during the season of the temple's dedication. Ira Ames, Luke Johnson, and Chapman Duncan emphasized that when they received their endowments, they were blessed by the Lord. [^57] Warren S. Snow declared that when he received his endowment, he heard clearly the voice of God. [^58] Nathan Tanner observed that during this period many felt the Spirit of the Lord daily. [^59] George A. Smith testified that while he was in the temple he beheld a vision of the Millennium, [^60] and Parley P. Pratt wrote, "Many persons were carried away in the visions of the Spirit, and saw and heard unspeakable things; and many enjoyed the ministering of angels." [^61]

After reading Joseph Smith's account of this period (which was recorded in his Kirtland diary and published in his history of the Church), some contemporaries wrote their own verification of his narrative. Brigham Young and Joel H. Johnson, for example, stated that they witnessed the powerful gifts of the Spirit described in the Prophet's history. [^62] Newel Knight testified that he was present in the temple when God's power was revealed to the Saints. [^63]

Not all manifestations of spiritual gifts mentioned by persons in Kirtland in the spring of 1836 occurred within the walls of the temple. Some affirmed that they witnessed the healing power of God or experienced unusual blessings during meetings in their own homes. Lorenzo Snow stated that in many instances "the sick were healed—the deaf made to hear—the blind to see and the lame to walk." [^64] Some members remembered experiencing at that time a "sweet heavenly communion with the Holy Ghost." Nancy Alexander Tracy wrote that this joyful feeling occurred while elders went from house to house, administering the sacrament and blessing the Saints. While solemn assemblies were being held and some persons were receiving an endowment, Nancy said, several families met occasionally in one of their homes and ate and worshipped together. [^65]

The spiritual feasts enjoyed by the Saints in Kirtland continued during fast and testimony meetings held in the temple on the first Thursday of each month. Lorenzo Snow testified that at many of these meetings, the Spirit of God "was poured out in copious effusion" and many Saints enjoyed pentecostal refreshings from on high. Many Saints, including Lorenzo Snow, Eliza R. Snow, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney, wrote that the gifts of healing, prophesying, speaking in tongues, and the interpretation of tongues were periodically manifest. [^66]

During one of these monthly fast days, Prescindia Huntington, who had moved to Kirtland in May 1836 and was baptized the following June, was in her home when an excited young girl rushed to her door and in bewilderment said that a meeting was being held on top of the temple. "I went to the door," Prescindia declared, "and there I saw on the temple angels clothed in white covering the roof from end to end. They seemed to be walking to and fro; they appeared and disappeared. The third time they appeared and disappeared before I realized that they were not mortal men. . . . This was in broad daylight, in the afternoon." She said that a number of children in Kirtland saw this assembly of angels, and that when members of the congregation returned to their homes after the meeting, they reported that the power of God had been manifest both inside and outside the temple. According to Prescindia, Saints who attended the meeting reported that members were blessed with the gifts of prophesying and speaking in tongues, and that one person who was interpreting an unknown language said that angels "were resting" upon the building. [^67]

Prescindia Huntington stated that on another Thursday fast day, she and her sister Zina were kneeling in the temple with the congregation in vocal prayer when she heard a "choir of angels singing most beautifully." Their voices seemed to have come, she observed, from one of the upper corners of the hall. Although she said that she and her sister did not see any heavenly beings on that occasion, they heard "myriads of angelic voices" that seemed to have been united in singing a song of Zion. She further reported that during another fast meeting conducted by Father Smith, the "Holy Ghost filled the house." While "the spirit of revelation, prophecy, and tongues" was being manifest, she said, a "sound of a mighty rushing wind" was heard by the Saints, and the spirit was so powerful that some thought the building had caught fire. [^68]

Word circulated that pentecostal gifts were being manifest in the temple during the Thursday sacrament meetings, and many relatives and friends of the Saints traveled to Kirtland to attend the meetings. Once one of Prescindia's cousins visited Kirtland, anticipating that she would witness a hilarious and ludicrous scene. Accordingly, Prescindia continued, "We went with our cousin to the meeting, during which a Brother McCarter rose and sang a song of Zion in tongues; I arose and sang simultaneously with him the same tune and words, beginning and ending each verse in perfect unison, without varying a word. It was just as though we had sung it together a thousand times." Following the meeting, the cousin confessed that instead of laughing, "I never felt so solemn in my life." [^69]

Another outpouring of pentecostal gifts occurred in the Kirtland Temple on Thursday, April 6, 1837, at a solemn assembly to commemorate the organization of the Church. Some members prepared for the meeting by fasting and praying for several days beforehand. Some priesthood members who had not been in Kirtland when the temple was dedicated received their washings and anointings on April 4. [^70] On the morning of the solemn assembly, these men met in the upper story of the temple, where they were blessed with the ordinance of sealing the anointing; then they retired to the main floor of the temple. The curtains had been lowered, dividing the main hall into chambers, and some of the men retired behind the curtains to participate for the first time in the ordinance of washing of feet. Following the administration of these ordinances, Joseph Smith spoke to the congregation for about three hours. Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon then preached, after which the sacrament was blessed and passed to the congregation. [^71]

Kirtland Temple, drawn by Henry Howe in 1846. He identified the building north of the temple as the "Teacher's Seminary" (site of the Methodist church in the 1830s) and the building south of the temple as "the old banking house of the Mormons"

After the solemn assembly, members were invited to retire to their homes or if they desired, to remain in the temple for the night. That night Joseph Smith conducted a testimony meeting at which some members were blessed with the gift of prophecy, others spoke in tongues, and some received the gift of interpretation of tongues. [^72]

Another meeting was held in the temple on the night of April 7. Wilford Woodruff attended the service and later wrote in his diary that "the power of God rested upon us." "We were baptized with the Holy Ghost," he said, "and the spirit of God immersed our bodies like a consuming fire." He also testified that the spirit of prophecy and revelation was manifest, and that through the gift and power of the Holy Ghost, many precious things were revealed to him. "Our hearts were made glad," he added, "[and] we returned to our homes rejoicing." [^73]

Elder Woodruff also reported that the "power, gifts, and graces of the gospel" were again manifest in the Kirtland Temple on Thursday, April 20. Many members spoke in tongues during this service, and one man sang in tongues while one of the sisters interpreted his message. Much of the discussion, Elder Woodruff observed, centered on the "fame of Joseph" and his magnificent accomplishments. [^74]

Signs of Dissension

While the Saints rejoiced as they attended one pentecostal meeting after another for more than a year, the peace and serenity of that season were marred by some strife and friction. Wilford Woodruff wrote in his diary in February 1836 and again on April 28 that the spirit of murmuring, complaining, and mutiny was beginning to be manifest in Kirtland. Many persons, including some in positions of responsibility, were beginning to reject the leadership of the Prophet and were "striving to overthrow his influence." [^75]

Other Kirtland Saints observed that in the fall of 1836, six months after the remarkable spiritual manifestations and communion with the hosts of heaven in the temple, the Spirit of the Lord was withdrawn from some of the members. Daniel Tyler wrote in his diary that after the priesthood had received their endowments, Joseph Smith cautioned them, "Brethren, for some time Satan has not had power to tempt you. Some have thought that there would be no more temptation. But the opposite will come, and unless you draw near to the Lord you will be overcome and apostatize." [^76] Six months later, three apostles were disfellowshipped; and within a year, three of the original seven presidents of the seventies had been released. Before two years had passed, eight of the twenty-five General Authorities who had witnessed some of the most remarkable events in the history of the Church had been excommunicated or released from their ecclesiastical responsibilities.

This episode, like so many other events in the history of Christianity, is difficult for historians to analyze. Why did the Saints who gathered in the Kirtland Temple in 1836 experience so many pentecostal gifts? Some critics have sought to discredit these events by suggesting that illusions occurred following the liberal consumption of wine. [^77] However, Latter-day Saints, like so many other Christians of the 1830s, regarded intemperance as a serious transgression, and there is no evidence that any of the visions described by numerous witnesses followed the consumption of large amounts of wine. Contemporary testimonies of these events are so numerous that they cannot be dismissed with such an oversimplification.

One possible explanation is that bearers of the priesthood who gathered in the temple in 1836 had been promised and were anticipating special blessings, and for some, this meant an unusual spiritual experience. After dedicating their lives to the advancement of the restoration movement and after sacrificing much of their material wealth for the sake of building up a new kingdom on earth, many awaited a special gift of the Spirit. By following precisely the instructions of their prophet, many testified that they partook of spiritual blessings in a magnitude unlike anything they had previously experienced.

Nancy Tracy, reflecting on this experience, wrote that although she felt during this pentecostal season that heaven was on earth, she recognized that such special blessings would not continue. Nevertheless, she suggested that these blessings were to prepare the Latter-day Saints for the trials that awaited them. "We have opposing elements to contend with," she said, adding that the Saints "shall be made perfect through suffering." [^78]

A Pentecostal Season

---
Notas:
[^1] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 15-16.
[^2] E. R. Snow, comp. , Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 20-21. See also journal of Oliver B. Huntington, pp. 28-29; HC 2:529; 3:1.
[^3] A copy of the plan prepared by Joseph Smith for the City of Kirtland is in the Church Archives.
[^4] Jessee, "Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," p. 391. Punctuation has been added for clarity.
[^5] Ibid., p. 371.
[^6] Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 444
[^7] Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1836. These estimates of the amount of property the average LDS and non-LDS family owned were determined by estimating the Mormon and the non-Mormon population of Kirtland and then evaluating property holdings of individuals in Kirtland based on property tax records of the mid-1830s. The non-Mormon population was determined by using a formula based on residents (tax payers who paid a personal property tax during the 1830s) who paid land taxes and on personal property tax records in Kirtland. See Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 5-14. The estimate of land purchased in the 1830s was sometimes not taxed until one or two years after the purchase had been consummated.
[^8] HC 2:479-80.
[^9] Between the spring of 1836 and early 1838, the taxable land held by members of the Church increased from about 1200 to almost 3, 000 acres. Geauga, Kirtland, Tax Records, 1836, 1837, 1838.
[^10] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 17, 21-22.
[^11] Crary, Pioneer and Personal Reminiscences, p. 34; Messenger and Advocate 3 (June 1837): 521. See also autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 40. Kirtland was not the only community in Geauga County that was experiencing inflationary conditions in the mid-1830s. In January 1836, contemporary reports estimated that the population of Painesville Township had increased "fifty per cent during the last year"; that the price of city lots in Painesville had increased in a few months from $10 to an estimated $50 to $75 per foot; and that one piece of property increased in value in a few weeks from $10, 000 to more than $20, 000. Painesville Telegraph, January 29, 1836, p. 3. According to Mark Grandstaff, there was not only a relationship in the growth of the LDS population in Kirtland and rising land prices but the increase in the land prices caused some non-Mormons in Kirtland to emigrate. Mark Grandstaff, "The Kirtland Community: 1815-1840," BYU Special Collections, pp. 15-18.
[^12] In April 1837, Joseph Smith wrote that the unliquidated debt on the temple was about $ 13, 000. HC 2:480.
[^13] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 25-29, 40.
[^14] Ibid., pp. 41-42.
[^15] Ibid., p. 43; Scott H. Partridge, "The Failure of the Kirtland Safety Society," BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 443-45; C. C. Huntington, "A History of Banking and Currency in Ohio Before the Civil War," Ohio Archaeological and Historical Publications 24 (1915): 348, 355, 375.
[^16] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 43.
[^17] HC 2:467-68; Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 67, 81-82.
[^18] HC 2:468.
[^19] Ibid.; Huntington, "History of Banking and Currency in Ohio," pp. 372-73, 377. The Bank of Manhattan was organized at Toledo, Ohio, on March 25, 1836.
[^20] HC 2:470-72; Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 441-43; 3 (July 1837): 535.
[^21] Huntington, "History of Banking and Currency in Ohio," pp. 265, 417, 446.
[^22] Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 443; D. Paul Sampson and Larry T. Wimmer, "The Kirtland Safety Society: The Stock Ledger Book and the Bank Failure," BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 427-36; Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 59-61.
[^23] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 54-58, 70.
[^24] Ibid., p. 44; Cleveland Daily Gazette, January 25, 1837; Western Reserve Chronicle February 7, 1837, p. 3.
[^25] J. W. Swan, comp. , Statutes of the State of Ohio, pp. 136-39; Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 44.
[^26] HC 2:487-88, 507-8; Kirtland Safety Society Ledger Book, p. 273.
[^27] Elders' Journal 1 (August 1838): 58; George A. Smith in JD 11:11; autobiography of Nathan Tanner, pp. 23-24; autobiography of Truman O. Angell, p. 4.
[^28] Geauga County, Court of Common Pleas Record Book U, pp. 359-64.
[^29] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 44.
[^30] Ibid., p. 66.
[^31] Ibid., p. 46; HC 2:487-88; Conneaut Gazette, January 27, 1837, p. 2; Western Reserve Chronicle, February 7, 1837, p. 3; Painesville Republican, January 19, 1837, p. 2; Messenger and Advocate 3 (July 1837): 535-36; George A. Smith in JD 11:11; autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 40; autobiography of Jonathan Crosby, pp. 14-15.
[^32] Messenger and Advocate 3 (July 1837): 535-41; Painesville Republican, January 19, 1837, p. 2; Geauga County, Court of Common Pleas, Record Book U, pp. 359-64.
[^33] HC 2:488; autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 40; Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 51.
[^34] Autobiography of William Draper, p. 2; autobiography of Nathan Tanner, p. 24; autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 10; Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," pp. 15-16.
[^35] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 65.
[^36] Ibid., pp. 25-29, 69.
[^37] Ibid., pp. 29-40, 68-69. Once the Saints began selling large sections of land in Kirtland as they prepared to migrate west, the value of the land decreased sharply. When the Prophet was forced to flee from Kirtland in January 1838, an angry mob in pursuit, he left behind many disgruntled creditors. He recognized his obligation to pay his debts, and after he moved west, he called Oliver Granger to travel to Ohio to locate individuals who had loaned him money and to pay them. As late as 1843, with the help of other members of the Church, he was still trying to pay debts incurred while he lived in Kirtland. HC 3:164-65. See also "Recommendatory Letters," October 19, October 26, October 27, 1838, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives; Journal History, May 4, 1838.
[^38] Huntington, "History of Banking and Currency in Ohio," pp. 385-90; Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, pp. 51-53. The Bank of Canton closed its doors on April 13, 1838.
[^39] Brigham Young In JD 1:215.
[^40] HC 2:502.
[^41] Painesville Telegraph, June 30, 1837, p. 3; journal of Joseph Fielding, p. 12.
[^42] HC 2:502; Journal History, July 27, 1837; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 20-21.
[^43] Mary Fielding to Mercy R. Thompson, 1837, typescript, Mary Fielding Papers, Church Archives.
[^44] Hill, Rooker, and Wimmer, Kirtland Economy Revisited, p. 29.
[^45] Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 20.
[^46] Jessee, "Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," p. 382.
[^47] Autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 40, cited in Woman's Exponent 9 (May 1, 1881): 118.
[^48] Messenger and Advocate 3 (May 1837): 505-10.
[^49] 2:487; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 15; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, pp. 4-5; Ebenezer Robinson, "Items of Personal History," The Return; p. 19; autobiography of Heber C. Kimball, p. 39. For additional information on LDS speculation in land sales in the 1830s, see Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," pp. 284-86.
[^50] Autobiography of Ira Ames, 1837.
[^51] Pratt, Autobiography, p. 168.
[^52] Jessee, "Kirtland Diary of Wilford Woodruff," p. 385.
[^53] HC 2:487-88.
[^54] Painesville Republican, February 9, 1837, p. 2; Kirtland Council Minute Book, p. 236; HC 2:487-88.
[^55] KCMB, p. 236; HC 2:510.
[^56] HC 2:493; Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," p. 312.
[^57] "Life Incidents," Woman's Exponent 9 (May 15, 1881): 186.
[^58] Elders' Journal 1 (August 1838): 50. See also Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," pp. 287-89.
[^59] George A. Smith in JD 7:115. See also Elders' Journal 1 (August 1838): 57.
[^60] Benjamin F. Johnson, "Letter to George A. Gibbs," p. 8. See also Oliver Cowdery to Warren Cowdery, January 21, 1838, Huntington Library, San Marino, California, microfilm copies at Church Archives and BYU; Danel W. Bachman, "A Study of the Mormon Practice of Plural Marriage Before the Death of Joseph Smith," pp. 82-83; and John Whitmer, "The Book of John Whitmer," p. 86.
[^61] Johnson, "Letter to George A. Gibbs," pp. 8-10.
[^62] George Q. Cannon, "History of the Church," Juvenile Instructor 16 (September 15, 1881): 206. See also Joseph F. Smith in JD 20:29.
[^63] Johnson, "Letters to George A. Gibbs," p. 8.
[^64] HC 2:509-11; KCMB, pp. 234-37; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, p. 23; Journal History, September 3-4, 1837.
[^65] HC 2:512; KCMB, p. 240; Elders' Journal 1 (July 1838): 36.
[^66] HC 2:528; Elders' Journal 1 (July 1838): 36-38; George A. Smith in JD 7:115; Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 20-21; autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1837; Thomas Marsh to Wilford Woodruff, April 30, 1838, Wilford Woodruff papers, Church Archives.
[^67] Quinn, "Organizational Development and Social Origins of the Mormon Hierarchy, 1832-1932," pp. 248-91. This estimate of the number who left the Church in 1837 and 1838 is based on reports of persons who united with apostate groups and records that reveal excommunications of members during that period. Approximately 87 percent of the Kirtland Saints have been identified on Missouri, Nauvoo, Iowa, or Utah records, and almost one hundred persons remained in Kirtland.
[^68] After arriving in Far West, Missouri, in March 1838, Joseph Smith learned that members had held a court and had released the Far West Presidency, consisting of David Whitmer, William W. Phelps, and John Whitmer, from their positions and excommunicated the latter two leaders. One month later, David Whitmer and Oliver Cowdery were excommunicated. According to Parkin, Whitmer's and Cowdery's problems were caused in part by a union with dissidents in Kirtland; and although the men were not excommunicated until after they had moved to Missouri, the roots of their difficulties stem back to problems that had occurred while they were living in Kirtland. Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," p. 318n; journal of Joseph Fielding, p. 13. A biographical profile of the General Authorities, including the dates of their callings and excommunications or disfellowshipment when applicable, is in Quinn, "Organizational Development and Social Origins of the Mormon Hierarchy 1832-1932," pp. 248-91. See also Benjamin Johnson, "My Life's Review," pp. 23-24, and Ebenezer Robinson, "Items of Personal History," p. 29.
[^69] Among the leaders cited in the text who returned and died in full fellowship in the Church were Oliver Cowdery, Frederick G. Williams, Martin Harris, Luke S. Johnson, John Gould, and Salmon Gee. John Gaylord also returned but later joined the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints.
[^70] Autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 15.
[^71] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 23-24.
[^72] Ibid., pp. 23-24; Parley P. Pratt in JD 1:85.
[^73] Memoirs of George A. Smith, pp. 10, 28-29, 47; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 231. See also chapter 18.
[^74] Heber C. Kimball in JD 9:374; HC 2:2; Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 19; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 10; journal of Levi Ward Hancock, p. 77; Oliver Cowdery to W. W. Phelps, January 21, 1834, photocopy, Church Archives.
[^75] Joseph Smith to Edward Partridge, W. W. Phelps, and John Whitmer, December 5,
[^76] Backman, American Religions, pp. 168-69. For additional information on intolerance in colonial America and the birth of religious liberty in this country, see chapter 4 in that work.
[^77] Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, p. 202.
[^78] Robert Boyd, Personal Memoirs: Together with a Discussion Upon the Hardships and Sufferings of Itinerant Life (Cincinnati, 1868), pp. 184-85, cited in William Warren Sweet, Religion in the Development of American Culture, p. 136.
