Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 17

Persecution in OhioHCConflict at Kirtland

Persecution in OhioHCThe year following the dedication of the Kirtland Temple saw a spirit of pride, selfishness, disaffection, and apostasy sweep through the quorums of the Church. In the summer of 1837, members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and other priesthood leaders met in the upper room of the Kirtland Temple. Though the preceding year many of these same individuals had witnessed in that building some of the most remarkable spiritual manifestations in the history of the restoration movement, now they were meeting to oppose the leadership of Joseph Smith. At this assembly, some persons who had once been faithful supporters of the Prophet recommended that he be replaced as president of the Church by David Whitmer. Others vehemently opposed this motion, including Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and John Smith. Brigham Young, "in a plain and forcible manner," said that he knew that Joseph was a spokesman for the Lord, and though others "might rail and slander him [the Prophet] as much as they pleased," they "could not destroy" his appointment as a "Prophet of God." Their apostate actions, he declared, would destroy their authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet and to God, and lead them to destruction. Many of the disgruntled members, enraged at Elder Young's efforts to thwart their recommendations, threatened to resolve the conflict with physical blows. The meeting finally ended without agreement on a course of action. According to Elder Young, "The knees of many of the strongest men in the Church faltered." [^1]

Persecution in OhioHCOn another occasion during this turbulent period, Warren Parrish, John F. Boynton, and other dissidents entered the temple on a Sabbath morning armed with pistols and bowie-knives and sat in the Aaronic Priesthood pulpits at the east end. Shortly after the morning service began, the men interrupted the meeting. Eliza R. Snow, who witnessed the interruption, called it "a fearful scene." Drawing their pistols and knives, the dissidents rushed from the stand into the congregation and attempted to gain control of the building. Amid great confusion and with screams of alarm, some persons tried to escape by jumping out the windows. Local officials were summoned, and finally, with the assistance of the police, members of the congregation succeeded in removing the belligerents from the temple. Though no one was injured, the incident was another in a disrupting chain of events leading to the expulsion of the Saints from Kirtland just a few months later. [^2]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCEconomic Problems in Kirtland

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCThe historical roots of apostasy among Kirtland Saints reach back to a policy of community improvement and expansion, followed by a period of improved economic conditions, followed in turn by a year of economic disasters. After the temple was dedicated, many Latter-day Saints concentrated on enlarging their homes, erecting new dwellings and shops, and beautifying their community. A master plan for the improvement of Kirtland was drafted by Joseph Smith in 1836. According to this model, Kirtland was to be divided into rectangular plots and square blocks, with streets bisecting each other at right angles. [^3] Commenting on this plan, Wilford Woodruff wrote in April 1837:

It was given him [Joseph Smith] by vision. It was great, marvelous and glorious. The city extended to the east, west, north and south. Steam boats will come puffing into the city. Our goods will be conveyed upon railroads from Kirtland to many places and probably to Zion. Houses of worship would be reared unto the most high. Beautiful streets was [sic] to be made for the Saints to walk in. Kings of the earth would come to behold the glory thereof, and many glorious things not now to be named would be bestowed upon the Saints. [^4]

Many contemporaries observed that in the fall and early winter of 1836 the Kirtland Saints were involved in various construction projects, seemed to be happy, and were participating in a vibrant program of community growth. "The noise of the ax and the hammer" were heard everywhere, Wilford Woodruff wrote in his diary, and "a cheerfulness beaming upon every countenance" revealed a new sense of prosperity. [^5] The Messenger and Advocate reported in January 1837 that the streets of Kirtland were crowded with teams loaded with provisions and with wood and other building materials, and that many visitors had come to Kirtland to view the stately and magnificent temple. According to the paper, the recent growth of Kirtland was more remarkable than that of any other community of similar size situated so far from navigable water. [^6]

During this era of rapid growth, Church leaders and other members were acquiring additional property in Kirtland. The land was needed to put into effect Joseph Smith's plan for an enlarged and beautified city of the Saints in the Western Reserve. After the temple was completed, many members who now had more time to devote to farming pursuits wanted enlarged farms to raise their standard of living and to adequately support their families. In the spring of 1836, Latter-day Saints were assessed land taxes on over twelve hundred acres in Kirtland, representing about 5.7 acres per family. The average farm size of non-Mormons in the township was about fifty acres per family, a minimal amount at the time for a satisfactory farm operation. [^7] Although some of the Saints owned stores and shops and others worked as teachers, laborers, and craftsmen, property held by the members in 1836 was not considered sufficient to meet current needs and future plans. Additional land was needed not only for those who had settled in Kirtland, but also for others who would be immigrating there. Joseph Smith and other leaders of the Church undoubtedly viewed the future optimistically. Based upon recent developments, they might have expected a growth in the Kirtland membership of eighty to one hundred families annually for at least a few years. [^8]

While members of the Church were increasing their property holdings in Kirtland, land prices rose sharply, and there was reason to believe inflationary conditions would continue. [^9] Changes in the real price of land in the 1830s were determined primarily by changes in the general price level (inflation) and changes in population. Between 1830 and 1837 the annual average price of land in Kirtland rose from $6.54 to $44.48 per acre. [^10] After the community was surveyed and divided into half-acre lots in the mid-1830s, some lots that had sold for $10.00 to $50.00 soon sold for many hundreds of dollars. According to an editorial appearing in the June 1837 issue of the Messenger and Advocate, the price of land in Kirtland during the preceding year had increased 800 percent. [^11]

To secure the money needed for economic expansion, many of the Saints were forced to borrow. During the previous three years most of their resources had been used for the construction of the temple, and by the summer of 1836, many of the debts incurred while the temple was being built had not yet been liquidated. [^12] Meanwhile, lenders were willing to extend credit to Saints seeking financial assistance. Land could be reclaimed, and creditors assumed that goods could be sold within a reasonable period for a profit. Since Kirtland was expected to continue growing, with land values increasing at a normal inflationary rate, Church leaders and creditors assumed that the Mormons could manage all the debts they had accumulated. [^13]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCThe financial problems of the Saints in Kirtland were compounded after the temple was completed. During its construction, members of the Church in the East and other areas of North America had sent contributions to Kirtland, which temporarily bolstered the town's economy. These donations decreased after the temple was dedicated, at a time when the debts of the Kirtland Saints were mounting. Recognizing a cash-flow deficiency, Church leaders sought a means to transform into cash some of the assets they and other members possessed in land. One means to which they now gave consideration was the establishment of a bank in Kirtland. [^14]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCBanks played a significant role in the development of many American communities in the nineteenth century. As the nation's economic growth accelerated, the demand for credit and money increased, resulting in the establishment of banks in small as well as large communities throughout the country. Between 1830 and 1837, the period when the Latter-day Saints were headquartered in Kirtland, the number of banks in the United States increased from 329 to 634 and the number in Ohio from 11 to 31. Banks provided loans, a medium of exchange, and a safe depository for money. To meet public demand for a readily acceptable medium of exchange, banks would provide notes or currency in exchange for the promissory notes of individuals and businesses.

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCWhile a promissory note was not generally accepted as a medium of exchange to secure goods and services, bank notes could be used quite readily. Local bank currency was generally accepted only within a small geographical area served by the bank, and was heavily discounted by banks outside that area. [^15] Prior to 1837, banks had already been established in several Ohio communities smaller than Kirtland, and based on the successful experience of these institutions, as one group of scholars recently reported, "Kirtland probably could have supported a modest bank." [^16]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCOn November 2, 1836, leaders of the Church in Kirtland, probably with the help of a non-Mormon attorney, drafted an article of agreement providing for the organization of a banking institution to be called the Kirtland Safety Society Bank. [^17] Orson Hyde then traveled to Columbus with a petition directed to the Ohio legislature, requesting approval for the incorporation of a banking institution. Church leaders, assuming that the legislature would grant the request, also sent Oliver Cowdery to Philadelphia to secure plates for the printing of currency. On January 1, 1837, Oliver Cowdery returned with the plates—but Orson Hyde returned with discouraging news. [^18] The legislature had refused to consider the petition. "Hard-money" Democrats who were opposed to an expansion of banks in Ohio had gained control of the legislature; in 1835 all requests for bank charters had been rejected, and in 1836 only one of sixteen such requests had been accepted. Thus, Orson Hyde was unable to secure a charter granting the Saints the right to organize a bank in Kirtland. [^19]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCThe Saints, disappointed by the rejection of their request to incorporate a bank in Kirtland, decided to reorganize and to create a private joint-stock company, the Kirtland Safety Society Anti-Banking Company. [^20] They probably assumed that individuals had a legal right to organize a private company that engaged in banking activities, since other unchartered or unauthorized banks were organized in Ohio before and after the Kirtland Safety Society was constituted. Insurance companies, savings institutions, and even a literary firm assumed banking powers during that era, including issuing notes, loaning money, and providing a depository for funds. Referring to the pre-Civil War era in Ohio, one modern historian has written that "all laws against unauthorized banks and bank paper seem to have been in vain." [^21]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCMany persons in the Western Reserve initially supported the formation of the Kirtland Safety Society. Church leaders served as officers, with Joseph Smith as treasurer and Sidney Rigdon as secretary. Both members and non-members bought stock in the company, most of the stock being purchased during the last three months of 1836 before the company was constituted. Two hundred investors purchased (primarily with gold and silver) 39,025 shares in the company, with subscriptions totaling about $20,000.00. Although the face value of the stock was $50.00 per share, the price per share varied from 1/3Â¢ to $3. 93, with an average price being 26 1/4Â¢. The average investor bought $12.00 worth of stock, representing almost one week's income. [^22]

Kirtland Safety SocietyHCOn January 2, 1837, the Kirtland Safety Society opened its doors for business. Using the plates that Oliver Cowdery had secured, the company issued its first notes during the first week of January, stamping on some of the currency words that changed "BANK" to "anti-BANKing Co." This first issue consisted of $1, $2, and $3 denominations and amounted to about $10,000. Possibly $15,000 had been invested in subscriptions, serving as backing for this first issue. Additional notes of denominations ranging from $1 to $100 were issued in February and March, bringing the total to perhaps $100,000. [^23]

Shortly after the Kirtland Safety Society began to function, serious problems interfered with its successful operation. On January 23, Sidney Rigdon announced that the society could no longer redeem its notes with specie. Thereafter, its notes were subject to heavy discounts. [^24] In February, Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and other leaders of this company were charged with violating an 1816 Ohio statute that prohibited the issue and circulation of unauthorized bank notes and fixed a penalty of $1,000 for officers of institutions that violated this law. [^25] In June, Joseph Smith resigned as an officer in the company and withdrew his support of this institution. [^26] In August, Warren Parrish was accused of defrauding the bank of funds and becoming involved in counterfeiting. [^27] In October, a jury found Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon guilty of violating the Ohio statute of 1816, and a judgment amounting to $1,000 was assessed them. [^28] Finally, in November the company closed its doors. [^29]

As the Prophet struggled to prevent the Kirtland Safety Society from collapsing, his financial problems increased. His subscriptions to the society totaled 1,360 shares, more than any other investor except John Greene. He also paid more per share than 85 percent of the investors, and in February and March, when the company was experiencing financial difficulties, he increased his subscriptions. Apparently in an effort to help the business, in 1837 he secured three loans. On January 2, he borrowed more than $3,000 from the Bank of Geauga; on July 3, he secured $1,225 from the Commercial Bank of Lake Erie-Cleveland, and a loan from the Bank of Monroe, a Michigan bank in which members of the Church had a controlling interest. Meanwhile, because of financial difficulties, he also sold property in Kirtland at a price of more than $5,000. [^30]

Many forces combined to destroy the Kirtland Safety Society. Success of any business at that time, especially banking institutions, depended upon public support. Many banks in the Western Reserve refused to accept the Kirtland Safety Society notes as legal tender, and anti-Mormon newspapers branded the currency as worthless "rags." Moreover, banks did not possess sufficient specie to satisfy large demands for redemption of their currency. Since the capital backing the Kirtland Safety Society was primarily in the form of land, in order for the society to continue as a successful business enterprise, supporters had to prevent individuals from securing large amounts of the Safety Society notes. Enemies of the Church, however, managed to obtain sufficient quantities of the notes to initiate a run on the institution, forcing the Safety Society to suspend payment in specie a few weeks after the first notes were issued. [^31]

Another reason for the failure of the company was the lack of a charter. During the trials in which Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon were charged with violating the banking statute of 1816, their attorney argued that that law had been repealed by an act of 1824. In fact, the February 16, 1837 issue of the Painesville Republican reported that the law of 1816 had been replaced by a general law of 1824 that declared that all notes "issued by unauthorized banking companies" were "null and void, without, however, annexing a penalty." The court did not sustain this interpretation. It ruled that the 1824 banking act amended provisions in earlier laws but did not replace these other statutes; [^32] thus, the operations of the Kirtland Safety Society were in violation of the laws of Ohio. When Church leaders decided in January 1837 to charter a bank in Kirtland, they and their legal advisers had not understood that forming a company with banking powers would be considered illegal. Since other unauthorized institutions in Ohio during that era were engaged in similar banking activities, Joseph Smith and other members recognized that enemies abroad and apostates within were involved in the destruction of the Kirtland Safety Society. [^33]

Demise of the Kirtland Safety Society intensified the economic problems of the Kirtland Saints. The two hundred individuals who invested in the bank lost nearly everything they subscribed; others secured notes issued by the company and redeemed their currency at heavy discounts. As the months passed, many still held bills that had no redeemable value. When the company failed, many persons lost their savings and a few were ruined financially. [^34] It has been estimated that the financial loss approached $40,000, almost the total cost of building the Kirtland Temple. This loss was sustained by persons whose income averaged about $400 annually. [^35]

Joseph Smith's economic losses from the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society were greater than those of any other individual. While seeking to establish and then sustain the company and at the same time purchase land in Kirtland and goods for his store, he had accumulated debts amounting to approximately $100,000. [^36] Although he had assets in land and goods that were of greater value in some respects than his debts, he was unable to immediately transform these assets into a form that could be used to pay his creditors. [^37]

The Saints' economic problems were compounded in the spring of 1837 by a panic that spread west from New York into other parts of the nation. In May 1837, there was a general suspension of payment in specie by the banks of Ohio. Chartered banks did not discontinue business, however, and prior to the resumption of specie payment in August 1838, only one bank in the state is known to have failed. [^38] But during the panic, money was scarce, and many creditors were unable to extend credit or postpone dates when debts were due. Unable to meet their financial obligations, Joseph Smith and other Church leaders were in an awkward and embarrassing position. While the Prophet's creditors pressured him to pay for supplies he had purchased at wholesale prices, he was unable to apply this same pressure on members of the Church who had purchased goods from him on credit. Brigham Young aptly described Joseph Smith's predicament while he was laboring as a merchant in Kirtland:

Joseph goes to New York and buys 20,000 dollars' worth of goods, comes into Kirtland and commences to trade. In comes one of the brethren, "Brother Joseph, let me have a frock pattern for my wife." What if Joseph says, "No, I cannot without the money." The consequence would be, "He is no Prophet," says James. Pretty soon Thomas walks in. "Brother Joseph, will you trust me for a pair of boots?" "No, I cannot let them go without the money." "Well," says Thomas, "Brother Joseph is no Prophet; I have found that out, and I am glad of it." After a while, in comes Bill and sister Susan. Says Bill, "Brother Joseph, I want a shawl, I have not got the money, but I wish you to trust me a week or a fortnight." Well, brother Joseph thinks the others have gone and apostatized, and he don't know but these goods will make the whole Church do the same, so he lets Bill have a shawl. Bill walks off with it and meets a brother. "Well," says he, "what do you think of brother Joseph?" "O he is a first-rate man, and I fully believe he is a Prophet. See here, he has trusted me this shawl." Richard says, "I think I will go down and see if he won't trust me some." In walks Richard. "Brother Joseph, I want to trade about 20 dollars." "Well," says Joseph, "these goods will make the people apostatize; so over they go, they are of less value than the people." Richard gets his goods. Another comes in the same way to so make a trade of 25 dollars, and so it goes. Joseph was a first-rate fellow with them all the time, provided he never would ask them to pay him. In this way it is easy for us to trade away a first-rate store of goods, and be in debt for them. [^39]

"Vexatious Law Suits"

In the summer of 1837, in the midst of financial reversals, Joseph Smith was involved in what he called "malicious and vexatious law suits." [^40] Enemies of the Church continually harassed him, indicting him on one charge after another. Grandison Newell, for example, one of the most outspoken critics of the Church in Geauga County, brought a suit against the Prophet, charging him with instructing two other members of the Church to kill Newell in harmony with the will of God. Joseph's actions, Newell alleged, were aimed at preventing him from prosecuting the Mormon leader for his involvement in the Kirtland Safety Society. The court convened in June, and after hearing various testimonies, the judge ruled that there was no reliable evidence substantiating Newell's complaint and suggested that his hatred toward the Mormon leader, not his fear of a threat on his life, had induced the prosecution. [^41]

On July 27, 1837, Joseph Smith set out on a trip to visit the Saints in Canada, accompanied by Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh. Brigham Young and a new convert, Albert P. Rockwood, were to accompany them part of the way. They got only as far as Painesville, where the Prophet was arrested. After a preliminary hearing, he was released by the court for lack of evidence. Within a short time he was again arrested by the sheriff, and again he was released. In fact, on that day he was arrested six times, charged with various offenses, and each time the case was dismissed for lack of evidence. After spending all day in Painesville, the Prophet and his companions returned to Kirtland. They commenced their mission again the next day. [^42]

As he returned from Canada, Joseph was again detained in Painesville. According to an account by Mary Fielding, based on information she learned from the Prophet, he and Brigham Young were seized by a mob when they were about four miles from home. Taken to a tavern in Painesville, they escaped through the kitchen door, aided by a housekeeper who was a member of the Church. The mob, upon learning of their disappearance, took up the chase. Joseph and Brigham fled through dense woods and along muddy roads, hiding in swamps and behind trees and logs. At times their pursuers, carrying blazing torches, were so close that the two men feared their own heavy breathing might be heard. At dawn they finally reached Kirtland. [^43]

Most of the legal proceedings against Joseph Smith in Ohio were cases involving debts. Between 1837 and 1839 seventeen lawsuits were filed against Joseph Smith in Geauga County for debts involving claims of more than $30,000. Four of the suits were settled; three were voluntarily withdrawn by plaintiffs; and ten resulted in judgments against the Prophet and others. Three of the ten judgments were fully discharged, three were partly satisfied, and available records indicate that four were not satisfied. [^44]

The Roots of Apostasy Spread

During this period of economic distress and increasing opposition against the Church, many converts apostatized. Eliza R. Snow observed that following the temple dedication, many of the Saints who had received marvelous spiritual blessings anticipated that "prosperity was dawning upon them." As economic conditions improved, some became "haughty in their spirits" and were "lifted up in the pride of their hearts." And as individuals "drank in the love and spirit of the world," she added, the Spirit of the Lord withdrew, and "they were filled with pride and hatred toward those who maintained their integrity." [^45]

Wilford Woodruff also pointed to pride as a factor leading to dissension within the Church. In January 1837, he wrote, Church leaders chastized some of the Saints assembled in the temple. "David Whitmer . . . warned us to humble ourselves before God lest his hand rest upon us in anger for our pride & many sins that we were runing into in our days of prosperity as the ancient Nephites did & it does not appear evident that a scourge awates this stake of Zion even Kirtland if their is not great repentance immediately." [^46]

At the same time that pride was manifest among the Saints, a spirit of selfishness emerged. Heber C. Kimball wrote that as the Saints were anticipating the commencement of an era of prosperity, some developed an inordinate desire to become suddenly and vastly wealthy. [^47]

In an article in the Messenger and Advocate in May 1837, editor Warren Cowdery suggested that the unbridled desire to accumulate worldly wealth led some of the Saints into mercenary and deceptive business practices in Kirtland. Unscrupulous brethren, he announced, were taking advantage of others and, after obtaining their money, deserting them. Such action, he said, was marring the peace of the community and causing distress among members of the Church, leading some to apostatize. He especially warned Church members who were planning to immigrate to Kirtland to beware of individuals who approached them shortly after their arrival and inquired concerning their financial status. Some persons were reportedly taking advantage of newcomers by describing unusual investment opportunities that would lead to financial gain and abundant blessings from the Lord, but that actually would deprive the investors of their savings. Elder Cowdery suggested that before anyone entered into a contract with a person with whom he was not acquainted, he should investigate the proposal and seek counsel from Church leaders and other reliable sources. [^48]

A few Kirtland Saints identified in their writings practices of Mormons in Kirtland that they regarded as selfish and un-Christian, including land speculation that brought excessive profits to some at the expense of their brethren. [^49] After some of the Saints lost their savings as a result of the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society, they complained about the lack of charity of their creditors. Ira Ames asserted that after he had lost nearly everything, including the land on which he was living, two creditors who were then serving as apostles tried to take his horse. [^50] Describing the contention, Parley P. Pratt wrote that there were "jarrings and discords" in Kirtland, that "envyings, lyings, strifes, and divisions . . . caused much trouble and sorrow," and "many fell away," becoming apostates and enemies of the Church. [^51]

In addition to pride and selfishness, a third major force leading to an apostasy in Kirtland was criticism of the Prophet Joseph Smith. According to Wilford Woodruff, even prior to the collapse of the Kirtland Safety Society some members complained about the leadership of Joseph Smith. Under the date of February 19, 1837, Elder Woodruff wrote that while Joseph was absent from Kirtland on business for the Church, some turned against him. He compared these members to the children of Israel who rebelled against Moses while he was on Mount Sinai. The Saints' discontent at that time was temporary, he said, for after the Prophet returned and spoke to the people in the temple, the complainers "saw that he stood in the power of a prophet." [^52]

As the financial crises in Kirtland deepened, the Prophet was criticized for his business transactions, for excessive borrowing, for speculating in land, and for supporting a banking institution that was experiencing serious problems. Some critics blamed the Mormon prophet for the economic reversals of 1837, failing to recognize that Joseph Smith was a mortal, subject to the weaknesses of the flesh, and was not directed in all of his personal affairs by the Lord. [^53] He became a scapegoat upon which many tried to unload their problems. A rumor was circulated that the Kirtland Safety Society had come about through revelation and that Joseph Smith had predicted the company would never fail, so some persons claimed that the demise of that institution was evidence he was a fallen prophet. [^54] Recognizing that he had been misrepresented, Joseph testified before the Kirtland high council that he had never uttered nor authorized a statement concerning the infallibility of the banking company. He declared in September 1837 that he had always said that "unless an institution was conducted on righteous principles it would not stand." [^55]

In mid-1837, many members living in Kirtland, including some who had been called to serve in the highest positions of responsibility, rejected the leadership of Joseph Smith, declaring that he was no longer a true prophet. While Joseph was lying in bed with a debilitating illness in June, apostates circulated a rumor that he was suffering because of his transgressions in leading the Church into a desperate financial condition. [^56] When Heber C. Kimball began his mission that month to England, he said that John F. Boynton called him a fool for leaving home at the call of a "fallen prophet." [^57]

Parley P. Pratt was among those who censured the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon for their "business transactions." He admitted that "under feelings of excitement, and during the most peculiar trials," he wrote a letter condemning the actions of the men.

After the letter was published by a non-Mormon in what Elder Pratt called a garbled form, he recognized his mistake and sought forgiveness from the Church and those whom he had offended. In his apology, Elder Pratt censured himself for his "rashness, excitement, imprudence, and many faults," adding that at no time, even during the period of his most intense anger, had he believed that the men were dishonest or held improper motives. "I have ever esteemed them from my first acquaintance," he said, "as men of God, and as mighty instruments in his hands to bring forth, establish, and roll on the kingdom of God. But I considered them like other men, and as the prophets and apostles of old liable to errors, and mistakes, in things which were not inspired from heaven; but managed by their own judgement." [^58]

Another factor that precipitated an apostasy of members in Kirtland was immorality. Referring to priesthood leaders who left the Church in the fall of 1837, George A. Smith observed that after the "spirit of adultery or covetousness" had seized control "of their hearts . . . the Spirit of the Lord left them." [^59] A few members in Kirtland possibly entered into the practice of plural marriage without authorization of Church leaders, justifying their actions by asserting that Joseph Smith had taken a plural wife. The Prophet had probably received revelations in Ohio relating to eternal and plural marriage in the early 1830s and may have been practicing plural marriage about 1835. [^60]

One contemporary of the Prophet wrote that after they learned that Joseph was practicing plural marriage, Oliver Cowdery, Warren Parrish, and Jared Carter incorrectly assumed that prerogative for themselves and became involved in promiscuous relations. [^61] Commenting on Oliver Cowdery's transgression, George Q. Cannon, who later served as a counselor to four nineteenth-century presidents of the Church, wrote:

The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph in an early day, some points connected with the doctrine of celestial marriage. He was told that it was to obey God's will that His ancient servants had taken more wives than one; and he probably learned, also, that His servants in these days would be commanded to carry out this principle.

The Prophet Joseph, however, took no license from this. He was content to await the pleasure and command of the Lord, knowing that it was as sinful to enter upon the practice of a principle like this before being commanded to do so, as it would be to disobey it when required to carry it into effect.

Not so with Oliver Cowdery. He was eager to have another wife. Contrary to the remonstrances of Joseph, and in utter disregard of his warnings, he took a young woman and lived with her as a wife, in addition to his legal wife.

Had Oliver Cowdery waited until the Lord commanded His people to obey this principle, he could have taken this young woman, had her sealed to him as his wife, and lived with her without condemnation. But taking her as he did was a grievous sin, and was doubtless the cause of his losing the Spirit of the Lord, and of being cut off from the Church. [^62]

Benjamin F. Johnson asserted that Joseph Smith's practice of plural marriage not only provided members with an excuse to justify their transgressions, but also caused others to leave the Church, undoubtedly because they did not understand the eternal principles involved in this marital law. [^63]

A "Great Apostasy"

On September 3, 1837, at a conference in Kirtland, Joseph Smith was unanimously sustained as President of the Church, and Sidney Rigdon was sustained as a counselor in the Presidency. The conference failed, however, to sustain some of the leaders, including Martin Harris, John Johnson, Joseph Coe, and Joseph C. Kingsbury; and a few were disfellowshipped, including three apostles—Luke S. Johnson, Lyman B. Johnson, and John F. Boynton. Moreover, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and Leonard Rich were accused of transgressions, but these men and many other leaders who were charged with improper conduct apparently confessed their errors and sought forgiveness. [^64] When the three apostles who had been disfellowshipped admitted their mistakes and indicated a desire to repent, they were received back into fellowship and retained their special calling as apostles. [^65]

That fall, while Joseph Smith was visiting the Saints in Missouri, criticism of him was renewed and reached an ugly schismatic dimension. The selfishness, murmuring, lust, and contention that had been manifest among the Saints in Kirtland led to a "great apostasy." Repudiating the Prophet's leadership, about thirty priesthood bearers renounced the Church and organized a new church in Kirtland, under the leadership of Warren Parrish. They adopted the name "Church of Christ" and tried to seize control of the temple. [^66]

Between November 1837 and June 1838, possibly two or three hundred Kirtland Saints withdrew from the Church, representing from 10 to 15 percent of the membership there. [^67] Many of the apostates had served in major positions of responsibility. During a nine-month period, almost one-third of the General Authorities were excommunicated, disfellowshipped, or removed from their Church callings. Among those who left the Church during this stormy period were the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon (Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris) four apostles (John F. Boynton, Lyman E. Johnson, Luke S. Johnson, and William E. McLellin), three of the original presidents of the First Quorum of Seventies (Hazen Aldrich, Leonard Rich, and Sylvester Smith), and two of the presidents of the seventies who were serving in 1837 (John Gould and John Gaylord). One president of the seventies (Salmon Gee) was disfellowshipped, and one member of the First Presidency (Frederick G. Williams) was released from his calling. Although some of these leaders were not excommunicated until after they had moved to Missouri, the roots of their apostasy stem back to transgressions that occurred in Kirtland. [^68] (Almost half of those who were excommunicated, disfellowshipped, or dropped from their positions of responsibility in 1837 or 1838 later repented and returned to the Church.) [^69]

Some of the apostates became bitter enemies of the Latter-day Saints and organized to expel them from Kirtland. Oliver B. Huntington wrote that "persecution commenced with an iron hand" in the fall of 1837 shortly after Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon left for Missouri. "It was the life and glory of the apostates," he said, "to hatch up vexatious law suits and strip the brethren of their property." He added that "it seemed as though all power was given them to torment the Saints," and that leaders of the Church "were hunted like rabbits and foxes." Some of the men whose lives were in danger, including Joseph Smith's father and two of his brothers, Samuel and Don Carlos, hid in Huntington's home and, while concealed there, planned their exodus west. "Even the mummies were secreted there," he concluded, "to keep them from being destroyed." [^70]

Others testified that dissidents tried to seize the property of the Saints and threatened to kill members of the Church. Brigham Young said that apostates threatened to destroy him in December 1837 because he proclaimed in public and in private that he "knew, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that Joseph Smith was a Prophet of the Most High God, and had not transgressed and fallen as apostates declared." [^71] Many contemporaries agreed that men who had once held the priesthood were responsible for the intense persecution that erupted in Kirtland and for the disruption of that community of Saints. [^72]

Persecution in OhioHCReligious Intolerance in Ohio and America

Persecution in OhioHCWhile apostates played a significant role in forcing Latter-day Saints to abandon their homes in Kirtland, enemies outside the Church were also involved in oppressive actions. Though the number of anti-Mormon articles appearing in Ohio papers declined after 1833, antagonists expanded the range of tools used in their campaign from newspapers to magazines, periodicals, and books. Throughout that decade (and continuing for more than a century), members of the Church frequently complained that their history and beliefs were being misrepresented by others. Persecution of the Kirtland Saints during the thirties was not limited to the constant flood of negative and often inaccurate propaganda. They were also socially ostracized, were denied employment opportunities, faced economic boycotts, and occasionally lived in fear of attack on their lives and property. [^73] While some members guarded the temple twenty-four hours a day, others slept near the Prophet, to preserve his life from his enemies. [^74] Expressing his grave concern that the Saints would be driven from Kirtland as others had been expelled from Jackson County, the Prophet had written to Edward Partridge on December 5, 1833, "The inhabitants of this county [Geauga County] threaten our destruction, and we know not how soon they may be permitted to follow the example of the Missourians." Four years later, persecution approached the dimension that the Prophet feared. [^75]

One of the major forces that helped precipitate intolerance against Latter-day Saints was the bigotry Americans inherited from their colonial ancestors. The earliest immigrants to America brought with them the behavioral patterns of western Europe. Among the religious concepts transplanted to America were the beliefs that there should be only one legal religion in each community; that heresy was a serious crime; that religious pluralism would lead to political anarchy; and that settlers should be required to pay a tax for the support of a religious establishment. Prior to 1634 there was strict religious uniformity in North American communities, solidarity that continued for a half century or longer in the colonies. During most of the seventeenth century, for example, there was but one legal religion in Virginia (Anglican) and in Massachusetts and Connecticut (Congregational in both colonies); and prior to 1664, the Reformed faith (primarily the Dutch Reformed Church) was the only legal religion in what is today New York.

When missionaries of the Society of Friends penetrated colonies where religious establishments existed in the mid-seventeenth century, they experienced cruel opposition. In Virginia and New York (then New Netherlands), Quakers were fined, imprisoned, and then banished. In Massachusetts, they were not only imprisoned and later banished but were also sometimes branded, whipped, or even put to death. [^76]

Prior to the American Revolution, tax-supported religions existed by law in nine of the thirteen colonies. In all the South and in New York City, the Church of England was supported by public taxes; and in New England, except for Rhode Island, the Congregational Church was the tax-supported faith. Laws were also enacted in most colonies to prevent non-Trinitarian Protestants and Roman Catholics from voting, holding office, or worshiping in public. During the early 1770s, itinerant missionaries were imprisoned in Virginia for preaching without authorization of resident ministers, and Baptists and members of a Strict Congregational Church were fined and imprisoned for failure to pay ecclesiastical taxes.

Although a new birth of religious and political freedom did indeed accompany the emergence of a new nation, intolerance remained a serious problem. Those who were considered threats to the established order of society were socially ostracized, defamed, mobbed, and otherwise cruelly treated.

The angry moods and ugly passions that led to violent mob action were sometimes generated by inflammatory newspaper articles. Although it is impossible to assess the precise influence journalistic campaigns had on individuals, propaganda undoubtedly molded the attitudes of many, justifying, in some minds, intolerant behavior. As Alexis de Tocqueville noted in his Democracy in America Latter-day Saints, therefore, were not the only Christians impugned by American journalists of the new nation. One of the most outspoken critics of the restored Church, Alexander Campbell, complained in the January 2, 1832, issue of the Millennial Harbinger that "never was there a more vigilant, determined, and untiring opposition to any religious paper, published on this continent . . . than at this time to this paper." He reported that his religious paper had been repeatedly "denounced from the pulpit and the press," and that some subscribers were being persecuted by ministers of various faiths.

Persecution had grown from seeds of ignorance, fear, revenge, jealousy, and other passions that instigated hatred. The tendency toward conflict was further stimulated as old standards were being discarded and new patterns of conduct were emerging. When these forces combined in a region where the arm of the law was weak, mobs sometimes became the ruling force. Occasionally, opinions of groups took precedence over the rights outlined in constitutions and laws. Robert Boyd, a missionary who labored in the Western Reserve during the 1830s, offered an interesting explanation for the lawlessness that sometimes became so distressing in that section of America. The New Englanders who settled there, he reasoned, had emerged from a religious environment that was as strict and somber as the physical climate. It was not surprising that some behaved "like freed prisoners." While in New England, he pointed out, many "walked the courts of God's house," but upon arriving in the West, they shrew off the shackles of conformity that had previously disciplined their actions. [^77] Boyd's theory needs amplification, however, for lawlessness was not limited to the Western Reserve or to parts of America settled by New Englanders. During the 1830s and 1840s mobbings occurred in the west, east, north, and south, in both rural and urban communities of the young nation.

When new elements appeared in communities, violence sometimes resulted. As Roman Catholic immigrants poured into America during the 1830s, confrontations reached ugly dimensions in some cities where they settled in large numbers. Roman Catholics challenged the prevailing views of religious orthodoxy, with some regarding them as enemies of America's democratic institutions. This added to the problems of poverty and unemployment in the cities.

In Ohio, various reform movements suffered from intolerance and mob action. The abolitionists of Ohio experienced especially cruel treatment from mobs during the 1830s. A report issued at the Ohio Anti-slavery Convention of 1836 states that during the previous year abolitionists had been attacked by mobs in thirteen Ohio towns, from Zanesville in the south to Willoughby and Painesville in the north. Mobs from Zanesville had attacked settlers in the neighboring town of Putnam on five or six different occasions, disturbing meetings, scattering people, attacking homes and other property, and ordering settlers to depart. At Painesville, a mob had pelted men and women with rotten eggs and tried to drown out the words of the abolitionists by beating on drums, blowing horns, and ringing sleigh bells. At Willoughby, an abolitionist was abducted, threatened with death if he returned to his home, and dropped off five or six miles down the road. One abolitionist, Theodore Weld, was greeted in Circleville and Granville with a barrage of eggs and stones. Two of his friends were attacked in Middlebury, Portage County, by a howling mob who threw glass and eggs at all who had gathered. [^78]

In April 1836, abolitionists meeting in Granville mounted an offensive against a group who threatened to interrupt their deliberations. Armed with clubs, the reformers rushed from their meeting and dispersed the mob. The next day the mob returned with new recruits, creating a force of about two hundred men. As the abolitionists were returning to their homes, the mobsters engaged them in fist fights, and a number of abolitionists were beaten mercilessly. [^79]

Another abolitionist, Marius Robinson, was tarred in Trumbull County in June 1837. The night before he was to deliver a lecture at Berlin, he was dragged from the home of his Quaker host, beaten and tarred and covered with feathers, then transported in a wagon about ten miles to Canfield and dumped. He wandered to a nearby farmhouse, where he was cared for and given a suit of clothes. Then he walked back to Berlin and delivered a Sabbath evening sermon against the evils of slavery. [^80]

While others who were considered a threat to existing institutions were being mobbed, the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, Missouri, and elsewhere were being persecuted partly because of their unusual religious convictions. The Saints believed that because of the disruption of the Primitive Church of Christ, all other faiths were void of God's authority and advanced inaccurate doctrines. They taught that the restored Church would continue to grow, like the stone mentioned by Daniel, and would roll forth until it eventually encompassed the earth. Opponents vigorously denounced the Latter-day Saint beliefs concerning a restoration of "Christianity in its primeval purity," the Book of Mormon as a new witness for Christ, latter-day visions and revelations, and the restoration of the priesthood with its accompanying miraculous powers. They condemned the Saints for worshiping a God who was a material personage and who literally created man in His own image; for calling others to repentance; and for teaching that the Church had been restored in preparation for the Second Coming and the millennial reign of Christ. The sacrifices of the Saints in building a temple and supporting an expanding missionary program were criticized by their enemies, as was the Saints' pattern of living in compliance with instructions and revelatory writings from an authoritarian ecclesiastical leader. [^81]

Political and Civil Issues

Another factor leading to Mormon persecution in Ohio stemmed from political issues. While most people in the Kirtland area supported candidates of the Whig party, a majority of the Latter-day Saints living there supported the Democratic party led by President Andrew Jackson. [^82] Most Kirtland Saints not only supported Jackson's opposition to the national bank, but also felt that under Whig leadership, as one historian has written, "the evils of the Old-World aristocracy would emerge in America in the form of federal privileges and monopolies." They feared that the Whigs would grant political favors to the wealthy that would transform "the purest government . . . into the rankest aristocracy." [^83] To publicize their political views and gain friends amid increasing opposition to the Church, the Saints established a newspaper in Kirtland, the Northern Times. The paper, edited initially by Oliver Cowdery and later by Frederick G. Williams, supported policies and candidates of the Democratic party. After the first issue was printed in February 1835, Whig papers in the Western Reserve denounced the Saints for their political stance and continued their tirade against the Church. One Whig editor responded to the appearance of the Northern Times by writing sarcastically:

The Mormonites in this county, as if weary of dull monotony of dreams and devotion, of visions and vexation—of profitless prophecys, and talking in tongues,—have concluded to turn their attention to political matters. A paper entitled the Northern Times has made its appearance from their press in Kirtland, bearing the name O. Cowdery, one of their leaders and preachers, as Editor. The editor breaks forth with a flood of words, filling seven columns under his editorial head—pounces upon the dead carcass of the United States Bank with most Quixotic ferocity—talks about "WIGS"—praises the President—and says, the nomination of Van Buren "we still add, would meet our mind, and receive our warm support." As the editor professes to have communication with the spirits of the invisible world, and certifies that he has seen an Angel, and "hefted" the golden plates of the Prophet, he will be a political anomaly, if not a dangerous opponent. [^84]

Non-Mormons not only denounced Latter-day Saints for supporting Jacksonian democracy, but also expressed concerns because Mormons were an increasingly powerful force in Kirtland. Members of the Church were elected to most township offices in 1837, and critics feared that if their membership continued to grow, they would soon gain control of county offices as well. [^85]

In addition to being viewed as a threat to the political aspirations of others, Mormons were accused of interfering with the democratic process by voting according to instructions received from their ecclesiastical leaders. Moreover, the critics warned, if the growth of the Church were not soon halted, inhabitants of Kirtland would be governed by the revelations of the Mormon Prophet. [^86]

Non-Mormons also accused the Latter-day Saints of violating the laws of Ohio by performing marriages, and refused to recognize Mormon elders as ministers who had the legal authority to solemnize marriages. The Prophet, however, claimed that he had received a commission from heaven not only to organize the Church but also to perform ordinances, including marriage. In 1835 Sidney Rigdon was tried before the court of common pleas at Chardon for "solemnizing marriages without a license," but since he had received the right to perform this rite while he was serving as a Baptist preacher and there were no records proving that he had been expelled from that faith, the case was dismissed. Although Latter-day Saint leaders continued to perform marriages and recorded in the Messenger and Advocate the names of those who had been married in Kirtland by Mormon elders, critics continued to question the "propriety" of elders solemnizing "matrimonial contracts." [^87]

The Poverty of the Saints

Another cause for the disfavor with which enemies of the Church looked upon the Saints in Kirtland was their economic status and the conditions under which they lived. As a rule, the Saints in Kirtland were poorer than most of their neighbors. Whereas most pioneers in the new area concentrated on improving their economic and living conditions, the Latter-day Saints had been challenged by revelation to devote their time and talents to the building of the kingdom of God. Complying with this law of consecration, the Kirtland Saints gave generously to the construction of a temple. They also helped poorer members who had gathered to Kirtland, aided families whose husbands and fathers were serving in the mission field, and assisted oppressed Saints in Missouri who had been expelled from their homes. [^88]

The economic problems of the Saints were compounded by inflationary conditions, as well as by an expanding population. Between 1830 and 1838, the population of Kirtland township increased threefold, increasing from one thousand to three thousand inhabitants. William W. Phelps, who lived in Kirtland during the winter of 1835-36 while his family resided in Missouri, wrote his wife, Sally, in December 1835 that he doubted he could support his family adequately in that community. "Everything is dear with us in Kirtland," he said. "Fresh pork costs from 5 to 6 cents per pound and beef from 2 1/2 to 3 1/2 cents per lb.; wheat is $1.12 1/2 centers per bushel and rising; corn 75 cents per bushel, cheese 9 cents per lb. by wholesale, butter 25 cents per lb., and hay and oats are also high. Without great business or plenty of money a family fares course in this part of the county. We have not had any butter for six or eight weeks." [^89]

Jonathan Crosby, who settled in Kirtland with his wife in 1835, lived in the home of Parley P. Pratt. He recalled that not long after he arrived in Kirtland, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Parley P. Pratt came to him for a loan. Shortly before that, Brigham Young had had nothing in his house to eat and no means with which to secure food. Parley P. Pratt approached Elder Young and informed him that he was also without food. Then he remembered that Jonathan Crosby had recently arrived in Kirtland with one hundred dollars, so the two men, accompanied by Heber C. Kimball, went to the new settler, who loaned them $25 each. [^90]

Following the completion of the temple, members acknowledged that for three years they had neglected to improve their homes and beautify the community. In an article in the Messenger and Advocate, one person wrote that most homes built on the property that stretched from the river to the temple (land that the Church had purchased from Peter French) were "small and inelegant, evincive of anything but wealth." He noted that the dwellings had been built during a period when the Saints had "little control, and but feeble means to execute any plan with elegance or taste." Consequently, instead of establishing an orderly, planned community, they had constructed "rude dwellings" that were "scattered in all directions" from the river to the Lord's House and south of that building. [^91]

At a conference in the fall of 1836, Church leaders declared that the Saints in Kirtland had been "poor from the beginning," and that their burdens had been compounded by the gathering there of many who needed economic assistance. The members were told that they should assume increased responsibility in caring for the poor, and that henceforth, branches of the Church in other areas were not to send their poor to Kirtland unless local leaders provided them with an adequate means of support. [^92]

As early as 1833, the poverty of the Saints provided non-Mormon critics with an excuse to demand their removal. Shortly after they began gathering in Kirtland in large numbers, local authorities warned many of them to leave town, thereby relieving the local government of its responsibility to care for the poor. Such an order was in harmony with the laws of the state. According to early statutes of Ohio, if a person who had been warned to leave applied for assistance or became a public charge, the overseer of the poor had the authority to remove that person from that community to the township where he had last gained legal status. Though some families who were not members of the Church received the same orders, it appears that there was a conscious attempt by local politicians in 1833 and 1834 to issue this special warning to Latter-day Saints. [^93]

As the Saints continued to gather, their enemies' complaints increased. One anti-Mormon group met in Kirtland in January 1834 and lamented that an undesirable element was spreading in the community. They charged that the Mormons were alienating other settlers and were threatening the town with an "insupportable weight of pauperism." [^94]

Local businessmen also considered the Saints' presence in the town an economic liability. In 1830, entrepreneurs in Kirtland were anticipating significant economic expansion as a result of expected population growth. Although there was significant growth of the LDS population, the non-Mormon growth remained almost stationary during the mid-1830s. Meanwhile, Latter-day Saints settled on land that would have been occupied by non-Mormons and established businesses that competed with others. While some older settlers in the community engaged in normal business relations with the Saints, buying from the Mormons and providing them with goods and services, others refused to hire Latter-day Saints, would not mill their grain, and would not sell goods to them. One group was frustrated in 1835 when it imposed an economic boycott in order to force the Latter-day Saints from Kirtland. After demanding that the Saints leave that community, the businessmen agreed not to sell grain to them during a winter when there was a shortage of food. The owner of the Kirtland gristmill joined the boycott, forcing the Saints not only to locate food in another community but also to find a mill outside of Kirtland. Though their problems were increased by added transportation costs, the Saints located the grain they needed and decided to send it to a mill owned by a Church member in another town. The boycott failed to produce the desired results. Mormons did not abandon their homes, and the local merchants lost many customers. [^95]

Thus, economic pressures, combined with religious, political, and social forces, led anti-Mormons to feel justified in oppressive actions against the Church and its members. Less than nine months after launching a new volley of attacks, they finally succeeded in forcing nearly all Kirtland Saints to abandon their homes, leave their sacred temple, and migrate to another section of the young nation.

Conflict in Kirtland

1833, Joseph Smith Collection, Church Archives, and cited in HC 1:448-51. See also HC 3:1.

---
Notas:
[^1] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 23-24. S. Dilworth Young, "Here Is Brigham," pp. 178-79.
[^2] HC 3:1; Hepzibah (Hepsy) Richards to Willard Richards, January 22, 1838, typescript, Richards Family Papers, Church Archives. Hepzibah wrote that Joseph and Sidney left Kirtland on Saturday night, January 14. According to Zera Pulsipher, Joseph was placed in a box that was nailed on an ox-cart and was driven out of town "to save his life." Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, pp. 7-8.
[^3] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, p. 247.
[^4] Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, p. 22. See also autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1838; autobiography of Daniel Wood, pp. 6-7; journal of John Lyman Smith, p. 1. John Lyman Smith wrote that the people persecuted Joseph Smith and his followers "so much that they were compelled" to flee from Ohio. See also autobiography of Julian Moses, p. 16.
[^5] HC 3:1.
[^6] Luke S. Johnson, "History of Luke Johnson," Millennial Star 27 (January 7, 1865): 5-6.
[^7] HC 3:2-3.
[^8] HC 3:2; Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 24-25.
[^9] HC 3:3, 8-9. Because of his wife's illness, Sidney Rigdon remained temporarily at Dublin and followed the Prophet's group to Far West, arriving there on April 4. F. Mark McKiernan, The Voice of One Crying in the Wilderness, p. 82.
[^10] Luke S. Johnson, "History of Luke Johnson," pp. 5-6; Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 22-23.
[^11] Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 23-24; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 248-49; autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 15.
[^12] Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 249, 252-53; HC 3:43.
[^13] Hepzibah Richards to Willard Richards, January 18, 1838, Manuscript History of the Great Lakes Mission-Ohio, January 18, 1838, Church Archives.
[^14] Hepzibah Richards to Willard Richards, January 22, 1838; Hepzibah Richards to friends, January 28, 1838.
[^15] Hepzibah Richards to friends, February 19, 1838.
[^16] Hepzibah Richards to friends, March 23, 1838.
[^17] Autobiography of Zadoc Knapp Judd, p. 7.
[^18] Nathan B. Cheney, life sketch, p. 2; Sadie Foss Elliott, "Life Sketch of Nathan Calhoun Cheney and Eliza Ann Beebe Cheney. "
[^19] Autobiography of Daniel Wood, pp. 6-7.
[^20] Autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 30.
[^21] Hepzibah Richards to friends, March 23, 1838.
[^22] Autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, pp. 30-31; Hepzibah to friends, March 23, 1838.
[^23] Manuscript History of the Great Lakes Mission—Ohio, January 17, 1838, Church Archives; autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1838.
[^24] Benjamin F. Johnson wrote that one of the Kirtland Saints, Lyman R. Sherman, set fire to the printing office to thwart the plans of Joseph's enemies. Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 24. Other Latter-day Saints, however, accused their enemies of destroying the building. Journal of Jonathan H. Hale, Book 2, p. 10; Elders' Journal (July 1838): 34.
[^25] Hepzibah Richards to Willard Richards, January 18, 1838.
[^26] Painesville Telegraph, May 31, 1838, pp. 2-3. Zera Pulsipher wrote that although mobbers claimed that the seventies set fire to the Methodist church, "we knew we were innocent" of this charge. He added that there was no doubt in his mind that their enemies were thus trying to destroy them. Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, pp. 9-10.
[^27] Crary, Pioneer and Personal Reminiscences, p. 35.
[^28] Journal of William Huntington, pp. 3-4. Huntington reported that he arrived in Far West after traveling more than eight weeks, but that his tools were never delivered.
[^29] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, pp. 25-27; autobiography of Elizabeth Beswick Tanner, p. 2; Leonard J. Arrington, "The John Tanner Family," Ensign 9 (March 1979): 46-47.
[^30] Autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, pp. 31-32.
[^31] Some of the best accounts of the journey of the Saints to Missouri in 1838 are found in the following works: autobiography of Anson Call, pp. 3-5; journal of John Smith, April 5, 1838, to June 16, 1838; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 251-53; Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 24-25; HC 3:1-3, 8, 43, 100-148; diary of Samuel D. Tyler, pp. 1-56; and autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, pp. 31-32.
[^32] HC 3:87-98; Gordon Orville Hill, "A History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 10-16; autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, p. 8.
[^33] HC 3:87-89.
[^34] HC 3:89-91.
[^35] Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, p. 8.
[^36] Autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 2. See also autobiography of George W. Johnson, p. 2, and autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 31.
[^37] HC 3:94-95.
[^38] HC 3:90-91
[^39] Hepzibah Richards to friends, March 23, 1838; Hill, "A History of Kirtland Camp," p. 16.
[^40] The names of the persons and the number of persons in their respective families who subscribed to the constitution of Kirtland Camp are in HC 3:91-93. Only about 33 percent of those who signed the constitution paid taxes in Kirtland during the 1830s, indicating that many of these members were among the poorest Saints. See also the journal of George Johnson, p. 2; autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 2.
[^41] Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," p. 330; autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, p. 9.
[^42] Hill, "A History of Kirtland Camp," p. 22; HC 3:98 100; autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 4; journal of Jonathan H. Hale, p. 11. Estimates of the number in this company who left Kirtland on July 6 or shortly thereafter vary slightly but not significantly. The two best accounts of the journey of Kirtland Camp are the diary of Samuel D. Tyler and the record kept by the camp historian, Elias Smith, which has been published in volume 3 of Joseph Smith, History of the Church.
[^43] Autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 4.
[^44] Autobiography of Charles Pulsipher, p. 69.
[^45] HC 3:100.
[^46] Autobiography of Jeremiah Willey, p. 13. The spelling in this quotation has been corrected. See also autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1838.
[^47] Journal of William F. Cahoon, cited in Stella Cahoon Shurtleff and Brent Farrington Cahoon, Reynolds Cahoon and His Stalwart Sons, p. 28.
[^48] HC 3:103-5; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 1, 10; Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 26, 88.
[^49] HC 3:100-116. The men who probably participated in both the march of Zion's Camp and the journey of Kirtland Camp were Nathan Baldwin, George Brooks, John Carter, John Folger, Sherman Gilbert, Michael Griffith, Joseph B. Noble, John Parker, William B. Pratt, and Joseph Young.
[^50] HC 3:89-90; Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:187, 192-94, 719-21.
[^51] HC 3:102-3; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 19, 27; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, 1838, p. 9; autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 4.
[^52] HC 3:114.
[^53] Diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 6-7; HC 3:101, 107-8, 112, 116-17, 123, 125-26, 129, 131.
[^54] HC 3:113; diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 13; Early Scenes in Church History, pp. 73-74; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, pp. 11-12.
[^55] Diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 14, 21-23. See also pages 26 and 28 for references of healing among participants of Kirtland Camp.
[^56] Autobiography of Jeremiah Willey, pp. 13-14. For references to those who died while journeying with Kirtland Camp, see Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 33, 75, 76, 81, 89, 93, 94, 96-100, 107, 111.
[^57] HC 3:106.
[^58] HC 3:108-9; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 7-8; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, 1838, p. 11; journal of Jonathan H. Hale, book 2, p. 15.
[^59] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 16. For additional references to the non-Mormon response to Kirtland Camp, see Clermont Courier (Batavia, Ohio), June 15, 1868, p. 2; Ohio Repository (Canton), July 18, 1838; Herald and Gazette (Cleveland), July 25, 1838, p. 2; and Western Citizen and Urbana Gazette, July 31, 1838, p. 3.
[^60] Diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 11, 19, 23, 43.
[^61] Ibid., pp. 18-19. See also HC 3:119-32.
[^62] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 19.
[^63] Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, pp. 10-11; HC 3:131-32.
[^64] HC 3:132-41; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 30-45.
[^65] HC 3:103, 137-46; diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 40.
[^66] HC 3: 137-38; diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 39.
[^67] HC 3:139-40; autobiography of Joel Hills Johnson, p. 19.
[^68] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 42.
[^69] Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 113-14.
[^70] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 46.
[^71] Ibid., pp. 48-49; HC 3:143.
[^72] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 50; HC 3:144-45.
[^73] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 55; HC 3:147.
[^74] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 56.
[^75] HC 3:175.
[^76] HC 3:323-25. Amanda Smith, wife of Warren Smith, whose description of the massacre at Haun's Mill was published in Joseph Smith's History, left Kirtland Camp with her family on September 18, 1838. Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 113-14.
[^77] Autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 12.
[^78] George Q. Cannon in JD 23:362.
[^79] Robert Price, "The Ohio Anti-slavery Convention of 1836," Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Quarterly 45 (1936): 185; Gilbert H. Barnes and Dwight L. Dumond, eds., Letters of Theodore Dwight Weld, Angelina Grimke Weld and Sarah Grimke, 1822-1844 1:236-38, 261-61; Benjamin F. Thomas, Theodore Weld, p. 174.
[^80] Thomas, Theodore Weld, p. 107; Henry Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio 2:80-81.
[^81] Russel B. Nye, "Marius Robinson, A Forgotten Abolitionist Leader," Ohio State Archaeological and Historical Quarterly 55 (1946): 147.
[^82] An excellent account of a non-Mormon view of Latter-day Saint beliefs in the mid-1830s was written by Truman Coe and published in the Cincinnati Journal and Western Luminary, August 25, 1836, p. 3. For additional information, see the author's collection of articles on Mormonism in Ohio newspapers during the 1830s, Church Historical Library and Brigham Young University.
[^83] Oliver Cowdery to John A. Bryan, October 15, 1835; Northern Times, October 9, 1835; August 7, 1835. In 1836, 396 people in Kirtland Township voted for Van Buren (Democratic candidate) and only 116 for Harrison (Whig), while in Geauga County 1, 487 voted for Van Buren and 3, 274 for Harrison. After the Mormons emigrated, the political pattern in Kirtland shifted, with only 103 voting for Van Buren in 1840 and 191 for Harrison (with Harrison also winning in Lake County, the country where Kirtland was located in 1840). Painesville Telegraph, November 24, 1836, and November 19, 1840.
[^84] Max H. Parkin, "Mormon Political Involvement in Ohio," BYU Studies 9 (Summer 1969): 487; Messenger and Advocate 3 (July 1837): 537-38.
[^85] Painesville Telegraph, February 20, 1835, p. 3. Northern Times continued to be circulated almost weekly for at least one year. Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," pp. 187-88.
[^86] Kirtland Township Record Book 1:137, 151; Parkin, "Mormon Political Involvement in Ohio," p. 492.
[^87] Painesville Telegraph, April 17, 1835, p. 3.
[^88] Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," pp. 174-77; Messenger and Advocate 3 (April 1837): 496. See also Danel W. Bachman, "New Light on an Old Hypothesis: the Ohio Origins of the Revelation on Eternal Marriage," Journal of Mormon History 5 (1978): 29-31.
[^89] "An Account 'About the Mormons,'" B. C. Fowls Papers, Western Reserve Historical Society; Messenger and Advocate 2 (July 1836): 349; 3 (January 1837): 443; HC 2:468-69.
[^90] Journal History, December 18, 1835.
[^91] Autobiography of Jonathan Crosby, pp. 15-16.
[^92] Messenger and Advocate 2 (July 1836): 349.
[^93] Messenger and Advocate 3 (January 1837): 443. See also HC 2:468-69.
[^94] Swan, Statutes of the State of Ohio, pp. 634-36; Kirtland Township Record Book, October 1833; memoirs of George A. Smith, p. 28.
[^95] Painesville Telegraph, January 31, 1834, p. 3.
