Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 18

The Exodus from Kirtland

First Presidency Moves to MissouriPersecution in OhioHCWhen Brigham Young described conditions existing in Kirtland on December 22, 1837, the day of his departure from that community, he said that he fled for his life because of the fury of the mob. After making hasty preparations for a journey of more than eight hundred miles, he left his wife and his three-year-old son and one-year-old twins, mounted his horse, and galloped southward. [^1] His flight was the beginning of a mass exodus from Geauga County. Between the end of December 1837 and the middle of July 1838, probably more than sixteen hundred members of the Kirtland branch migrated west, abandoning their homes and beginning a new colonizing adventure in the wilderness of western America.

First Presidency Moves to MissouriPersecution in OhioHCThree weeks after the first Latter-day Saints left Kirtland because of the "mobocratic spirit prevailing in the bosoms of the apostates," Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and George W. Robinson (clerk and recorder of the Church and Sidney Rigdon's son-in-law) also fled. [^2] "Persecution became so violent," Lucy Mack Smith observed, that "Joseph regarded it as unsafe to remain any longer in Kirtland." [^3] Eliza R. Snow also testified that the Prophet "had to flee" Kirtland because his life was in danger. [^4]

First Presidency Moves to MissouriPersecution in OhioHCJoseph Smith recorded in greater detail the circumstances that led to his flight from the community he had helped build. "A new year dawned upon the Church in Kirtland," he wrote, "in all the bitterness of the spirit of apostate mobocracy, which continued to rage and grew hotter and hotter, until Elder Rigdon and myself were obliged to flee from its deadly influence, as did the Apostles and Prophets of old." Quoting the Savior, the Prophet said that "when they persecute you in one city, flee to another." He and his companions rode from Kirtland on the night of January 12, 1838, "to escape mob violence." [^5]

First Presidency Moves to MissouriPersecution in OhioHCDescribing another form of persecution that he feared, the Prophet asserted that the "hellish designs" of his enemies were colored under the disguise of legal processes. Luke S. Johnson, a former apostle who had left the Church but was opposed to the intolerant acts of others, believed that had Joseph not left Geauga County, he would have been involved in another expensive lawsuit for illegal banking and possibly faced imprisonment. Learning that the sheriff was planning on arresting the Prophet, Johnson intervened and placed Joseph in his custody "on an execution for his person, in the absence of property to pay a judgment of $50." After settling the judgment, the Prophet left for Missouri. [^6]

First Presidency Moves to MissouriPersecution in OhioHCFleeing from disgruntled creditors, angry apostates, and civil authorities, Joseph and his companions rode southward under cover of darkness and arrived the next morning in New Portage, Norton Township, Medina County, about sixty miles from Kirtland. Three days later, after the Prophet's wife, Emma, and their children arrived in Norton, the group continued their journey in covered wagons. Though the weather was bitterly cold, the Prophet wrote that a mob, armed with pistols and guns, followed him for about two hundred miles. During the pursuit, his enemies once stayed in a home where the Saints were sleeping, with only a partition separating the Smith family from their pursuers. That night, the Smiths listened to "their oaths and imprecations, and threats" concerning actions they would take if they seized the Mormon leader. On other occasions members of the mob passed Joseph Smith and his family passing through small Ohio communities, but failed to recognize them. [^7]

First Presidency Moves to MissouriHCIn Dublin, Indiana, the Smith party met Brigham Young, who was staying there with his brother Lorenzo. By this time Joseph and his companions had spent all of their money, and although he secured employment in Dublin, cutting and sawing wood, he did not consider the money he earned sufficient to continue the journey. Thus he went to Brigham Young for assistance, telling him, "You are one of the Twelve who have charge [hold the keys] of the kingdom in all the world; I believe I shall throw myself upon you, and look to you for counsel in this case." Although Brigham was startled that a Prophet was seeking help from him, he agreed to help. One of the members in Dublin, Brother Tomlinson, had been trying to sell his tavern, and Brigham had instructed him that if he remained obedient to righteous counsel, he would soon receive a good offer on his property. Shortly thereafter, Brother Tomlinson told Brigham that he had been offered $500 in cash, a team of horses, and $250 in store goods for his property. Brigham advised him to sell and to help Joseph Smith. Consequently, Tomlinson sold his tavern and gave the Prophet $300 so he could continue his journey to Missouri. [^8]

First Presidency Moves to MissouriHCJoseph Smith and his family and traveling companions traveled through Indiana and Illinois, crossed the Mississippi River at Quincy, Illinois, and headed across the state of Missouri toward Far West. When they were within 120 miles of their destination, they were met by some Saints from Far West who had brought wagons, money, and provisions for them. When they were eight miles from the city, they were met by another escort group, and on March 14, as they reached the outskirts of Far West, a large number gathered to welcome them. The Prophet commented, "We were immediately received under the hospitable roof of Brother George W. Harris, who treated us with all possible kindness, and we refreshed ourselves with much satisfaction, after our long and tedious journey, the brethren bringing in such things as we had need of for our comfort and convenience." [^9]

Other Church leaders were also forced to flee from Kirtland during the winter of 1837-38. In January 1838, Joseph Smith, Sr., was arrested for performing illegal marriages. Placed in the custody of Luke Johnson, he was taken to a small room next to the magistrate's office. There Johnson removed a nail from the window sash and left the room, locking the door behind him. With the help of Hyrum Smith and John Boynton, Father Smith slipped out the window. Luke Johnson then returned to the room, replaced the nail in the sash, and rushed back to the magistrate's office to report that the prisoner had disappeared. The officials rushed into the room and saw the window was securely locked from the inside. According to several contemporary accounts, a perplexed constable settled the disappearance problem by explaining, "It is another Mormon miracle." [^10]

Father Smith hid in the homes of Oliver Snow (the father of Lorenzo and Eliza R. Snow) and William Huntington for approximately three weeks, while he prepared for the westward journey. On occasions he was joined in this Mormon underground by his sons Don Carlos and Samuel and by other members of the Church whose lives were in danger. To prevent the escape of the Patriarch from Geauga County, handbills were posted in public places and along the roads leading from Kirtland, and sentinels prepared to seize him and take him back for trial were stationed along the roads. Joseph Smith, Sr., however, evaded his pursuers; he managed to ride to New Portage, where he waited for his family before setting out for Missouri. [^11]

Other members of the Smith family left Kirtland under distressing circumstances. A mob tried to seize Don Carlos, accusing him of the same crime his father had allegedly committed—performing marriages illegally. He fled to Norton Township, where he was joined by other members of the Smith family. On May 7, twenty-eight members of the family started for Missouri, including Joseph Smith, Sr., and his wife, Lucy; their children Don Carlos, William, Catherine, and Sophronia, and their families; and a few others. Don Carlos's wife, Agnes, was very weak from giving birth to a daughter only two weeks before. The group began the journey with fifteen horses, seven wagons, two cows, $75 in cash, tents, blankets, clothes, and a few other provisions.

The Smith family were delayed often on their journey westward. Shortly after crossing the Mississippi River, they stopped at a small wooden hut belonging to a black family and requested help for Catherine; shortly after being placed in this shelter, she gave birth to a son named Alvin. The next day she and the baby were transported on a lumber wagon four miles to another home, where she rested while her husband and sister Sophronia attended to her needs. Meanwhile, other members of the party continued their journey, but because the Prophet's mother was ill, they proceeded slowly. In Huntsville, Missouri, they stopped temporarily so she could recover. Eventually those who had stayed with Catherine joined the others in Huntsville, but Catherine became ill there, so they were again delayed while she regained her health and strength. Lucy Mack Smith reported that after the elders administered to Catherine she seemed better, so the company was able to resume its journey to Far West without further difficulties. [^12]

Persecution in OhioHCThe Persecution Continues

Persecution in OhioHCAfter many of the Church leaders had left Kirtland, the fury of the Saints' enemies was directed toward those who remained. This relentless persecution continued as the Latter-day Saints prepared to leave the community. One of the most vivid descriptions of conditions in Kirtland in 1838 was recorded in a series of letters written by Hepzibah Richards, a convert who had migrated to Kirtland shortly before persecution erupted."For some days past the spirit of things has been rapidly changing," she wrote on January 18, 1838, "and to the view of all appears to be gathering blackness. A large number have dissented from the body of the Church and are very violent in their opposition to the President and all who uphold him." She reported that apostates had vowed to seize control of the temple even if such action led to "the shedding of blood. " [^13]

After the lives of members of the Kirtland high council had been threatened, Hepzibah wrote in another letter, "All our friends design leaving this place as soon as possible. . . . The feeling seems to be that Kirtland must be trodden down by the wicked for a season. . . . Probably several hundred families will leave within a few weeks." [^14] In February, she again noted that Latter-day Saints were being forced to abandon their homes: "They are driven out of this place as truly as the Saints were driven out of Jackson County 4 years ago, though in a different manner. There they were driven by force of arms, here by persecution, chiefly from the dissenters." [^15]

A month later Hepzibah reported that the oppression of the Saints had not abated. "I have been wading in a sea of tribulation ever since I came here. For the last three months, we as a people, have been tempest-tossed, and at times the waves have well nigh overwhelmed us, but we believe there will yet be a way of escape." [^16]

In July 1838, after nearly all the Latter-day Saints had left Kirtland, Zadoc Judd arrived with his family, anticipating settling there. Their plans were immediately altered after they assessed the situation, and their stay there was short. He wrote that "apostates and mobbers had caused nearly all the good and worthy people to leave the place." After deciding that Kirtland was not a favorable location for Mormons, the Judds continued west along the trail leading to Missouri. [^17]

In addition to living in fear that they might be killed or beaten, Latter-day Saints reported that mobs had broken into their homes, shattered their windows, destroyed their property, stolen their goods, and threatened continued violence if they did not leave. According to the family records of Nathan Cheney, a mob stole four of his cows and some bedding. The following day Nathan was seized while searching for his animals and was held prisoner for two weeks. During his confinement, his wife, Eliza Ann, who did not know whether her husband was dead or alive, was menaced by ruffians who threatened to burn the Cheney home. Terrified, she took her two young girls and fled into the woods, where she hid until she thought it safe to return. When they returned home, she found her husband alive and uninjured. Because of the persecution, the Cheney family was driven from Kirtland, leaving behind a home and farm they had bought for $1,200, for which they received nothing. [^18]

Daniel Wood testified that enemies of the Church were so "unrelenting in their persecution" that the Saints could not consider secure any property they possessed, even if they had personally contracted no debts. Sometimes, he explained, a constable would enter the home of one of the Saints and seize a large brass kettle, an iron pot, or some other item, and then would auction these goods. To justify such action, the constable would say that he was taking goods that belonged to Joseph Smith and was selling them to liquidate debts the Prophet had accrued. When Daniel Wood learned that the constable planned to take his wagon, he took it apart, placed the pieces on the back of a sled, covered the parts with hay, and had his younger brother transport the dissembled vehicle out of town, where he could later recover and rebuild it. [^19]

Members of the Church were also unjustly accused of crimes and thefts. Sometimes enemies would place their clothes near Mormon homes, summon the law enforcement officials, lead the officers to the sites where they had deposited the clothing, and then accuse the Mormons of stealing. [^20] Hepzibah Richards asserted in March 1838 that one of the objectives of enemies of the Church was to seize "all the property of the Church for little or nothing and drive the Saints out of the place." She testified that the house of her nearest neighbor had been ransacked by a mob on the pretense they were trying to recover goods stolen by the Mormons. [^21]

Kirtland Saints further complained that their enemies frequently attempted to burn their homes and other buildings. According to Luman Shurtliff, dozens of fires were started in the basements of Mormon homes, and Hepzibah Richards said that mobsters tried to burn her neighbor's home while the family was sleeping. [^22]

Shortly after midnight on January 16, Kirtland residents were awakened by men yelling, "Fire!" Caroline Crosby wrote that she looked out her window and "beheld the ground as light as day, while the sky was as black as a thundercloud." Rushing to an outside door, she threw it open and saw the printing office in flames. Many men had responded to the cries for help and were trying frantically to control the blaze but to no avail. The printing office with all its contents, including many copies of the Book of Mormon, was destroyed. The temple and other buildings near the printing office were scorched and sparks landed on many homes in that area, but these other buildings did not ignite. [^23]

Members and nonmembers blamed each other for destroying the printing office. Since the Saints had sold the property the day before the fire, apostates accused them of burning the building, an accusation that was vehemently denied. The Mormons had been forced to auction the property because of charges of indebtedness brought against the Presidency by Grandison Newell. The Saints insisted that the building had been taken from them unjustly, that their enemies knew they could not retain title to the property, and that their enemies had wanted to stop Mormon publications. [^24]

The next day, a meeting was held in Kirtland to discuss the mounting crisis and to prevent further destruction. A patrol of twenty-one men that was appointed to guard the city included both members and nonmembers. Their effectiveness was weakened, however, because of mutual distrust, for the two factions devoted much of their time to spying on each other. Eventually the patrol was dissolved, and the arsonist responsible for destruction of the printing office was never apprehended. [^25]

Four months later, on May 22, arsonists set fire to the Methodist chapel a few feet north of the temple. That same night someone broke a window in the temple and threw a bundle of straw and shavings containing hot coals into the building. Presumably the arsonists intended that fire to be fed by the Methodist Church fire. Only a few straws caught fire, however, and they were quickly extinguished. Efforts of those who gathered to fight the fires were hampered because someone had cut the rope in one of the wells in the area, removed a bolt from the pump of another well, and hidden the buckets kept there for use in fighting fires. Therefore, the Methodist chapel burned to the ground. Though anti-Mormon factions claimed that the seventies had set fire to the Methodist church, the Painesville Telegraph asserted that the fire was probably started by individuals who were trying to destroy the nearby Mormon temple. [^26]

Preparations for the Exodus

Even as the Saints were experiencing persecution, they were preparing for their exodus to western Missouri. Since many had lost their savings during the financial reversals of 1837, they were forced to sell most of their material goods to pay debts, and once the exodus began, land values declined sharply. Many were unable to obtain the teams, wagons, provisions, and money they'd need for the trek west. One nonmember Kirtland resident, Christopher Crary, summarized the situation of the Saints at that time:

When their bank failed, all their imaginary wealth vanished; their money was gone; their teams were gone; their provisions were gone; their credit was gone; their stores of goods disappeared. No community could be left in more destitute circumstances, and the only alternative was for them to leave—leave their Temple, their homes, all that they had held dear, and go to, they knew not where. And how to go was a serious question. [^27]

Though Crary wrote that the Saints did not know where they would settle, most planned to go to Far West, Missouri. Nearly all of the Kirtland Saints had previously sold their farms in the eastern states in order to gather in Ohio, and now they were being forced to leave that area. William Huntington, for example, sold his farm of approximately two hundred acres in New York (with 130 acres cultivated) and his stock, barns, and home, to move to Kirtland in 1836. One year later he lost all of his property in Kirtland and was "reduced to a state of poverty," with no idea how he could transport his family a thousand miles to Missouri. He managed to obtain a pair of oxen from Oliver Snow, and a Sister Ives loaned him thirty-two dollars. He wrapped his tools in clothes and shipped them to Missouri, then put a few other clothes and blankets in the bed of a small wagon and, accompanied by his family, started walking toward Far West. [^28]

John Tanner, who had also arrived in Kirtland in the mid-1830s with a wagon loaded with goods and with ample money to buy a farm in Geauga County, had given generously to the temple-building project, had loaned money to Joseph Smith so he could purchase goods in the East, had invested in the Kirtland Safety Society, and had supported other similar programs. By 1838 he had sold, loaned, lost, or given to others nearly all of his money and property, including the land, mills, cattle, and barns he had owned in New York and the farm he had purchased in Kirtland. Thus, at the time of the exodus he was so poor that he had to borrow some of the necessities for the journey. He and his wife and other family members began the long journey to the frontier with a dilapidated cart, pulled by a broken-down stage horse that collapsed during the journey, and with only a few dollars in cash. [^29]

Some of the Saints were much better prepared for the westward migration than the Huntington and Tanner families. Though Luman Shurtliff lost the two-hundred-dollar down payment he had made on property in Kirtland, he owned land about ninety miles west of that community that he was able to sell in order to secure horses, harnesses, wagons, and money for the journey to Missouri. He also exchanged a large quantity of maple sugar for axes. During the latter part of March, in a company with several other families, he left the Western Reserve with two teams and two covered wagons loaded with provisions. "The blessings of the Lord attended us in our preparations to move," he later recalled. [^30]

Throughout the spring and early summer of 1838, small groups of Mormons left Kirtland for the western frontier in Missouri. While some enjoyed the luxury of water transportation, most walked or traveled in wagons. Like other pioneers of that age, few Latter-day Saints were accustomed to walking or riding such long distances, day after day, suffering from illness, fatigue, blistered feet, biting cold, intense heat, and unquenched thirst. Wagons became mired in the mud, wagon wheels and tongues broke, and animals collapsed and died. Moreover, many women gave birth during the long journey, while other Saints grieved the loss of husbands, wives, or children buried in graves along the trail leading west. [^31]

Organizing Kirtland Camp

Although most of the Saints went west in small groups of less than fifty, one company of more than five hundred persons traveled in a body that was called Kirtland Camp. Plans for the company were constituted by the seventies in a series of meetings in the temple between March 6 and 20, 1838. Initially, the seventies considered migrating together to the West and then locating in the same general area so that they could meet together regularly when they were not involved in full-time missionary service. At these meetings they considered the advantages and disadvantages of organizing a large traveling company. Some feared that such a group would attract attention, which might lead to persecution; others brought up the problems of securing adequate supplies for the people and forage for their animals. Proponents of the plan pointed out that by traveling together, they could more easily help members of the three quorums in Kirtland who were destitute and might not otherwise be able to transport their families to Missouri. Through pooling their talents and means, they could help one another; in addition, provisions and other necessities for such a large group could be purchased in quantities at reduced costs. [^32]

The presidents of the seventies invited Hyrum Smith, a member of the Presidency, to meet with them on March 10 as they sought spiritual confirmation of their decisions from the Lord. At the meeting, "the Spirit of the Lord came down in mighty power, and some of the elders began to prophesy" that if they traveled together and kept the commandments of the Lord, the expedition would succeed. Following this outpouring of the Spirit, one of the presidents of the First Quorum of Seventy, James Foster, arose and, in the course of his remarks, testified that he beheld a vision in which he saw a company of about five hundred starting from Kirtland and traveling and camping together, concluding that it was the will of God that the seventies should travel as a body to Missouri. [^33]

Recognizing that other Saints who were not seventies were in need of help for the journey west, and with the approval of President Hyrum Smith, the seventies agreed to invite to join this company all members who were willing to comply with the requirements they specified, and those who failed to comply strictly with the rules would be expelled from the group and "left by the wayside." [^34] According to Zera Pulsipher, when other members of the Church heard that the seventies were going together and would help one another, "they wanted to join us and get out of the 'hell' of persecution. Therefore, we could not neglect them for all there was against them was that they were poor and could not help themselves." [^35] John Pulsipher, Zera's son, who traveled with the Kirtland Camp, wrote that as the plans for the camp were being formulated, the church in Kirtland was "being broken up and the poorest of the poor were left, because they could not get away." [^36]

Since Hyrum Smith had previously proposed that the Saints consider chartering a ship to transport them to Missouri, some members thought there was a conflict in that recommendation and the seventies' plans for an overland expedition. Hyrum resolved this problem by telling the Saints that his proposal had been based on "his own judgment without reference to the testimony of the Spirit of God. . . . He said further that the Saints had to act oftentimes upon their own responsibility without any reference to the testimony of the Spirit of God in relation to temporal affairs," explaining that he had not received a spiritual confirmation sanctioning his plan, which indicated to him that "God did not approve" of it. He then declared that he knew by the Spirit of God that the plan being formulated by the seventies "was according to the will of the Lord." [^37]

On March 13, a general outline, or constitution, for the organization and policies of Kirtland Camp was endorsed by the seventies. The seven presidents of the First Quorum of Seventy were to serve jointly as leaders, and a treasurer was to be appointed to maintain an account of the money received and expended by the camp. "Tent-men" were to be appointed to preside over small groups, with responsibility to secure teams and tents for those under their jurisdiction and to execute instructions from the presidents of the seventies. They were also charged to encourage those under their jurisdiction to be clean and decent and to observe the commandments, including refraining from using "tobacco, tea, coffee, snuff, or ardent spirits of any kind." The head of every family was to see that members of his family abided by the rules of the camp. Laws of the company were to be amended by majority vote of the participants, and all participants were to pay a proportionate share of expenses incurred by the camp as soon as circumstances permitted. [^38]

Initially a group of about five hundred was to leave Kirtland in the middle of May. Participants were to carry with them clothing, blankets, cooking utensils, and "light crick bedsteads" to avoid sleeping on the ground. Shelter would be provided by large tents of common sheeting or duck cloth, and it was assumed that many of the women and children would be able to sleep in the wagons. Two good teams and one tent would serve for every eighteen immigrants. Runners sent ahead of the wagon train were to purchase necessary provisions, which would then be distributed to the travelers. The seventies agreed that they would travel slowly five days a week and stop on Saturday to wash, bake, and engage in various other chores. Services were to be held on Sunday, and the seventies would invite non-Mormons in areas where they were camped to attend the meetings. [^39]

Before the departure of the company, 177 heads of households subscribed to the camp's constitution, including three women—Nancy Richardson, Mary Parker, and Julie Johnson. Although seventies directed the program, only 30 percent of the constitution signers were members of one of the three quorums of seventies. [^40]

After determining the camp's needs and identifying the equipment and animals available for the journey, the leaders discovered that not only were there too few wagons and tents, but also only ten teams were owned by camp participants, and few had any money with which to purchase supplies. Therefore, the presidents of the seventies instructed the Saints to secure work in nearby communities for a few months to obtain the animals, wagons, and necessary provisions. Some secured work in the fields, some labored for a canal company for fifty cents a day, and some manufactured stoves and sold them to settlers in nearby areas. [^41]

Members of the Kirtland Camp were not ready to begin the long journey to Missouri until the first week of July, more than three months after the seventies decided to lead a company west. On July 5, participants gathered in a clover field behind Mayhew Hillman's former home, about one hundred rods south of the temple. That day many pitched their tents, and at night they slept near their wagons and teams. The next day, about noon, a stream of about fifty-nine wagons began rolling from Kirtland. Included in the first company and those who followed shortly thereafter were about 515 pioneers—249 males and 266 females—with 27 tents, 97 horses, 22 oxen, 69 cows, and 1 bull. [^42]

The emigrants left Kirtland with mixed feelings of gratitude, remorse, anxiety, and determination. John Pulsipher said he was grateful that though their enemies had threatened to block their departure, no one interfered with them as they started southward. He also expressed enthusiasm at being a participant in the "largest company of Saints that had ever traveled together in this generation." [^43] His brother Charles wrote, "We had made a covenant that we would go. . . to Missouri together or die in the attempt." [^44] And Elias Smith, the quorum clerk and historian of the camp, recorded his impressions as the Saints abandoned their homes and left the temple they had built at such great sacrifice:

The feelings of the brethren on leaving Kirtland and parting with those who were left behind were somewhat peculiar, notwithstanding the scenes they had passed through in Kirtland; but the consciousness of doing the will of their heavenly Father, and obeying His commandments in journeying to Zion, over balanced every other considerations that could possibly be presented to their minds, and buoyed up their spirits. [^45]

After the company left, only a few Latter-day Saints remained in Kirtland. A portion of the town was almost desolate, with most homes near the temple abandoned. Jeremiah Willey, who participated in the Kirtland Camp, said, "I was obliged to leave my house and lot unsold." Although he had sent some of his personal belongings west by water, he left some clothing, bedding, and furniture in his abandoned home. [^46] William F. Cahoon wrote that he turned the key and locked the door of his house, leaving all his property and other possessions in "the hands of enemies and strangers," without ever receiving one cent for that which he left in Kirtland. [^47]

The Journey of Kirtland Camp

The problems of the Saints who traveled with the Kirtland Camp were compounded because of the large numbers involved and because most of them were not as well equipped as other members of the Church who immigrated to the Missouri frontier. During the first month of travel, the group followed their initial plans without many alterations. A trumpet generally awakened the camp at 4:00 A.M., and at 4:20, prayers were offered in each tent, which housed about three or four families (approximately fifteen or twenty persons). The first of the four divisions generally left camp about 7:00 or 8:00 A.M., and for more than an hour wagons rolled from the encampment. During the first three weeks, after traveling an average of twelve miles a day, the pioneers stopped in the late afternoon on a farm where they could obtain water, graze their animals, and build fires to cook their evening meal. Usually the Saints placed their wagons in a square or circle, pitched their tents so that they formed a rectangular pattern within the circle of wagons, and stationed guards around the site. On July 10, for example, fifty men were assigned to guard the encampment and keep the horses and cattle from straying. [^48]

From Kirtland the camp proceeded south through Hudson to Akron, then westward to Wooster, Mansfield, and Bucyrus. South of Bucyrus they passed through the fertile Mad River Valley and proceeded past Springfield toward Dayton. They followed many of the same roads taken in 1834 by Zion's Camp, and about ten members of this wagon train had participated with the Prophet Joseph Smith in that earlier march. [^49]

Throughout the journey to Missouri, the presidents of the First Council of Seventy served as a governing council. Since two of the presidents, Levi Hancock and Daniel S. Miles, had previously departed for the west, Benjamin Wilbur and Elias Smith were called to replace them until the group arrived in Far West. Therefore, the seven men who were involved in decision-making processes were Joseph Young, James Foster, Josiah Butterfield, Henry Harriman, and Zera Pulsipher, the permanent members of the governing council, and Elias Smith and Benjamin Wilbur, the two temporary leaders. This group established daily schedules, made assignments, altered general procedures, and instructed, counseled, and disciplined the Saints. [^50]

Jonathan Dunham, the camp engineer, traveled ahead of the four divisions to search for campsites and find forage for the animals. Jonathan H. Hale, the commissar, was responsible for buying food and provisions for the Saints. Every evening rations were issued to the various families according to their numbers. The Saints lived primarily on corn and cornmeal, wheat and flour, beans, pork, and dried apples; they shared the milk they obtained from their cows. [^51] The number in Kirtland Camp swelled to about 620, as a result of other families joining them, and on July 23, Jonathan Hale was unable to buy sufficient provisions in Marion and Hardin counties, through which they were traveling. Seven and a half bushels of corn had to suffice for the entire camp for three days. Elias Smith reported that although some members "complained and murmured because they did not have that to eat which their souls lusted after, . . . none lacked for food." [^52]

Since the seventies had received a special call to be involved in missionary work and other members of the Church had been challenged to teach the gospel whenever possible, participants of the Kirtland Camp sought opportunities to discuss religion with those who stopped them along the trail and to bear their testimonies to inquirers who visited their encampments. Most of the missionary activity was conducted on Sundays. During the first two months of the journey, the Saints held outdoor meetings every Sunday. Visitors were invited to attend these services, and on July 15 some two hundred non-Mormons gathered and listened to the elders. Special services were planned for the visitors, and those who spoke bore witness to the restoration, the teachings of the Bible and the Book of Mormon, and latter-day revelation. So many visitors attended the meetings the first two Sundays that the sacrament was not administered. On the third Sunday, the Saints had to move their encampment to another area five miles away because of insufficient forage for their livestock, and on that day they held a single meeting to worship and partake of the sacrament. [^53]

Accidents and illness constantly afflicted the pioneers. Some persons were crushed under wagon wheels; other succumbed to disease. Many forces contributed to their suffering. They perspired by day and slept on cold and sometimes damp terrain by night. They forded streams, climbed up and down inclines, and followed rutted roads and trails, continually weakened by fatigue, a meager and changing diet, and polluted drinking water.

In the midst of their suffering and afflictions, they turned to their Heavenly Father for help. Throughout the journey, elders administered to the sick and the injured; and diarists reported that through the power of the priesthood, many of the afflicted were instantly healed. On July 23, for example, Martin Peck's son Edwin accidentally fell, crushing his leg under the wheel of a heavily loaded wagon. "When he was picked up," one witness observed, "the limb appeared to be flattened as if almost crushed to pulp, and the flesh was laid open." Elder Peck immediately administered to his son and placed him in the wagon. An hour later, the boy "was entirely well, the only sign of the injury left being a slight scar which had the dry and scaly appearance of an old sore, long since healed." [^54]

Samuel Tyler testified that the day following this miracle, his own son, James, complained of an earache, and his wife was very sick, so he asked Elder Peck to administer to them. Immediately following the administration, he said, his son's pain ceased and his wife was healed. Moreover, he reported that on August 5 his wife was again healed following an administration, and on August 8 elders walked among the people "rebuking diseases and foul spirits," and some, including himself, were promptly cured. [^55]

Death periodically struck the camp, especially the young children. On the sixth day of the journey, the infant son of Benjamin Wilbur died. Within three hours, a funeral service was planned, a grave was dug in an orchard, a graveside prayer was offered, and those in that division resumed their journey and rejoined the other divisions. Seven other children were buried in the fields of Ohio. On September 3, while crossing Indiana, the first adult, Bathsheba Willey, died. Since the young son of E. P. Merriam had died the day before, a joint funeral was held that afternoon. Four days later, two other children passed away and were interred in one grave. One of these children was the thirteen-year-old daughter of Otis Shumway, who had buried another daughter just nine days earlier. Before the Saints arrived in Far West, fourteen children and one adult had been buried along the trail to the Missouri frontier. [^56]

The non-Mormon response to this large movement of Saints varied from curiosity and amazement to criticism and threats. Hundreds sometimes gathered along the public roads and watched as they passed by. The camp was sometimes compared to the children of Israel, who, under the direction of a prophet, crossed a vast wilderness and headed toward a promised land. Many onlookers were "astonished . . . at seeing so large a body moving together." While some spectators expressed feelings of encouragement and warmth, others jeered and swore or expressed pity for those whom they called "the deluded believers in modern revelation." [^57]

The ridicule was sometimes combined with threats of violence. On July 16, as the Saints approached Mansfield, Ohio, a sheriff arrested and imprisoned Josiah Butterfield, Jonathan Dunham, and Jonathan H. Hale for alleged involvement in the Kirtland Safety Society. Meanwhile, the Saints were told that they would not be permitted to pass through Mansfield. Later that afternoon, however, the camp traveled through the town without interference or commotion except for the firing of a cannon. The next day the three brethren who had been imprisoned were discharged by the court. [^58] Two weeks later, Jonathan Dunham was ordered off a farm near Springfield, Ohio, as he tried to purchase feed for the cattle. The irate farmer swore that he would shoot the first Mormon who stepped on his property. [^59]

Many of the difficulties of Kirtland Camp were caused by internal strife and discontent. Periodically, the presidents of the seventies chastized the pioneers for their selfishness, murmuring, and failure to work congenially with others. Samuel Tyler wrote that on July 20 the presidents told the Saints that "God was angry" with them because of their "ingratitude," their "hardness of heart," their "slowness to keep his commandments," and their "iniquities," and warned them that God "would scourge" them if they did not repent. Occasionally, families or persons who persisted in violating the camp's constitution, who continually complained about decisions of the governing council, or who were unable to live harmoniously with others were excluded from the camp. The presidents of seventies devoted so much of their time to resolving internal problems that on August 3 they formed a lesser or assistant council to discipline recalcitrants. [^60]

The task of feeding and renting campsites for such a large group was apparently greater than the seventies had anticipated. By the end of July, three weeks after they left Kirtland, the company had spent nearly all of their money, though they had traveled only 250 miles, less than one-third of the distance to Far West. While they were camped on the outskirts of Dayton, Ohio, some of the men were offered work on a road under construction between Dayton and Springfield. Because of their need for money, the company made camp, and throughout August, some of the men worked on the road while others secured employment in Dayton. Meanwhile, those who remained in the encampment organized four schools, one for each of the four divisions, and the women taught the children in an unusual summer session. [^61]

The number traveling with the Kirtland Camp continued to change, with families frequently joining and leaving the company. While some were ordered to leave, others departed because of sickness or because they were unable to repair their wagons. Samuel Tyler estimated that in the early part of August the number of participants ranged from about 530 to 550. [^62]

By late August, the men who had been working on the turnpike completed their contract, earning twelve hundred dollars for their labors. Although the Saints were asked to build another segment of the road, the governing council decided to resume the journey to Far West. [^63] Therefore, on August 29, the trumpet sounded at 3:00 A.M., and by 9:00 A.M. the encampment had been vacated. Kirtland Camp crossed the state line into Indiana on August 31, proceeded along the national road through Indianapolis and Terre Haute, and entered Illinois on September 8. After traveling through Springfield, they ferried across the Mississippi River about fifty miles below Quincy and, on the evening of September 20, pitched their tents one mile west of Louisiana, Pike County, Missouri. [^64]

In September the governing council altered some of their plans. Instead of traveling no more than fifteen miles per day (unless circumstances absolutely required it), resting on Saturday, and holding worship services on Sunday, they decided to travel nearly every day and to increase the distance covered each day. Therefore, during the last phase of the journey, Kirtland Camp traveled an average of almost twenty miles a day. On September 8 they covered twenty-five miles, the longest distance to that date, and four days later they set a record of twenty-nine miles. They also rested for a full day on only a few occasions. On Sunday, September 2, they covered twenty-one miles because feed for their livestock was scarce. The next Sunday they traveled two miles, and on September 23 and 30, they continued traveling because of the shortage of funds. On only one Sabbath in September did they remain in camp and conduct Sabbath meetings. [^65]

Due to the lack of funds, the governing council also requested some of the participants in the immigrant train to leave the camp. On September 9, shortly after they reached Illinois, the presidents of the seventies asked nine or ten families to secure employment in the area of Amboy, Illinois, and join the Saints later in Missouri. At that time a few other families also left the camp because of illness. [^66] Less than one week later, on September 15, about fifteen or sixteen additional families departed and secured employment in the area of Springfield. Joel H. Johnson remained with this group and presided over the branch of the Church. [^67]

Describing the hardships of the Saints during their trek across Illinois, Samuel Tyler wrote that they were often short of food for themselves and their animals. They frequently ate boiled corn and corn pudding and fed the cobs to their horses so that nothing was wasted. He found the corn pudding to be delicious when mixed with milk, butter, fat, and any kind of sweetening. He also wrote under the date of September 14 that the size of the company had been greatly depleted. "Our number is now about 260," he observed, which was about half the size of the group that had started from Kirtland. He concluded that one reason the camp was smaller was that some members had failed to live the celestial law. [^68]

Shortly before the pioneer company crossed the Mississippi River, the Saints encountered another problem that persisted during most of the remaining 260 miles of their trip. This new affliction was fear that they would be attacked by mobs if they tried to cross the state of Missouri. They were warned that a war had erupted in western Missouri between the Saints and non-Mormons, that all Mormons would soon be driven from the state, and that if they continued their journey, they would be attacked and would suffer a similar fate. Intimidated by these threats, nine additional families left this company in Illinois. [^69]

Threats of violence continued as Kirtland Camp continued west across the rolling prairies of Missouri. On September 20, while Samuel Tyler was looking for a stray cow, he met a Missourian who asked him if he belonged to that "gang of Mormons." When he responded in the affirmative, the stranger said that he was a fool to let the Mormons lead him into danger. "Don't you know the Missourians are raising armies to cut you all to pieces?" he was asked. [^70]

Four days later, as the camp passed through Madisonville, they were told that several armies, including a military force led by Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, were located east of Far West and that if they continued their journey they would be attacked. [^71]

One of the presidents of the seventies, James Foster, became so concerned about the threats that on September 26 he recommended that the camp be dissolved and that each family continue alone so they would not be identified as Mormons. The other presidents rejected the proposal, and following a vote, the company resumed traveling together. Later that day a group of Saints from Far West met them and assured them they could complete their journey to Far West without being mobbed. [^72]

On October 2, the wagons of Kirtland Camp rolled into Far West, 870 miles from Kirtland. As the party of about two hundred Saints neared the end of their journey, they were met by Joseph Smith, his brother Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, and a few other Church leaders, who escorted them during the last five miles. They stopped at the public square about 5:00 P.M. and pitched their tents near the site designated for a temple. There they visited with old friends and accepted their hospitality. Isaac Morley, one of the first persons to join the Church in Kirtland, donated some beef, and Sidney Rigdon provided supper for many of the weary travelers. [^73]

Responding to an earlier request by the Prophet, members of Kirtland Camp resumed their travels on October 3, and the next day they settled twenty-two miles north of Far West on land that had not yet been offered for public sale. Under the date of Thursday, October 4, Samuel Tyler concluded his journal describing his experiences as a participant of Kirtland Camp, noting that "this is a day long to be remembered." As the Saints pitched their tents at sunset that evening, he reported that one of the brethren proclaimed in a loud voice, "Behold, your long and tedious journey [is] now ended; you are now on the public square of Adam-ondi-Ahman," [^74] the place that Joseph Smith had identified, through revelation, as the location where Adam blessed his children and predicted what would befall his posterity.

The trials of the Kirtland Saints did not end when they reached the Missouri frontier. On October 27, less than one month after Kirtland Camp arrived there, Governor Lilburn W. Boggs issued one of the most intolerant decrees uttered by an executive in the history of the United States. After telling General John B. Clark of the Missouri militia that the "Mormons must be treated as enemies," the governor ordered him to exterminate or drive members of the faith from that state. [^75] Some of the participants in the Kirtland Camp had settled in a community called Haun's Mill, and on October 30, Missouri militiamen suddenly attacked the Saints living there. The threats of death that they had heard while crossing Missouri became a reality: seventeen Saints were killed and thirteen others were wounded. [^76]

Throughout the long winter of 1838-39, hundreds of Latter-day Saints fled again from persecutors. Many had been forced to abandon Kirtland in 1838, and now they were being driven from the state of Missouri. Fortified by their faith, many of the former Kirtland Saints settled in Iowa and Illinois and helped build a new city, Nauvoo, on the banks of the Mississippi River. Within a few years, they would once again have to abandon their homes, cross a vast wilderness, and begin a new life in the great basin of western America.

Although few Americans experienced as a consequence of their religious beliefs such agonizing and overt oppression as did the early Latter-day Saints, many members of the Church testified that during their trials they were sustained by their faith. Oliver Huntington wrote in his autobiography that although his parents lost all of their worldly wealth in Kirtland and subsequently suffered poverty and persecution, he never heard them complain nor question the divine calling of Joseph Smith. [^77] George Q. Cannon summarized the Prophet's perseverance, integrity, and courage as manifest amid great trials and persecution when he said:

Think of what he passed through! Think of his afflictions, and think of his dauntless character! Did any one ever see him falter? Did any one ever see him flinch? Did any one ever see any lack in him of the power necessary to enable him to stand with dignity in the midst of his enemies, or lacking in dignity in the performance of his duties as a servant of the living God? God gave him peculiar power in this respect. He was filled with integrity to God; with such integrity as was not known among men. He was like an angel of God among them. Notwithstanding all that he had to endure, and the peculiar circumstances in which he was so often placed, and the great responsibility that weighed constantly upon him, he never faltered; the feeling of fear or trembling never crossed him—at least he never exhibited it in his feelings or actions, God sustained him to the very last. [^78]

The Exodus from Kirtland

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 117:1. See also Gordon Orville Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 25-26, and Davis Bitton, "The Waning of Mormon Kirtland," BYU Studies 12 (Summer 1972): 455.
[^2] Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:226, 283.
[^3] Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, pp. 57-58. See also journal of Theodore Turley, November 1839.
[^4] Journal History, April 27, 1840.
[^5] HC 4:204-5, 225-26; Times and Seasons 2 (July 1, 1841): 458-60.
[^6] Times and Seasons 2 (July 1, 1841): 458-60. According to the minutes of this conference, the following branches comprised Kirtland Stake: Kirtland, Brownhelm, Charleston, Nelson, Madison, Harrisonville, Brooklyn, Grafton, Gustavus, and Andover. Some of the leaders of this stake, such as Zebedee Coltrin and Almon W. Babbitt, returned to Kirtland after migrating to Missouri and Illinois; others, such as Hiram Kellogg and Salmon Gee, continued to live in Kirtland after most of the Saints had left in 1838. Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:190, 192-93, 284-85.
[^7] Journal History, October 19, 1841.
[^8] Journal History, October 28, 1842; October 29, 1842; October 31, 1842.
[^9] D&C 124:83.
[^10] HC 4:443-44; Times and Seasons 3 (November 15, 1841): 589. See also Artel Ricks, "Hyrum's Prophecy," Improvement Era 59 (May 1956): 305ff.
[^11] Times and Seasons 4 (August 1, 1842): 282-84.
[^12] Brigham Young to the "Brethren" (Kirtland Saints), January 21, 1845, photocopy, Church Archives. In October 1845, Brigham Young received a letter from Reuben McBride informing him that "apostates were doing everything they could to injure the Saints," that they had broken into the Lord's House and "taken possession of it," and that they were "trying to take possession of the Church farm." HC 7:484.
[^13] Times and Seasons 6 (April 15, 1845): 871-72.
[^14] Deseret News, December 13, 1851. The letter was dated August 7, 1851. Elder Bay also wrote that there were "quite a number of scattered Saints in Ohio, and most of them are willing to gather." In 1846, Henry Howe, a non-Mormon writer, visited Kirtland and wrote that after the Mormons left, "most of the dwellings went to decay, and it now has somewhat the appearance of a depopulated and broken down place." Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio (1847), p. 282. See also Bitton, "The Waning of Mormon Kirtland," pp. 459-63.
[^15] HC 7:484; Fields, "History of the Kirtland Temple," p. 93; History of Geauga and Lake Counties, pp. 39-40; Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio, p. 282. In 1847 apostates held several conferences in the temple. See The Ensign of Liberty of the Church of Christ 1 (1847): 1, 14.
[^16] Ricks, "Hyrum's Prophecy," p. 340; Richard W. Young, "In the Wake of the Church," Contributor 4 (December 1882): 106-8.
[^17] According to Paul E. Reimann, the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints secured title to the property through adverse possession. See Paul E. Reimann, The Reorganized Church and the Civil Courts, and Clarence L. Fields, "History of the Kirtland Temple," pp. 89-101.
[^18] Ricks, "Hyrum's Prophecy," p. 340.
[^19] Richard W. Young, "In the Wake of the Church," p. 108.
[^20] Autobiography of Jesse Wentworth Crosby, pp. 5-6.
[^21] Hepzibah Richards to friends, March 23, 1838.
[^22] Autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, pp. 30-31; Hepzibah to friends, March 23, 1838.
[^23] Manuscript History of the Great Lakes Mission—Ohio, January 17, 1838, Church Archives; autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1838.
[^24] Benjamin F. Johnson wrote that one of the Kirtland Saints, Lyman R. Sherman, set fire to the printing office to thwart the plans of Joseph's enemies. Benjamin F. Johnson, "My Life's Review," p. 24. Other Latter-day Saints, however, accused their enemies of destroying the building. Journal of Jonathan H. Hale, Book 2, p. 10; Elders' Journal (July 1838): 34.
[^25] Hepzibah Richards to Willard Richards, January 18, 1838.
[^26] Painesville Telegraph, May 31, 1838, pp. 2-3. Zera Pulsipher wrote that although mobbers claimed that the seventies set fire to the Methodist church, "we knew we were innocent" of this charge. He added that there was no doubt in his mind that their enemies were thus trying to destroy them. Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, pp. 9-10.
[^27] Crary, Pioneer and Personal Reminiscences, p. 35.
[^28] Journal of William Huntington, pp. 3-4. Huntington reported that he arrived in Far West after traveling more than eight weeks, but that his tools were never delivered.
[^29] Autobiography of Nathan Tanner, pp. 25-27; autobiography of Elizabeth Beswick Tanner, p. 2; Leonard J. Arrington, "The John Tanner Family," Ensign 9 (March 1979): 46-47.
[^30] Autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, pp. 31-32.
[^31] Some of the best accounts of the journey of the Saints to Missouri in 1838 are found in the following works: autobiography of Anson Call, pp. 3-5; journal of John Smith, April 5, 1838, to June 16, 1838; Lucy Mack Smith, History of Joseph Smith, pp. 251-53; Snow, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 24-25; HC 3:1-3, 8, 43, 100-148; diary of Samuel D. Tyler, pp. 1-56; and autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, pp. 31-32.
[^32] HC 3:87-98; Gordon Orville Hill, "A History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 10-16; autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, p. 8.
[^33] HC 3:87-89.
[^34] HC 3:89-91.
[^35] Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, p. 8.
[^36] Autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 2. See also autobiography of George W. Johnson, p. 2, and autobiography of Luman Andros Shurtliff, p. 31.
[^37] HC 3:94-95.
[^38] HC 3:90-91
[^39] Hepzibah Richards to friends, March 23, 1838; Hill, "A History of Kirtland Camp," p. 16.
[^40] The names of the persons and the number of persons in their respective families who subscribed to the constitution of Kirtland Camp are in HC 3:91-93. Only about 33 percent of those who signed the constitution paid taxes in Kirtland during the 1830s, indicating that many of these members were among the poorest Saints. See also the journal of George Johnson, p. 2; autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 2.
[^41] Parkin, "Conflict at Kirtland," p. 330; autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, p. 9.
[^42] Hill, "A History of Kirtland Camp," p. 22; HC 3:98 100; autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 4; journal of Jonathan H. Hale, p. 11. Estimates of the number in this company who left Kirtland on July 6 or shortly thereafter vary slightly but not significantly. The two best accounts of the journey of Kirtland Camp are the diary of Samuel D. Tyler and the record kept by the camp historian, Elias Smith, which has been published in volume 3 of Joseph Smith, History of the Church.
[^43] Autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 4.
[^44] Autobiography of Charles Pulsipher, p. 69.
[^45] HC 3:100.
[^46] Autobiography of Jeremiah Willey, p. 13. The spelling in this quotation has been corrected. See also autobiography of Caroline Barnes Crosby, 1838.
[^47] Journal of William F. Cahoon, cited in Stella Cahoon Shurtleff and Brent Farrington Cahoon, Reynolds Cahoon and His Stalwart Sons, p. 28.
[^48] HC 3:103-5; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 1, 10; Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 26, 88.
[^49] HC 3:100-116. The men who probably participated in both the march of Zion's Camp and the journey of Kirtland Camp were Nathan Baldwin, George Brooks, John Carter, John Folger, Sherman Gilbert, Michael Griffith, Joseph B. Noble, John Parker, William B. Pratt, and Joseph Young.
[^50] HC 3:89-90; Jenson, Biographical Encyclopedia 1:187, 192-94, 719-21.
[^51] HC 3:102-3; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 19, 27; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, 1838, p. 9; autobiography of John Pulsipher, p. 4.
[^52] HC 3:114.
[^53] Diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 6-7; HC 3:101, 107-8, 112, 116-17, 123, 125-26, 129, 131.
[^54] HC 3:113; diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 13; Early Scenes in Church History, pp. 73-74; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, pp. 11-12.
[^55] Diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 14, 21-23. See also pages 26 and 28 for references of healing among participants of Kirtland Camp.
[^56] Autobiography of Jeremiah Willey, pp. 13-14. For references to those who died while journeying with Kirtland Camp, see Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 33, 75, 76, 81, 89, 93, 94, 96-100, 107, 111.
[^57] HC 3:106.
[^58] HC 3:108-9; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 7-8; autobiography of Aroet L. Hale, 1838, p. 11; journal of Jonathan H. Hale, book 2, p. 15.
[^59] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 16. For additional references to the non-Mormon response to Kirtland Camp, see Clermont Courier (Batavia, Ohio), June 15, 1868, p. 2; Ohio Repository (Canton), July 18, 1838; Herald and Gazette (Cleveland), July 25, 1838, p. 2; and Western Citizen and Urbana Gazette, July 31, 1838, p. 3.
[^60] Diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 11, 19, 23, 43.
[^61] Ibid., pp. 18-19. See also HC 3:119-32.
[^62] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 19.
[^63] Autobiography of Zera Pulsipher, pp. 10-11; HC 3:131-32.
[^64] HC 3:132-41; diary of Samuel Tyler, pp. 30-45.
[^65] HC 3:103, 137-46; diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 40.
[^66] HC 3: 137-38; diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 39.
[^67] HC 3:139-40; autobiography of Joel Hills Johnson, p. 19.
[^68] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 42.
[^69] Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 113-14.
[^70] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 46.
[^71] Ibid., pp. 48-49; HC 3:143.
[^72] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 50; HC 3:144-45.
[^73] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 55; HC 3:147.
[^74] Diary of Samuel Tyler, p. 56.
[^75] HC 3:175.
[^76] HC 3:323-25. Amanda Smith, wife of Warren Smith, whose description of the massacre at Haun's Mill was published in Joseph Smith's History, left Kirtland Camp with her family on September 18, 1838. Hill, "History of Kirtland Camp," pp. 113-14.
[^77] Autobiography of Oliver B. Huntington, p. 12.
[^78] George Q. Cannon in JD 23:362.
