Milton V. Backman, Heavens Resound: A History of the Latter-day Saints in Ohio, 1830-1838 ( 1983)

Chapter 19

The Aftermath

When the long line of the Kirtland Camp teams and wagons moved south from the temple on July 6, 1838, along the old Chillicothe road toward Chester, few Latter-day Saints remained in Kirtland. Probably more apostates lived there than active members of the Church, but these dissenters divided into many factions and consequently were unable to unite under a common religious banner. A few Saints traveled with this large migrating company the first seven miles to Chester and then returned to their homes.

Two days after the camp left Kirtland, Joseph Smith received a revelation in Far West directing William Marks, a member of the Kirtland high council, and Bishop Newel K. Whitney to settle their business affairs as quickly as possible and leave for Missouri. [^1] Complying with these instructions, the two men left Kirtland in the fall of 1838. Before they reached western Missouri, however, they learned of the expulsion of the Mormons from that state. Therefore, like a number of other Kirtland Saints, they did not reach the Missouri frontier, but settled temporarily in other areas and then gathered in Nauvoo. [^2]

While nearly all of the faithful Kirtland Saints abandoned that community in 1838, a few members were still living there in November 1839 when Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball stopped there while en route to the British Mission. Brigham Young wrote that he met "a good many friends and brethren who were glad" to see him. Many of these persons, he added, lacked the energy or the disposition to move to Missouri in 1838. The Kirtland Temple was still available for use by the Latter-day Saints at that time, for on Sunday, November 17, Elder Young preached in a meeting in the morning and John Taylor preached in the afternoon. That evening, after Elder Taylor had "washed himself in pure water with castile soap," members of the priesthood gathered in the temple, and Elder Young anointed Elder Taylor "with pure sweet oil, and pronounced such blessings as the Spirit gave utterance." They also participated in the ordinances of sealing the anointing and of washing of the feet. [^3]

A Second Gathering

In the early 1840s there was a temporary growth of the Church in Kirtland through conversions and renewed migration. In April 1840, Hiram Kellogg, a leader of the Kirtland Branch, reported that as a result of recent baptisms, membership in the congregation had increased to about 125. [^4] Six months later, leaders of the Church in Nauvoo called Almon W. Babbitt to preside over the Saints in northeastern Ohio and again designated Kirtland as a gathering place for members of the Church living in the eastern states. Immediately following this announcement, Latter-day Saints commenced a new migration to the Western Reserve, and by the spring of 1841 membership of the Kirtland branch had increased to between three hundred and four hundred members. [^5]

During this renewed migration, the Kirtland Stake was reorganized. In May 1841, Almon W. Babbitt was sustained as president of the stake, which consisted of branches in ten towns in northeastern Ohio. He selected as his counselors Lester Brooks and Zebedee Coltrin. Many other leaders were sustained during this conference, including Thomas Burdick as a bishop, with Hiram Winters and Reuben McBride as counselors; Hiram Kellogg as president of the high priests quorum, with John Knapp and Joseph Pine as counselors; and Amos Babcock as president of the elders quorum, with Otis Hobart and Thomas Green as counselors. Nehemiah Greenhalgh was called to preside over the lesser priesthood, with James Crumpton and John Craig as his counselors. [^6]

For two years, from 1841 to 1843, Kirtland continued to be a gathering place for the Saints. In October 1841, President Babbitt wrote to Joseph Smith informing him that the Kirtland Branch had about five hundred members, that other branches in the Kirtland Stake were growing, and that the House of the Lord was in good condition as a result of recent repairs. Of the five hundred members in the Kirtland Branch, about one hundred were converts from England who were staying in Kirtland during the winter before continuing on to Nauvoo. [^7] Though many members of the Church left Kirtland in the spring of 1842 to gather with the Saints in Illinois, others moved to Kirtland, replacing those who had emigrated, so that the membership was sustained. When Lyman Wight visited Kirtland in October 1842, he reported that he preached to a congregation of from 500 to 700, that he ordained 30 elders, and that he baptized 203 individuals. [^8]

That Kirtland was to be a temporary gathering place for the Saints in the East is clearly evident from a revelation recorded by Joseph Smith in January 1841 and from a prophecy uttered by Hyrum Smith. In the January revelation, William Law, who was called to be a counselor in the First Presidency, was told not to take his family to Kirtland. "Nevertheless," the commandment continued, "I, the Lord, will build up Kirtland, but I, the Lord, have a scourge prepared for the inhabitants thereof." [^9] Hyrum Smith's prophecy harmonized with this revelation. While serving as Patriarch to the Church, he sent the following instructions to members in Kirtland:

All the Saints that dwell in the land are commanded to come away, . . . 'Thus saith the Lord;' therefore pay out no moneys, nor properties for houses, nor lands in that country, for if you do you will lose them, for the time shall come, that you shall not possess them in peace, but shall be scourged with a sore scourge; yet your children may possess them, but not until many years shall pass away. . . . Then I will send forth and build up Kirtland, and it shall be polished and refined according to my word. [^10]

The Waning

In 1843 Latter-day Saints participated in a major exodus from Kirtland for the second time. They were not fleeing amid apostate mobocracy and increasing threats from other enemies. Rather they abandoned their homes because they were instructed by Church leaders to gather in Illinois. At a conference in the Kirtland Temple on April 6, 1843, Lyman Wight, an apostle who presided over this conference, announced that the time had come for the Saints in the Western Reserve to migrate to Nauvoo. "I . . . told you not to leave this place until you were instructed so by revelation," he said, adding that the season had arrived when the Saints were to be instructed more perfectly and that one of the objects of that conference was "to devise means to effect a removal of the church [from Kirtland] to the city of Nauvoo" in harmony with the revealed word of God. He advised the Saints to leave as soon as possible while they had "a chance to go in peace." The Saints attending the conference voted unanimously to support this program of removal, and they began immediately to plan their migration to Nauvoo. [^11]

Apparently not all Latter-day Saints in Kirtland complied with the instructions concerning the gathering. In 1845 members living there were again reminded in a directive from Brigham Young to move west, "leaving neither man, woman or child behind that desires to come up here with a pure heart, leaving Kirtland to the owls and the bats for a season." [^12] At a conference held in the Kirtland Temple on April 5, 1845, attended by more than one hundred Saints, members again agreed to sustain the General Authorities, to assist in building the temple in Nauvoo, and to gather with the body of the Church in Illinois. [^13]

During the latter half of the 1840s and the early 1850s, a small branch of the Church was generally maintained in Kirtland, while groups of apostates sought to restore that community to its former position as a major church center. In January 1845, William E. McLellin, Leonard Rich, Jacob Bump, and others organized a new religious group called the Church of Christ. This group grew to about one hundred, then began to dissolve within a few years. Another group during the late 1840s adopted the name Church of Christ and attempted to establish Kirtland as a headquarters, but this faith, which later became known as Brewsterites, also began to decline in 1849. In 1851, Elder James W. Bay summarized conditions in Kirtland in a letter to President Brigham Young:

There have been all kinds of false prophets here in Kirtland, but I have found a few that begin to feel that west is the place, and the authority is there. Bro. Isaac Bullock and I succeeded in getting an organization here, and they begin to have the gifts, and are blessed, and calculate to gather west to the valley. [^14]

During the latter part of the 1840s, after most members of the Church had permanently left Kirtland, apostates seized the temple, and the Latter-day Saints never regained possession. The building was used by various groups for religious, educational, and civic purposes. In fact, shortly after the Saints' major exodus in 1838, the Reverend Nelson Slater obtained a five-year lease on the second and third stories, and that September classes were conducted there under the direction of trustees of the Western Reserve Teachers' Seminary. This school was maintained throughout the 1840s and part of the 1850s and was regarded as an important educational institution in that area. [^15]

After the Western Reserve Teachers' Seminary was dissolved, the population of Kirtland continued to decline, the temple was abandoned, and for years no one maintained the building. [^16] The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints took possession of the building in 1880, and in the twentieth century it was restored to it original beauty. [^17]

The population of Kirtland Township declined from 1,778 in 1840 to 909 in 1890, the latter census recording fewer inhabitants than when the missionaries introduced the gospel in the Western Reserve in October 1830. [^18] During the first half of the twentieth century, the population remained sparse, with only 2,663 residents reported in the census of 1950. When Richard W. Young visited Kirtland in 1882, he found a community thinly settled and a temple in poor repair. "Much of the interior wood work has been taken away for fire wood," he observed, "and sashes contained more broken than undamaged panes of glasses. Paint it has not seen for a generation at least." [^19]

A Wondrous Past

For 130 years, from 1850 to 1980, few Latter-day Saints resided in Kirtland. During this long era, however, Kirtland and its towering temple stood as a symbol reminding those who visited the site of the faith and dedication of the early Saints, of their response to the call of repentance and baptism, of their gathering in Ohio, of their missionary zeal, of their attempts to help those who gathered in western Missouri, of their sacrifices in building a house for the Lord, of the powerful spiritual manifestations that many witnessed in the temple, and of the resolute faith of those who experienced poverty and persecution. Rather than deny the reality of the restoration, these and other pioneers abandoned their homes and searched for a site where they could worship in peace.

In 1839 an early convert of the Church visited Kirtland and recorded his impressions of the Saints who had lived there. As he and his traveling companions passed through the community, en route to join the main body of the Saints farther west, they found a sparsely settled community with many abandoned houses. He wrote:

We entered the Temple, and beheld the fixtures, the curtains, the seats, etc., with astonishment, being so different from anything we had before seen, and being, as we believed built by revelation and commandment of God. Here the Saints though few in number and poor, in the infancy of the Church surrounding with opposition, nevertheless, rich in faith and in knowledge of God, united their efforts, some toiling for a whole year together, without pay and with scanty food until this fine edifice was completed, being the first in the 19th century, and at the time the only building on the face of the earth built by revelation from Heaven. Our hearts were filled with gratitude to God, that we were thus highly favored to live in the day when the voice of the Lord was again heard out of the heavens, and with bosoms burning with the intelligence of God, we still prosecuted our journey westward in order to join the Presidency and main body of the Church with whom the oracles of God had been entrusted. [^20]

More than 140 years after nearly all Latter-day Saints had left Kirtland, a new glory appeared. Through renewed sacrifice and persistent labor, Saints living in northeastern Ohio built a spacious meetinghouse there. On October 17, 1982, Ezra Taft Benson, president of the Council of the Twelve Apostles, dedicated that sacred building. He prayed that the Lord would accept the humble offerings of those who through faith and devotion had built that sacred house in a sacred area on sacred ground. He also expressed gratitude to the Lord for the prospect of growth and development in Kirtland, where so many inspirational experiences had transpired and where so many truths of the gospel had been restored. The dedication of the Kirtland Ward inaugurated a new era in the history of the restoration movement. While the glory of Kirtland lies in the past, a renewed glory shines in the present and awaits the future.

The Aftermath

---
Notas:
[^1] Albert Clements appears on the list that was included in the first edition of Joseph Smith's history (edited by B. H. Roberts), but he does not appear on the Bullock, Foster, or Jenson listings.
[^2] David W. Patten and William D. Pratt were sent from Kirtland in advance of the army, carrying dispatches to the Saints in Missouri. Both men are included in a list of fifty-six participants identified in Joseph Smith's history and appear in most listings of members of Zion's Camp. When Joseph Smith's scribes or historians referred in his history to the "205" men who comprised Zion's Camp on June 8, 1834, they undoubtedly did not include these two men. (See HC 2:87.)
[^3] Milcher Riley appears on the Jenson and Roberts listings but not on the rolls compiled by Bullock and Foster.
[^4] The name Jesse J. Smith appears on the Bullock list but not on the lists prepared by Foster, Jenson, and Roberts. On the other hand, Jesse B. Smith appears on the Foster and Jenson lists but was excluded by Roberts and Bullock. Possibly Jesse J. Smith and Jesse B. Smith refer to the same individual. Joseph Smith or those who wrote that portion of his history referred to Jesse Smith dying of cholera while burying one of the members of Zion's Camp in Missouri. (HC 2:115.) The Prophet also identified Jesse B. Smith as one of the participants in the march. (Millennial Star 15 [March 26, 1853]: 205.)
[^5] The "J. B." often referred to in various records of Zion's Camp was probably Jezeniah B. Smith, whose name was spelled Jazariah, Jozeniah, and Zechariah in various listings.
[^6] Gad Yale, a member of the second quorum of seventy, appears on the Bullock and Foster lists but not on the rolls compiled by Jenson and Roberts. In the Kirtland Council Minute Book (p. 196), there is a reference to Gad Yale having traveled to Missouri in relief of the Saints.
[^7] Lewis Zobriskie also appears on the Bullock and Foster rolls and not on the lists compiled by Jenson and Roberts. Although his name appears in early records of the Church with more than thirty different spellings, contemporary records inform us that "Captain" Lewis Zobriskie participated in a mock battle with other members of Zion's Camp during the march to Missouri. (HC 2:75.) Two names appear on the roll prepared by Thomas Bullock but not on any other listing cited above: Horace Evans and Thomas Turner. Except for the Bullock listing, there is no other evidence that these men participated in the march; and following the name of Thomas Turner in one of the manuscripts compiled by Bullock is a large question mark. Two Latter-day Saints, Joseph C. Kingsbury and John Riggs, volunteered to march with Zion's Camp to Missouri, but they were counseled by the Prophet to remain in the East and were told they would receive the same blessings as those who participated in the march. (Journal History, October 10, 1864, p. 1.) One of the marchers, Dean C. Gould, traveled during part of the journey west as a nonmember on June 15, 1834, he was baptized by Lyman Wight in the Chariton River in Missouri. (HC 2:95.)
[^8] Journal History, October 28, 1842; October 29, 1842; October 31, 1842.
[^9] D&C 124:83.
[^10] HC 4:443-44; Times and Seasons 3 (November 15, 1841): 589. See also Artel Ricks, "Hyrum's Prophecy," Improvement Era 59 (May 1956): 305ff.
[^11] Times and Seasons 4 (August 1, 1842): 282-84.
[^12] Brigham Young to the "Brethren" (Kirtland Saints), January 21, 1845, photocopy, Church Archives. In October 1845, Brigham Young received a letter from Reuben McBride informing him that "apostates were doing everything they could to injure the Saints," that they had broken into the Lord's House and "taken possession of it," and that they were "trying to take possession of the Church farm." HC 7:484.
[^13] Times and Seasons 6 (April 15, 1845): 871-72.
[^14] Deseret News, December 13, 1851. The letter was dated August 7, 1851. Elder Bay also wrote that there were "quite a number of scattered Saints in Ohio, and most of them are willing to gather." In 1846, Henry Howe, a non-Mormon writer, visited Kirtland and wrote that after the Mormons left, "most of the dwellings went to decay, and it now has somewhat the appearance of a depopulated and broken down place." Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio (1847), p. 282. See also Bitton, "The Waning of Mormon Kirtland," pp. 459-63.
[^15] HC 7:484; Fields, "History of the Kirtland Temple," p. 93; History of Geauga and Lake Counties, pp. 39-40; Howe, Historical Collections of Ohio, p. 282. In 1847 apostates held several conferences in the temple. See The Ensign of Liberty of the Church of Christ 1 (1847): 1, 14.
[^16] Ricks, "Hyrum's Prophecy," p. 340; Richard W. Young, "In the Wake of the Church," Contributor 4 (December 1882): 106-8.
[^17] According to Paul E. Reimann, the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints secured title to the property through adverse possession. See Paul E. Reimann, The Reorganized Church and the Civil Courts, and Clarence L. Fields, "History of the Kirtland Temple," pp. 89-101.
[^18] Ricks, "Hyrum's Prophecy," p. 340.
[^19] Richard W. Young, "In the Wake of the Church," p. 108.
[^20] Autobiography of Jesse Wentworth Crosby, pp. 5-6.
