John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 2

NEED OF HEALTH INFORMATION

"All things which come of the earth, in the season thereof, are made for the benefit and use of man, both to please the eye and to gladden the heart; yea for food and raiment, for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul." [^1]

Present Health Conditions. The preservation of human health has not been forgotten by the scientific explorers of the present day. Now as never before the conditions that determine health and disease are understood. The length of human life has been extended, and information is available for maintaining health while life lasts.

Nevertheless, while science has conquered many a dread disease, the death rates from others are rising. Before them, at present, humanity stands powerless. Infectious diseases are diminishing; chronic or degenerative diseases are increasing. The death rate in infancy is decreasing, but the death rate in later life is increasing. Cancer, heart disease, stomach ulcers, and diabetes are increasing in civilized countries at an alarming rate. The rich and educated are as susceptible as those whose finances demand a low output for food.

AVERAGE DEATH RATES FROM FIVE CAUSES IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PER 100,000 OF POPULATION--1900-1934 [^2]

1900-04 1910-14 1920-24 1930-34 Typhoid .............. 26.7 14.0 4.2 1.7 Tuberculosis .........162.2 127.5 80.5 53.6 Cancer ............... 67.5 86.2 103.6 118.5 Diabetes Mellitus .... 12.2 18.2 21.4 25.5 Diseases of the Heart. 47.4 182.9 207.5 244.5

The preceding table confirms these statements. In the United States of America, from 1900 to 1934, the deaths from typhoid and tuberculosis have been steadily decreasing, while deaths from cancer, diabetes and heart diseases have been as steadily increasing. This is one of the most serious problems confronting the civilized world.

Poor Nutrition as a Cause. This condition is the effect of many causes. One of the most potent is the failure to observe the recent findings of science in the field of nutrition; for as we eat so is the composition of the blood stream, the nature-provided healing agent of the body. The world could with much profit consider its dietary habits and mistakes.

While the science of foods in its relation to health and disease may be said to be in its infancy, yet, in laboratories over the world, it is advancing, and enough truth has been discovered to make everyone conscious of the relation which exists between daily food and the health enjoyed or the ill health that follows broken laws.

Some of the most prominent workers in this field hold that the American diet as a whole, as well as that of most civilized nations today, is not as wholesome as it was two generations ago. Too much of the modern food supply comes from tin cans or packages, for often women as well as men work in factories and offices, and the can opener is coming to be the most used kitchen implement. Certain classes of our so-called civilized people, who in this "machine age" are industrially rather than agriculturally minded, have come to subsist in large measure upon a diet of soft, highly refined and concentrated foods, a diet which is often predominantly acid-forming, lacking in fiber or residue and poor in mineral salts and vitamins. A typical modern diet of meat, white bread, refined cereals, potatoes and sweets, crowding milk, fruits and vegetables to a minimum, is especially likely to be deficient in calcium (and other minerals), roughage and vitamins. The results are unquestionably bad.

Constipation has become a "national complaint", while colitis, appendicitis, poor bone development and tooth decay and the more serious diseases already mentioned are increasing. Underweight (or overweight), nervous irritability, poor digestion, general weakness and lowered vitality are regarded to be other signs of malnourished tissues which are becoming more frequent due to unbalanced food and other imperfect health habits.

The question is not wholly one of length of life, but one as well of good health while life endures. Undoubtedly, the ill effects to be expected from wrong dietetic habits reduce the joy of living and drive many to the use of artificial, injurious stimulants.

"A report on diets in the Proceedings of the Mayo Clinic (Barborka) of August, 1931, states that 'the American diet contains a large proportion of concentrated foods low in vitamins, residue and alkaline minerals, and high in carbohydrates and acid minerals. Such a diet lacking certain protective foods, a term applied to milk, eggs and fresh leafy vegetables, conduces to an early advent of degenerative diseases. Not only is this true, but diet each day bears evidence of its immediate influence on the emotions and nature of individuals.'" [^3]

On the other hand there is some improvement, for the use of more milk, vegetables and fruits is now being encouraged. An increased consumption of citrus fruits is being made possible by improved transportation facilities. Yet there remains too much underweight and illness among children, with overweight, frequent colds and other illnesses among adults. The campaign for good health must not be relaxed.

There is a growing concensus of belief among professional as well as lay members of society that faulty nutrition is a contributing factor in many of the diseases that plague civilization. It has come to be believed that degenerative diseases do not attack healthy tissues. That is, predisposing conditions precede disease. The problem of health then becomes a matter of prevention by keeping the bloodstream, the natural health-provoking agent of the body, of the correct composition. This implies the intake of suitable food as a major factor of health. Reliable observations indicate that the prevention of cancer may possibly be found through a more natural diet, such as is set forth in the Word of Wisdom. Dr. Hindhede, famous nutritionist of Denmark, in a careful study of this subject concludes that:

"The most frequent and dangerous form of cancer, that of the stomach and alimentary canal, may be due to a wrong diet, which irritates the muccus membrane, leads to catarrh and possibly later to cancer . . . the use of vegetables instead of meat, of natural instead of refined food reduces the chances of stomach and intestinal cancer." [^4]

It is a notable, well-attested observation that primitive peoples are largely freed from the diseases that trouble civilized man most. These matters are being subjected to the scrutiny of science and as new light comes the prejudices and superstitions of the past will be overcome.

Health Among the Latter-day Saints. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has had since 1833 a health code called the Word of Wisdom, dealing primarily with nutrition. Alcohol, tobacco, tea and coffee are to be eschewed, meat is to be eaten sparingly, and grains, fruits and vegetables are to be used liberally. Many members of the Church have obeyed, in part at least, the injunctions of this health code. Even the partial observance of the Word of Wisdom has affected notably and favorably the comparative health status of the Latter-day Saints, as indicated by the following table.

COMPARATIVE DEATH RATES PER 100,000 (1926-1927)

Six Nations Latter-day Saints Tuberculosis.................................... 120 9 Cancer............................................ 119 47 Diseases of the Nervous System........ 123 52 Diseases of the Circulatory System (heart)............................. 196 115 Diseases of the Respiratory System (pneumonia)..................... 167 105 Diseases of the Digestive System....... 73 56 Kidney and Kindred Diseases (Nephritis)....................... 44 23 Maternity (per 1,000 births)............. 45 10

It is seen at a glance that the health rating of the Latter-day Saints far exceeds that of the nations listed.

Excellent as it is, it is none too good considering the possibilities of good health offered by the Word of Wisdom. Moreover it must be observed that Latter-day Saint vital statistics indicate danger signals that should be heeded. Deaths from typhoid and tuberculosis have been reduced greatly since 1914, when full vital records were first made by the Church, but the death rate from diabetes has decreased only slightly, and cancer and heart diseases have definitely increased. These statements are confirmed by the data of the following table:

AVERAGE DEATH RATE FROM FIVE CAUSES AMONG

THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS, PER 100,000 OF

POPULATION—1914-1934 [^5]

1914-16 1924-26 1932-34

Typhoid .......................... 13.4 6.4 2.2

Tuberculosis ..................... 11.6 9.1 7.0

Cancer ........................... 31.3 40.9 49.8

Diabetes Mellitus ................ 11.6 9.2 8.2

Diseases of the Heart ............ 82.4 80.6 113.3

Why Not Better Latter-day Saint Health? The environment of the majority of the Latter-day Saints is favorable. Many live in mountain valleys where the climate is invigorating, the water pure, and in the larger centers the care of conscientious medical men and Boards of Health is available. In addition they possess a religion or life philosophy which not only answers the deep questions of life and keeps them spiritually active, but which also tends to make them socially equal and economically secure—all of which make for contentment in life and peace with men and God. Such a condition of mind is always conducive to physical health and well-being. It may be asked, however, why, under such a healthful environment, the percentage of deaths from the diseases enumerated should be even as high as shown in the above table. The answer is obvious: It is evident that the people of the Church are not observing fully all the factors of health as given in the Word of Wisdom, else they would have an even greater immunity from all diseases.

Since the diseases which take most lives among the Latter-day Saints have distinct nutritional relationships, it is safe to conclude that the dietary life habits of the people are at least partly at fault. One can not say that to refrain from smoking and from drinking tea, coffee or alcohol is to keep fully the Word of Wisdom. That is a big step toward maintaining health but it is not full obedience to the law. The many "do's" in the inspired document are as important as the "don't's". Unquestionably, the Word of Wisdom is not lived completely or the people would receive a greater fullness of the promised reward—a long life of physical health, while the destroying angel of sickness and death would pass by and not slay them.

Cumulative Effects. It must not be overlooked that the mistakes of living have a cumulative effect. Daily errors may not be noticed at the time they are committed but they finally break down the resistance of the body and allow disease to take possession. The errors of youth must often be paid for in later years. Therefore, those who have disobeyed the laws of health in childhood and youth, whether ignorantly or wilfully, must seek with redoubled care, to preserve their health during maturity. Likewise, to make most certain of a joyous life, obedience to the laws of health must begin in the earliest years and continue throughout life. Men may break the laws of health for years yet seem to feel no ill effects, but sooner or later the penalty must be paid by them and too often by their progeny. Nature has no favorites.

It is understood that human appetites are tyrants and difficult to vanquish. That to which the taste is accustomed creates an imperative desire. Therefore, many fail to observe any substantial portion of the Word of Wisdom, and others observe it only in part. There can be no progress except as the will is directed towards obedience to law. The results already attained, as shown in the preceding table, and in chapter 18, indicate that greater health may be secured by observing this divine law.

Economics of Health. The economic side of this problem must also be kept in view. Men in indifferent health cannot work as efficiently as those who are in full possession of their powers. The equivalent of billions of dollars is lost annually because men and women are not able to work or to do their work well. When the loss to the country from every premature death is added, the total is increased greatly. Aside from such losses, the actual cost of caring for the sick is enormous. The Committee on the Costs of Medical Care in 1932 reports that the United States spent in that year $3,600,000,000 for medical and dental care, more than was spent for recreation or education. [^6]

To these losses must be added the actual waste of money, running into billions of dollars, when things injurious to the body such as alcohol, tobacco, coffee and tea are bought. Add together the monetary equivalent of the loss of man power due to ill health and premature death, the cost of caring for the sick, and the money wasted for substances not only useless but injurious to the body, and a staggering total is reached. The national debt could be wiped off quickly if the laws of health were fully understood and obeyed. This economic phase of the Word of Wisdom has been repeatedly stated by President Grant in public and private addresses. For example:

"I believe that if every dollar of money that is expended in Utah for liquor and for beer, tea, coffee and tobacco, were saved, Utah would need no help from the United States government to take care of the poor, but that peace, prosperity, happiness and abundance would be given to the people of our fair state, and of every other state in the Union. If in addition we observed the suggestion by the Lord, which is a very wise one, that once a month we refrain from eating two meals, which would be physically beneficial to every living soul, and give the equivalent to help those who are poor it would go far towards solving our financial problems." [^7]

A close and careful study of the Word of Wisdom in the light of the modern knowledge of nutrition—really the study of health maintenance and resistance to disease—is of prime importance, and should engage the thoughtful attention of all people, especially of those responsible in the home for the food supply. Knowledge and the use of knowledge give health and power.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Dublin and Lotka, Length of Life, 1936.

Fisher, I., and Fisk, E. L., How to Live, 1931.

Lane, Sir W. A., The Prevention of Diseases Peculiar to Civilization, 1929.

Lane, Sir W. A., Blazing the Health Trail, 1929.

Lane, Sir W. A., Secrets of Good Health, 1928.

League of Nations, International Health Year Book, 1928.

Nethersole, O., The Importance of Diet in Relation to Health, 1926.

U. S. Health Service Publications.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:1-3.
[^2] History of the Church, Vol. II, p. 482.
[^3] History of the Church, Vol. II, pp. 34-35.
[^4] Far West Record, p. 111.
[^5] Discourses, pp. 283-284.
[^6] Improvement Era, Vol. 40, p. 665.
[^7] Conference Report, October, 1933, p. 9.
