John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 3

"THE ORDER AND WILL OF GOD"

"A Word of Wisdom, for the benefit of the council of high priests, assembled in Kirtland, and the church, and also the saints in Zion—to be sent greeting; not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God in the temporal salvation of all saints in the last days—given for a principle with promise, adapted to the capacity of the weak and the weakest of all saints, who are or can be called saints." [^1]

Historical. The revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was received by the Prophet Joseph Smith on February 27, 1833, when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was not quite three years old. The young Prophet had received revelations from time to time, as occasion demanded, for the building and guidance of the Church that he had been commissioned to restore.

According to the custom of the day, a number of the early converts to the Church were users of tobacco. In fact, several who had been called into the higher councils of the Church had the tobacco habit. Some were accustomed also to the use of alcoholic beverages, chiefly such as were brewed by the people of the "pioneer fringe". There was little or no drunkenness. Coffee and tea were favorite family drinks when they could be secured. In the use of alcohol, tobacco, tea and coffee the early Church members were much like their pioneer neighbors, perhaps more temperate.

These habits did not seem to the Prophet to comport with the sacred nature of the work entrusted to and accepted by the Church. Especially did it seem out of keeping with the spirit of the occasion to have the odor of tobacco in the council rooms of the Priesthood. This was aggravated when, as occasionally happened, a tobacco chewer brought his "cud" into the council chamber. That explains the reference to the "council of high priests" in verse one of the revelation. It was the use of tobacco by this body of Priesthood that brought the matter to a head.

The practice of the Prophet was to lay before the Lord all questions that arose, and await answers. Such an appeal was made with respect to tobacco, and in due time the revelation called the Word of Wisdom was received. The inquiry may have been confined to tobacco; the response covered the whole field of food and drink. It was often so. A simple question was the beginning of a vast unfolding of truth.

While the inquiry was occasioned by experiences among the "council of high priests, assembled in Kirtland" and the answer directed in part to them, the revelation was also for "the church and the saints in Zion" and "all saints, who are or can be called saints," that is, for the Church everywhere. It was so interpreted by Joseph Smith and has been so taught by his successors.

A Law of the Church. The words, "to be sent greeting, not by commandment or constraint, but by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and will of God", have led to much discussion, chiefly by those who do not conform in their habits to the principles laid down in the Word of Wisdom.

Mankind is never compelled or "constrained" to accept or obey the words that come from the Lord. Man's free agency should ever be respected. That is the fundamental principle of human action; it is stated or implied in every divine communication. In the Word of Wisdom it is but stated more boldly. Even when the Lord says, "I command", it is a statement of cause and effect. Unless obedience is yielded, certain rewards are forfeited.

Moreover, this forthright statement was a protection to Joseph Smith. The Word of Wisdom enters into personal daily habits, always difficult to change. The Lord was supposed in those days, as frequently in our day, to confine Himself to spiritual matters. It might have been thought by those weak in the faith that Joseph's personal predilections lay at the bottom of the new order, and that he was using his high office in the Church to interfere (command and constrain) with matters that were beyond his jurisdiction. As far as he was concerned, it was "to be sent greeting", as are all the commandments of the Lord.

The words that follow clear up the question fully. It was given "by revelation and the word of wisdom, showing forth the order and the will of God." It came by "revelation" and not because of the likes or dislikes of the Prophet. Whatever is "the will of God", men are required to do, if they wish full salvation. The Word of Wisdom is the will of God, hence binding upon all who desire to show full obedience to the principles of the plan of the Lord for human welfare. God's human children may accept or reject the truths of the Word of Wisdom—it is their privilege—but they lose by disobedience the blessings promised the obedient.

Whether the Word of Wisdom is a law of the Church or merely a kindly suggestion was discussed soon after the revelation was received. The history of the Church shows clearly that it has been regarded as a law by all of the sustained leaders of the Church. In the early days of the church, men were suspended from office because they were breakers of the Word of Wisdom; others were excommunicated because of continued disregard of the Lord's law of health. [^2] At a High Council meeting held on February 20, 1834, under the presidency of Joseph Smith, Orson Hyde and Oliver Cowdery being clerks, it was decided that "No official member is worthy to hold an office after having the Word of Wisdom properly taught him and he, the official member, neglecting to comply with or obey." [^3] On April 8, 1838, President Joseph Smith, Jr. spoke on the Word of Wisdom, giving the reason for its coming forth, saying it should be observed. [^4] At a general meeting of the Church, called by the First Presidency, held at Far West on May 28th, 1837, at which were present representatives of the Apostles, Seventies, and Presiding Bishopric, was enacted a resolution which reads:

"Resolved unanimously that we will not fellowship any ordained member who will not, or does not, observe the Word of Wisdom according to its literal reading." [^5]

President Brigham Young said,

"I know that some say it [the Word of Wisdom] is not given by way of commandment. Very well, but we are commanded to observe every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. . . . I now again request the authorities of this church . . . to sever from this society those who will not cease getting drunk." [^6]

At the October, 1937, General Conference, President Heber J. Grant spoke as follows:

"We expect all the General Officers of the Church, each and every one of them, from this very day, to be absolute, full-tithepayers, to really and truly observe the Word of Wisdom; and we ask all of the officers of the Church and all members of the General Boards, and all Stake and Ward officers, if they are not living the Gospel and honestly and conscientiously paying their tithing, to kindly step aside, unless from this day they live up to these provisions.

"No Latter-day Saint is entitled to anything that is contrary to the mind and will of the Lord, and the Word of Wisdom is the mind and the will of the Lord." [^7]

A Principle with a Promise. In common with all other laws of the Lord, obedience to the Word of Wisdom brings certain rewards. It is for the "benefit" of the people.

Special reference is made in verse two to the value of this law in the "temporal salvation of all saints in the last days". Clearly, a healthy body permits a person to perform his "temporal" labors more effectively. Moreover, in these days of keen competition, the man who complies with the Word of Wisdom, and thereby wins greater physical stamina, and saves the money others expend for alcohol, tobacco, and habit-forming drinks, has a decided "temporal" advantage. (see chapters 2 and 18)

President Heber J. Grant said in the General Conference of the Church in October, 1933:

"Do you want to know how to obtain temporal salvation? Not only the Latter-day Saints, but all the world would have the solution of that problem if there were no tea, coffee, liquor nor tobacco used in the world. Peace, prosperity and happiness would come to the entire world." [^8]

Adapted to the Capacity of the Weak. Conformity to the Word of Wisdom brings quick results in improved health of body and in increased spiritual power. It should not therefore be difficult to obey.

Bad habits are persistent enemies. Those of the body clamor for attention; yet once overcome they remain silent. Conquest of self may always be accomplished if the will is born of strong enough desire. The training of the will is the beginning of personal power; and such training is always initiated by sincere, continuous desire.

Obedience to the positive aspects of the Word of Wisdom have the effect of increasing bodily health, thereby reducing the taste for the things warned against in the negative division. Thus there lies within the Word of Wisdom itself the means of full obedience to it. It may be that in some such sense the Word of Wisdom is adapted "to the capacity of the weak and the weakest".

However, there is a larger view. The successful life is ever training its will in obedience to principles of truth. These principles are of a temporal and a spiritual nature. In the last analysis spiritual laws are more difficult to obey than temporal ones, but the blessings enjoyed are increasingly greater. In that sense the Word of Wisdom is adapted to the capacity of the weakest of all saints, "who can be called saints". A person who cannot obey a temporal law, such as the Word of Wisdom, seldom can obey spiritual laws, which reach more profoundly into the nature of man. That is, those who are living the high spiritual laws of the Gospel, true saints, must have achieved sufficient desire and power of will to obey the temporal commandment known as the Word of Wisdom. Unless they have done so, the spiritual integrity of such persons may be called into question.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:4.
[^2] Herring, E. P., Public Administration and the Public Interest, chapter 14.
[^3] Life, March 13, 1937, p. 13.
[^4] Far West Record, p. 111.
[^5] Discourses, pp. 283-284.
[^6] Improvement Era, Vol. 40, p. 665.
[^7] Conference Report, October, 1933, p. 9.
[^8] 7. Compiled from records in the office of the Presiding Bishopric.
