John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 4

"EVILS AND DESIGNS"

"In consequence of evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men in the last days, I have warned you, and forewarn you, by giving unto you this word of wisdom by revelation—" [^1]

A Word of Warning. The special reason for giving the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom is set forth in the above quotation. Due to evil-minded persons, mankind may be led away from the natural mode of living which insures good health and happiness. That is, innocent persons may often be misled by those of evil designs to do things injurious to health. The Word of Wisdom is therefore a warning as well as a guide. This is of especial importance in our day.

The Progress of Fraud. Fraud and deceit have been practiced since the beginning of history. The ancient Egyptians bought expensive hair restorers made chiefly of date refuse; and we of this day pay a ten-fold price for flavored chalk labeled fancifully as a magic tooth powder. Brass has been called gold; glass has been sold as diamonds; and poison has been hawked as excellent food. The story of fraud throughout the ages forms an ugly chapter of human history.

Those who practice fraud are evil-minded, a menace to society, whose subtle designs are against the welfare of their fellowmen. Without hesitation they deliberately and knowingly sacrifice others to secure their own purposes. They are impelled by insatiable, merciless selfishness and greed. Avarice is their god. They gloat over their profits as their dupes lose money, health and often life. They frequently "conspire" together to accomplish their "designs". They are many times more dangerous than the open enemy.

In earlier days the methods of fraud were simple, often crude. Knowledge was limited, and the people were not generally enlightened. The appeal was often to ignorance and superstition. In this latest day of advancing science when men are more generally educated, fraud has been compelled to employ more refined methods. Fraud now uses the best knowledge of the day, and clothes its wolfish nature with a lamblike vesture of apparent truth, therefore its dangers have been multiplied in recent years.

Many observing men have recognized this evergrowing evil. As early as 1879, a bill was introduced in the United States Congress to protect the public against food and drug adulteration, but it was defeated through the efforts of the powerful combinations of men whose financial interests were involved. Repeatedly, the bill was introduced and rejected. Not until 1906 did it become law, and legal weapons secured to control partially the monstrous evil of fraud. Since that time fraud has been concerned, often successfully, in circumventing the law. Attempts to secure legislation to improve and strengthen the law have so far failed. So-called "pressure groups" are well organized and ever alert to protect those whose finances are involved, while the consumers are unorganized and unprotected. [^2] Pure food and drug laws have been passed within the last generation by most civilized countries; but the difficulties encountered there are much like those of the United States. Fraud continues to prosper exceedingly.

At times, informed groups of private citizens have taken up arms against fraudulent offerings and advertising. Such helps to the efforts of the Government and the resulting publicity have checked temporarily this or that violation of the law, but another crop of frauds under other disguises has soon followed and flourished until the organization of another reform campaign.

The warning against fraud, particularly with reference to the materials mentioned in the Word of Wisdom, is greatly needed today, when wicked men have at their command the resources of science and the glare of modern advertising with which to connive against the welfare of man.

Adulterations. With the advent of new knowledge, the means of adulteration have been multiplied, and a great variety of dishonest commodities, many injurious, now appear on the market.

Formerly, simple forms of adulteration were common. White, inert matter, gypsum perhaps, was added to flour, or potatoes were soaked in water, to increase weight, or water was added to milk to increase the volume. Today, such easily detected attempts at deceit are seldom made. More subtle adulterations, much more difficult to trace, are now employed. An elusive chemical adulterates Jamaica ginger; olive oil is blended with a cheaper oil and offered as pure olive oil; a gelatin consists largely of glue; glucose is mixed with a trifle of honey and sold as pure honey; "maple syrup" is often chiefly a solution of cane or beet sugar artificially colored and flavored; and a strawberry jam may contain an insignificant amount of strawberries.

Another phase of modern food adulteration is the attempt to make an inferior article so attractive in looks that it may be sold at a first-class price. For example, old meat is made to acquire a fresh red color by the use of sodium sulphite, a substance injurious to man; tomato paste made chiefly of materials other than tomatoes is colored and flavored to resemble the real article; canned goods with brilliant labels bear no relationship in price to quality.

A menace to health is the use of preservatives to prevent the decomposition of perishable substances, meats or vegetables. Formaldehyde, salicylic acid and boric acid, injurious to the body, formerly in common use, are now, under legal pressure, seldom used as preservatives; but benzoate of soda and sulphur dioxide gas, banned in some countries, are still employed in America. While the quantity used may be small, yet no doubt it endangers human health; for as one author has aptly said, "Whatever will kill bacterial protoplasm will kill human protoplasm".

A distorted public taste frequently leads to food treatments of possible danger to the consumer. In answer to utterly foolish demands by the public, the naturally slightly yellow wheat flour is bleached snow white by chlorine, nitrogen trioxide or other distinctly harmful agents; dried fruits, naturally discolored by sun and air in the process of drying, are bleached with sulphur dioxide gas; ketchup and a variety of other condiments and soda water drinks are usually colored with coal-tar dyes, many of which are causes of disease. [^3] Little of the bleaching or coloring agent may remain in the food or drink, but that which does remain injures health, especially in cases where the effects are cumulative.

It is moral depravity that makes it possible for a manufacturer to place the meats of diseased animals on the market, or to can putrifying materials for public consumption. Yet this is often done, and the unsuspecting purchaser wastes his money and invites disease.

A dangerous variation of food adulteration is the production of candies, gum, crackers and bread mixed with drugs or bacteria, supposed to relieve some disorder of the human body.

An unpremeditated food adulteration is the small deposit of arsenic and lead salts on apples and other fruits that have been sprayed with these substances for the control of orchard pests. Legal regulation has compelled safer and more moderate types of spraying, especially in Europe and some states in America. Meanwhile, all consumers should make it a practice to wash thoroughly all fruit before it is eaten.

It is of course elementary dishonesty more injurious to the purse than to health that leads to selling milk of the same character at different prices by labeling one "Grade A" and the other "Grade B"; or canning or drying inferior meat, fish, eggs or vegetables and selling them as first class articles.

The public should also be informed concerning cosmetics and toilet articles used so extensively by women. Many of these contain dangerous, often poisonous substances, which have led to pitiful injury, even death.

Human suffering beyond computation has followed the various forms of food adulteration above mentioned, and there are hundreds of others. The whole story, written by man's love of gold, is revolting to the last degree.

A mass of recent literature sets forth the present status and menace to man of food adulteration.

Agencies exist to inform the public on these important matters. Foremost among them are the U. S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C., and the American Medical Association, Chicago, Illinois. A letter of inquiry to these agencies regarding any product will bring an honest reply. Support should be given to state and local boards of health which to some degree protect the consumer against frauds in foods. The Consumers' Research Corporation in Washington, D. C., is also giving good help in the battle against dishonest methods.

The best protection against food fraud is to use natural foods and food products, even though the cost may seem higher.

False Advertising. Governmental supervision is making it more difficult to practice food adulteration. The attention of producers has been directed therefore to methods by which increased sales may be won for their products. Driven by competition, greed and avarice, men have resorted to fraudulent advertising almost as foul as direct adulteration.

By law the label on a bottle, can, or package must show the presence, if any, of an adulterant or injurious substance. To circumvent this requirement and to deceive the public, the notation of the adulterant is often printed in very small letters, sometimes difficult to decipher with normal eyes, while the wholesome ingredients are printed in type so large as to shout from the shelf to the customer. Many an unwary person is led by this device to the use of unwholesome or adulterated foods or drinks.

A more prevalent method of false advertising is to print the truth on the label as required by law, and then on a wrapper to distort the truth by printing all the imaginary properties and virtues of the article in question. The same distorted truths may be told over the radio, for there is no present law to control satisfactorily this means of advertising.

Another method is to print on the package or loaf—of a wheat product for example—that the whole wheat kernel is used, that neither the bran nor the germ (containing the minerals and vitamins) have been removed; but it does not state that in the process of preparation the vitamins have been destroyed. While a part of the truth is told, the deceived purchaser thinks that he is buying a vitamin-rich product.

A contemptible deception is to place false bottoms in containers, making the quantity contained look larger than it really is; or to fill the container so loosely as to have the same effect. Bottles are frequently made with sunken bottoms and sides, thus made to look larger than they really are.

Deceiving titles of probably wholesome food products are commonly employed. A can containing cheap fish is labeled "white meat fish"; a bottle labeled "salad bouquet" contains a cheap kind of vinegar; a peanut spread is a mixture of peanut butter and starch; chicken and noodles are chiefly noodles and water. Such misleading names are used, apparently, in the hope that the purchaser may think the fish to be an expensive variety, the salad bouquet to be cider vinegar, the peanut spread to be true peanut butter, and the can of chicken and noodles to be filled with chicken. A long list of such articles is on the market. This type of fraud, while perhaps not injurious to health, does improperly divert money from the consumer to the producer.

Misinformation concerning food products becomes most dangerous when concerned with the effects upon the body. Producers point out, irrespective of the facts in the case, the virtues of their product in healing disease or maintaining health. Desire for such a perfect product is engendered in the reader. The product becomes popular. The commonest of articles are thus "boosted" by misleading statements. Bread may be advertised to make a person fat or thin; honey to contain elements that practically insure against old age; canned foods to be superior to fresh meats and vegetables; radio-active waters to bring youth back to age; grape juice to supply every element missing in the blood; a weak chocolate, under a fancy name, to banish sleeplessness; alcohol to give joy to life; tobacco to promote digestion and to soothe nerves when great work is to be done; coffee and tea to be less harmful to the body than clear mountain water; an inferior quality to be in reality a superior one. Such deliberately dishonest statements, distorting scientific facts, are spread broadcast over the land by printed page and radio until many people come to believe them.

The means used in this improper propaganda are many. The mails are used widely. Most persons receive unsolicited literature recounting the merits of this or that article of food or drink. Billboard advertising is extensive. The radio and the motion picture are being used more and more. Advertising in newspapers and magazines is, however, the most widely used means of spreading false as well as true propaganda. Indeed, the American advertising bill is enormous. A few years ago it exceeded one billion dollars; today it is no doubt larger. To give a few examples: one food firm spent four million dollars annually for advertising in periodicals; one breakfast food manufacturer alone spent one million dollars; three tobacco firms spent during the first six months of 1937 nearly six millions of dollars in magazine and radio advertising. The money spent for education and medical care is small compared with the vast sum spent for advertising unnecessary or harmful commodities on the modern market. In the end the consumers pay these huge bills.

The statements made in many of these advertisements are misleading or fraudulent, but are within the law. Nevertheless, a manufacturer who stoops to mislead the public cannot expect to be classed with honest men.

Any intelligent person who will sit down for a few hours to study the current advertisements of foods and beverages will discover the fraud that runs through many of them. Only honest advertisers should be patronized. Pressure from advertisers frequently masks the true feelings of periodicals towards fraud.

Making Use of Fads. The rapid increase and dissemination of knowledge have necessarily led to wide public interest in the application of man's new knowledge to human needs. Nutrition and matters of health have not escaped. The recent accession of facts concerning nutrition has sharpened interest in the relation between food and health, especially in view of the recognition of the fact that the science of nutrition is far from being complete.

Food fads and fancies have therefore multiplied. Some of these rest upon sound knowledge; many of them are worthless and dangerous. Systems proposed for preserving health and lengthening out life are innumerable. Here are some of them: use no meat; eat no vegetables; eat only fruit; pay attention only to vitamins; minerals are the only concern; eat very little, fast a great deal; drink nothing but grape juice; eat salads to reduce, eat salads to grow fat; etc., etc. Dried vegetables are mixed and sold as "mineral broth" at an exorbitant price, while ordinary senna leaves are mixed with other dried leaves, given a fanciful name, and sold as a famous natural laxative. Those engaged in fraud have taken advantage of such situations, and have undertaken advertising propaganda of some food fad for the purpose of popularizing their own products.

This kind of fraud has been and is very harmful, physiologically and economically, to the public at large.

Refined Foods. Modern knowledge has given man the power to refine his foods, until some of them may become very much changed from the natural conditions in which they are found. The common use of such refined, and in most cases concentrated foods, has at times, for want of adequate knowledge, led to injurious results. Occasionally, also, unscrupulous advertising, unmindful of the facts in the case, has increased the possible danger from the unwise use of refined, concentrated food products. (see chapters 12 and 13)

Since these foods are often advertised inaccurately, the subject comes properly under the warning given by the Word of Wisdom as quoted at the head of this chapter. The power of modern man to refine his foods is not an unmixed blessing. Public education and honest advertising are necessary here as elsewhere.

"Conspiring Men with Evils and Designs". All persons should inform themselves about the practice of fraud in their country. Before purchasing, one should be sure of the value of the article. Those known to be falsely labeled, or misrepresented by advertising, should be shunned as a matter of public service.

The American nation is fast becoming a people who eat out of packages and cans and drink out of bottles, thus furnishing the opportunity for unscrupulous persons to practice fraud upon their fellowmen.

The principles of the Word of Wisdom point securely to the safe and sane way to health through proper nutrition and the use of natural food products, without becoming subject to the attacks of frauds.

In view of the food frauds perpetrated upon the public, compelling legal action and continual supervision, the warning in the Word of Wisdom concerning evil and designing men who will conspire to harm their fellow men, is fully justified. Indeed, it is a prophetic utterance.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

American Medical Association Publications.

Fishbein, M., Fads and Quackery in Healing, 1932.

Harding, T. S., The Popular Practice of Fraud, 1935.

Jordan, E. O., Food Poisoning, 1931.

Kallet, A., Counterfeit, 1935.

Phillips, M. C., Skin Deep, 1934.

Schlinck, F. J., Eat, Drink and Be Wary, 1935.

Schlinck, F. J., and Chase, S., Your Money's Worth, 1927.

Schlinck, F. J., and Kallet, A., 100,000,000 Guinea Pigs, 1933.

U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bulletins of the Bureau of Chemistry.

U. S. Senate, Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics, Hearings on S. 1944, 1934.

U. S. Senate, Food, Drugs, and Cosmetics, 73rd Congress, Report 493, 1934.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:5, 7.
[^2] Evans, R. L., A Century of "Mormonism" in Great Britain, 1937, pp. 44-49, Deseret Book Company.
[^3] Weeks, C. C., Alcohol and Human Life, 1929, p. 63.
