John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 5

ALCOHOL

"That inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father, . . . and, again, strong drinks are not for the belly, but for the washing of your bodies." [^1]

Historical. Alcoholic drinks (those containing the substance ethyl alcohol. CH3CH2OH, commonly known as alcohol) have been used from time immemorial. In every land, wine and other forms of fermented liquors have been well known beverages. The warning of the Word of Wisdom is directed against one of the oldest human practices.

The recognition of the injurious effects of alcoholic drinks was not new in Joseph Smith's day. In almost every country, coincidentally with the record of the existence of alcohol, opposition to its use has been voiced. The Bible, from Noah to the later prophets, contains numerous references to the evil of drunkenness: "Do not drink wine nor strong drink." (Lev. 10:9); "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise." (Proverbs 20:1); "Wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps." (Deut. 32:33); "Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess." (Eph. 5:18).

Little progress had been made, at the time that the Word of Wisdom was given, in the scientific study of alcohol and its effects on man. However, through long and world-wide human experience many of the evil effects of wine and strong drinks were better understood than before. There was no difference of opinion among intelligent people concerning the excessive use of alcoholic drinks, with the attendant drunkenness, disease and squalor. Perhaps a majority were ready to admit that serious danger lurked even in the moderate use of alcohol. It was only to be expected therefore that the Word of Wisdom, a modern code of health, should speak out against this ancient and widespread evil.

The movements against alcohol, from antiquity to recent days, have fought valiantly for the suppression of this ancient and dangerous dietetic habit of man. Curiously enough, the modern organized effort to stamp out the liquor evil, under the advocacy of total abstinence, began about the time that the Word of Wisdom was received. This agitation culminated on September 1, 1832, in Preston, England, when total abstinence pledges were signed by seven persons. [^2] It was in the Preston Society also that the word "teetotalism" was coined. There is slight probability that the Prophet Joseph Smith knew anything of this activity.

At various times, legislation has attempted to regulate or eliminate the traffic in alcoholic liquors. While the results have not been all that was desired, yet much good has been accomplished. Manufacturers, who by improper means have encouraged the use of alcohol, have been forced by law into less activity, and there has been a general enlightenment concerning alcohol and its physiological, moral, and economic effects. A most notable episode in the history of alcohol was the prohibition experiment of the United States, which unfortunately was not allowed to go on long enough to secure reliable results.

The unqualified statement against alcohol in the Word of Wisdom was courageous, as it was spoken in the name of the Lord in a day of advancing and progressive science. Does the latest knowledge and most modern thought concerning the effects of alcohol on the human body confirm this phase of the Word of Wisdom?

The bitter controversy which has raged around the liquor question has had the good result of inspiring many careful research workers to study the effects of alcohol on the human body and mind. There is now a vast literature on the subject which has been compiled, collated and reduced to a reasonable compass for everybody's use. All such works must be read, however, with due reference to the likes and dislikes of the authors, for wherever differences are slight, conclusions are likely to favor the appetites of the writers. Yet, out of the labors of such trained investigators much has been learned upon which all now agree.

Consumption of Alcohol. It is very difficult, almost impossible, to secure full and correct facts regarding the consumption of alcohol. According to the annual report of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, the United States in 1936, consumed 286,316,731 gallons of distilled and rectified spirits and wine; 179,152,628 gallons of still and sparkling wines, and 1,657,985,984 gallons of beer, or a total of over two billions of gallons of alcoholic liquors. That meant per capita in 1936, 11.8 gallons of beer, .6 gallon of distilled liquors, and .3 gallon of wine were consumed, and the consumption is steadily rising. The approximate retail value of this quantity of intoxicating liquor approaches five billions of dollars. Clearly, the money now spent on alcoholic beverages would in a few years wipe out the national debt, and go far towards removing poverty from the land. The world's liquor bill shows how men and women by catering to unnatural appetites may bring disaster upon themselves and their loved ones. It is rather foolish to set up systems of political philosophy for the cure of economic and other ills, without including the correction of injurious habits such as those of alcohol, tobacco and the like.

Is Alcohol a Food? The advocates of drink claim as a favorite argument that alcohol is a food.

A food is a substance, that when taken into the body, builds, repairs and nourishes the tissues and cells of the body; provides heat and supplies energy for the processes of life. By this definition alcohol is not a food. It contains no nitrogen with which to rebuild or repair cell waste; no sugar, starch, mineral matters, fats or vitamins, all essential in maintaining the body in good health. It is true that alcohol taken in small quantities is removed from the body largely by combustion and that it does in that way supply some heat, but since it fails utterly to meet the other requirements of a food, and may even cause excessive loss of protein, and besides interferes as a narcotic with all normal functions of life, it cannot be classed as a food. [^3] Authoritative science is conclusive on that point. Besides, alcohol acts as an irritant to the organs of the body, predisposing them to disease, and it develops a vicious, compelling habit—things not done by a food.

Beer, which has been widely advertised as a liquid food, also fails to meet food requirements. Compared with a glass of milk, as is often done, beer shows its deficiencies.

"Milk contains a valuable nutritive fat (cream), beer none. Milk contains a large amount of useful and nutritive sugar; beer contains only a small amount of sugar, the rest of the carbohydrate being useless for purposes of nutrition. Beer contains about one-fourteenth of the protein found in milk, and even much of this is, to say the least, of very doubtful nutritive value. Milk, unless it has been contaminated through neglect and carelessness, contains no poison; beer contains a powerful poison, alcohol. Then again, milk contains valuable vitamins; beer contains none, or practically so." [^4]

The best that can be said about beer, as about certain weak wines, is that the percentage of alcohol in it is smaller (from 2.5% to 6.5%) than in the so-called strong drinks; but the continual use of even small doses of alcohol has been shown to produce harmful results.

Neither wine (often containing 12% of alcohol), beer (about 3.5% of alcohol), nor a distilled liquor (more than 50% of alcohol) has true food value. To claim that alcohol in any form is a food betrays, in this enlightened day, gross ignorance or a purpose to deceive.

All these statements have been confirmed by many careful experiments. Alcohol is not a food; it is a poison, a powerful drug which exerts a marked effect upon many of the organs of the body. The desire for alcoholic drink is not a result of a normal need, but of an acquired appetite. By frequent use this appetite too often becomes the master of the will.

Temperate Use of Alcohol. Is there such a thing? No one argues for drunkenness. Its ugly brood are too evident. The question among intelligent people has always been as to the effect of the moderate indulgence in alcoholic beverages. This matter has been put to frequent experimental test, with results definitely against the use of alcohol in even small amounts. Since human beings react to small doses of alcohol, the effect upon the body and mind is merely one of degree. This has been shown to be so by numerous experiments. It has been wisely said that "a man under the influence of even small doses of alcoholic liquor becomes an altered individual—always altered for the worse."

Alcohol and the Mental Faculties. Alcohol acts as a narcotic upon the brain. That is, it depresses or benumbs mental activities. The drinker seems to gain a feeling of well-being while under the influence of alcohol, even in small amounts. He feels himself freed from the anxieties and bonds placed upon him by the obligations of life. He rises in self-importance; his moral vision is blurred. If alcohol is used intemperately he moves into forgetfulness; all his mental faculties are impaired—he is "drunk". When he recovers he craves the experience again; the habit grows upon him, and before he is aware, it is his master. Only with the greatest effort can the habit be overcome—and only too often it is never overcome.

The higher brain centers, the voluntary and most intelligent, are paralyzed by alcohol, leaving the lower centers uncontrolled, which, no longer restrained, often run riot. The ship has lost its captain. That is the most familiar fact in connection with the use of alcohol. This loss of control has been shown to extend from the moral field into that of involuntary body movements, even under the influence of from two to three glasses of the lightest beer on the market.

The impairment of the higher mental faculties, occasioned often by as little as one glass of light beer, is of first concern. The moderate drinker suffers a weakening of his perceptive faculties, such as seeing and recognizing signals; or acting promptly under set regulations. The power of memory is likewise diminished; in one experiment nearly one-fifth of the usual memorizing power was lost under the influence of little more than one glass of beer. The ability to give close, steady attention to any subject in hand, to concentrate upon it, is lowered greatly under the influence of a glass or more of beer. The learning process is slowed up when alcohol is in the system. The average school standing of abstainers, if otherwise alike, is always highest. A diminution of mental alertness and keenness is the price paid for alcoholic indulgence, however slight. Since lapses of memory or consciousness are common, the victims, when they recover, are usually unable to remember what has happened. Clearly, such conditions are not only hurtful to the individual but dangerous to society. Our day needs clear brains.

The words of an eminent psychologist, Dr. Hugo Munsterberg, himself a moderate user of alcoholic beverages, are notable:

"If I were to take a glass of beer now in the morning, I should certainly be unable to write the next page of this essay with the same ease. The ideas would flow more slowly,—of course, alcohol before serious, intellectual work disturbs one—psychologically the case stands thus: Alcohol has indeed an inhibitory influence on mind and body. The feeling of excitement, the greater ease of motor impulse, the feeling of strength and joy, the forgetting of sorrow and pain—all are at bottom the result of inhibitions; impulses are let free because the checking centers are inhibited." [^5]

But after this cool analysis of the effect of alcohol, he proceeds to argue for its moderate use when the day's work is done! He ignores the natural way to refreshment, renewed vigor and happiness. It shows the effect of an unnatural appetite, habit, even on a trained mind.

No one can rationally argue that constant interference with the higher mental faculties, from the moderate use of alcohol, can benefit the brain and nervous system. The effect is clearly deleterious. The mind naturally weakens under the repeated influences of alcohol and often becomes diseased.

Dr. F. R. Mott, British mental specialist, declares that in his opinion, alcoholic intoxication is insanity in miniature. In fact, drunkenness often leads to insanity. The U. S. Census for 1910 shows that of all admissions to mental hospitals, 10.1% were due to alcohol, and of the males admitted, 15.3%.

Alcohol and Physical Fitness. The disorders of the brain, occasioned by moderate drinking, necessarily affect all bodily activities, for all are under the control and direction of man's mental organization.

One of the commonest observations in connection with drunkenness is the lack of coordination between the brain and the body, resulting in clumsiness. The fumbling of a drunken man with the key and the lock is the most familiar illustration. A drunken man cannot thread a needle. Such lack of muscular control is carried into all the operations of life. Under the influence of alcohol, though only a glass of wine or beer is used, the speed of the typist is diminished and errors increased; and the accuracy of the mechanic and all skilled workmen reduced. The unsteady hand, slow judgment and confused head are effects of alcohol, which more and more disqualify men and women for trustworthy positions and expected promotions.

Fatigue and hardship are endured best by abstainers. The safest automobile drivers are those who do not drink alcohol. The aviator who drinks does the poorest work. During the Great War it was demonstrated that non-drinking pilots could last at the front twice as long as drinkers.

Alcohol is an enemy to success in athletics. Experienced coaches are unanimous on that point. Connie Mack said he "wouldn't bother with a youngster who drinks"! Knute Rockne insisted that his players should abstain from "poisons such as alcohol". Many athletic champions are abstainers. [^6]

Alcohol and physical fitness do not travel together.

In the case of women, the future mothers of the race, the evils of alcohol are of even graver consequence, for the mother tainted in body by the use of alcohol, of necessity produces a weaker offspring.

Alcohol and Disease. It is unthinkable that the daily ingestion of any poison will not in time affect the human body unfavorably. In fact, studies in this field have shown correlations between alcohol and disease that cannot be ignored. The particular disease developed depends on the individual, for the weakest organ is usually first attacked.

Alcohol disturbs the body mechanism by its direct effect upon the blood stream. Contained in the blood are many mineral constituents such as sodium, magnesium, calcium, phosphorus, iodine, chlorine, etc. Calcium has been shown to perform functions of special importance to the body. Alcohol in the blood causes a large diminution of the calcium content and other mineral constituents of the blood. (see chapter 9)

The stomach, which receives all drinks, is definitely affected by alcohol. The digestive process is slowed up in the presence of alcohol. In the course of time, inflammation of the stomach tissues usually ensues and gastritis and other disorders appear. The suggestion has been made that injury to the digestive organs by alcohol may be responsible in part for other disorders attendant upon the continued use of alcohol.

Derangements of the liver have been definitely traced to the effects of alcohol. According to many reports from hospitals in the United States, Canada and Europe, the majority of cases (four-fifths) of cancer of the liver are due to the use of alcoholic beverages.

The following instructive table, based upon the Supplement of the 75th Annual Report of the Registrar General of Great Britain (1927), shows the number out of 10,000 of each class afflicted with syphilis and cirrhosis of the liver. Note how brewers and barmen head the list under cirrhosis of the liver. [^7]

Occupations Syphilis Cirrhosis Lowest Groups: Ministers .............. 85 531 Anglican Clergy ........ 114 521 Iron Miners ............ 140 313 Bank officials ......... 207 1,521 Railway Officials....... 214 406 Bus and Tram Conductors. 247 0 Highest Groups: Brewers .............. 4,808 8,000 Actors ............... 4,649 4,646 Waiters .............. 2,598 2,354 Cellarmen ............ 2,284 1,537 Bargemen ............. 2,144 646 Barmen ............... 2,137 5,833

The heart and the circulatory systems are also sensitive to alcohol. Under alcoholic effect the heart is compelled to do more work; the chambers of the heart enlarge abnormally, and the circulation of the blood is interfered with; arterial disease may be set up. The kidneys, always sensitive to disturbances of the circulatory system, suffer from the presence of alcohol. Bright's disease is a frequent accompaniment. The lungs and other organs of the body likewise suffer from the effects of the ingestion of alcohol.

It must be added and emphasized that the use of alcohol reduces the resistance of the body to infection and other similar dangers. Statistics show that the mortality of drinkers is much higher than of abstainers; barmen and brewers are the highest among occupational groups. A survey of the existing literature convinces the student that abstainers from the use of alcohol have the longest expectation of life.

Alcohol and Society. The behavior of any drunken person is sufficient to show that alcohol leads a person to forget or ignore the usual standards of conduct. The moral sense is blurred by even a small amount of alcohol. Tipplers are not exempt. This is said with due deference to the host of good people who are users of alcoholic beverages, and whose high characters and accomplishments are maintained in spite of this habit.

Certain types of criminals are nearly always drinkers. The United States Department of Justice estimates that 80% of the factors making jails and similar institutions necessary are due to the use of alcohol; that 75% of the causes leading to cruelty to children result from the use of alcohol. The disordered brain, following the use of alcohol, seldom acts properly. Crimes and misdemeanors result from the use of alcohol. This is not unexpected. When the higher, controlling faculties are benumbed, the lower faculties assume the power of directing the acts of man.

Poverty is another fruit of alcoholism. Much of our pauperism may be traced directly to alcohol; more of our child destitution may be followed to the same source. The liquor habit dulls all human emotions. Degradation, disgrace, misery and death are results of the use of alcohol. Even one drink gives effects that point to the evils of intemperance.

A vast number of automobile and other accidents, shooting scrapes and rioting, are found associated with the use of alcohol. In the interest of public safety in this automobile age only abstainers from alcoholic liquors should be allowed to use the public highways. While many factors enter into automobile accidents, it is strikingly suggestive that during the period 1933-1936, traffic deaths in the United States paralleled the consumption of liquor.

The famous, longstanding, "Rule G" of the railroads forbids the use of "intoxicants or narcotics", by employees. Air pilots, likewise, must refrain from the use of intoxicating beverages for 24 hours preceding a trip and during any time on duty, and they must not frequent liquor-dispensing places.

Sexual immorality usually accompanies alcoholism. The dimming of the moral sense weakens the character of the individual. Soon the defenses that education and religion have built up are broken down. Acts of immorality are committed which at the beginning seemed intolerable. It is noteworthy that in the preceding table syphilis increased in almost every instance with cirrhosis of the liver. The conclusion is inevitable: Alcohol causes moral as well as physical disease. Alcoholism is a menace to society.

Alcohol as a Racial Poison. In yet another way is society deeply interested in this question. Alcohol is a racial poison. The injury from it does not cease with the person who uses it, but harms his children and children's children as well. This difficult but important subject has been under experimental study, the results of which point consistently to the inheritance of certain of the evils of alcoholism.

An authority on this subject asserts that:

"Alcohol taken in excess, or freely and continuously, has the power of breaking through all the defensive barriers and producing the most profound effect upon the sex glands and consequent interference with the sperm or germ cells. In such cases the alcohol causes degeneration of the protoplasm of the germ-plasm, interferes with what is called spermatogenesis (that is to say, the formation of mature sperm cells), and if the germ-plasm is not actually destroyed, its architecture may be so interfered with as to cause imperfect offspring in the next, immediate generation." [^8]

Thus the very future of the race depends upon the use or avoidance of alcohol.

"Because the continuity and essential well-being of the race depends upon germ-plasm, the sex organs are naturally of profound significance, and although remarkably resistant in many ways, it is an accepted fact today that they can be damaged by certain substances and thus cause injury to the immediate and succeeding generations. In 1906 Dr. C. W. Saleeby termed these substances Racial Poisons. The term has passed into current scientific language, and is applied to those substances which may not only damage the individual but the race as well. The three great racial poisons are lead, venereal diseases, and alcohol." [^9]

The effects upon the coming generations are altogether too evident to be ignored. Drinking parents have more than the average of mentally and physically defective children; their children also have a high early mortality; in those that survive and are normal there is often a persistence of the weaknesses developed in their parents by intemperance.

The Indictment Against Alcohol. The evidence against alcohol in any form as a beverage is overwhelming. One needs only examine the voluminous literature on the subject to become convinced of the truth of this statement. Let the indictment be summarized.

Alcohol is a poison which injures body and mind, the degree of injury depending upon the amount used. Its use causes poverty, since money that should be spent for food, clothing, shelter and recreation is paid out for this harmful beverage. Alcohol also dulls the moral senses, for a person ever so little under the influence of alcohol, is no longer his natural self, but irresponsible, inexact, careless, often cruel. The unhappy after-effects of alcohol increase the desire for the forgetfulness induced by more alcohol. Thus the habit grows, and becomes the master of the man. In the wake of alcohol are poverty and sorrow, misery and ruin, disease and death.

Almost the worst indictment against alcohol is that those who do not drink are injured through its use by others. The workman spends his week's earnings on drink and leaves his wife and children to starve. The drunkard loses his job and drags his children down to woe of body and soul. In the presence of alcohol as a beverage, the finer instincts of man vanish, the atmosphere becomes tainted, the finer human impulses stifled. There is no denial of these charges and a hundred others.

The consumption of alcohol has been a monstrous evil throughout the ages and the human misery caused thereby is beyond computation. Its use among intelligent people rests upon two counts: Weakness of the will in the face of the tempting but ugly desire for alcohol; and the lustful greed for money by those who make and sell the poison.

The defender of the alcohol habit declares that he is a moderate user of alcohol, therefore the indictment does not fit him. That is but subterfuge, a vain excuse. It is the moderate drinker who often becomes the immoderate user, and it has been amply demonstrated that small doses of alcohol affect the drinker unfavorably, both temporarily and permanently.

The claim is sometimes made by those who should know better that the use of alcohol does not shorten life. The drinker will point to the drinker who has attained a high age. He is the exception and the argument is unsound. Judgment must be formed from the behavior of a group. The use of alcohol is not the only factor that tends to lengthen or shorten life. From statistics compiled by insurance companies and others it is safe to say that abstinence from alcoholic liquors tends to lengthen out the span of life; and what is of almost greater consequence, to increase health and the joy of living. The fact remains that for one drinker there are many abstainers who reach old age. The one drunkard who lives a long life is uncommon and therefore obtains publicity. Insurance companies with financial interests involved hold moderate as well as heavy alcohol users as poorer risks than those who abstain from the beverage. The user of alcohol must therefore pay more for his insurance. Insurance statistics show that the death rate increases steadily with the degree of alcoholic intemperance.

The indictment against alcohol is complete. Specious arguments by those addicted to the habit do not change facts.

An Official Verdict. In no respect can alcohol as a beverage be said to increase physical or mental efficiency. So well is this understood that the practice of using alcohol in hospitals has almost ceased. Other means, more adequate and less harmful, are now employed. The hospital milk bills have gone up and the alcohol bills down.

The American Medical Association has gone on record against the general use of alcohol in medical practice in resolutions formulated and adopted in 1917 by the House of Delegates:

"Whereas, we believe that the use of alcohol is detrimental to the human economy, and

"Whereas, its use in therapeutics as a tonic or stimulant or for food has no scientific value; therefore,

"Be it Resolved, that the American Medical Association is opposed to the use of alcohol as a beverage; and,

"Be it Further Resolved, that the use of alcohol as a therapeutic agent should be further discouraged." [^10]

On the other hand, alcohol is being used, as suggested in the Word of Wisdom, for external use—for rubbing to reduce fevers, for hardening the skin to prevent bedsores, for sterilizing instruments and skin for hypodermic injections and for many other similar purposes. The validity of the Word of Wisdom with respect to alcohol is fully vindicated.

What to Do? Education is the first and perhaps the last step in the fight against alcohol. If the dangers of alcohol were impressed upon the minds of the public as are the rules of arithmetic, alcoholic beverages would lose their present social standing. The foolish hostess who serves a cocktail to her guests, presumably her friends, to ensure a more sparkling conversation at her dinner table, is usually unaware of the fact that "the amount of alcohol contained in a cocktail produces a greater effect on the central nervous system than three or four times its alcoholic content administered as beer" (Dr. W. E. Dixon), that she is helping to destroy the health and ultimate happiness of her friends.

It is very probable that if temperance education in schools, churches and all welfare organizations had accompanied the American prohibition experiment, the vicious, unrelenting propaganda by those interested in making money from alcoholic drinks would not have succeeded in defeating the prohibition amendment.

Alcohol is a poor pick-me-up compared to other, harmless drinks. The story is told that F. W. Kraemer, the famous English film director, while directing the play "Tin Gods", in the midst of a long, trying work period, called to a new property man to get him some "dynamite". Half an hour later the man returned with the report that dynamite was not to be had, even at the arsenal! What Mr. Kraemer really wanted as a drink was a special non-alcoholic pick-me-up, which had been found to be so successful in "toning up" the tired actors that it had been nick-named "dynamite". It was a glass of milk into which two eggs and the juice of an orange were beaten! Alcohol is a poor and injurious tonic; there are others, better and harmless.

The personal methods of overcoming the habit are like those suggested for the conquest of the tobacco habit. (see chapter 6)

Wine for the Sacrament. The Word of Wisdom provides that wine used for the Sacrament, should be "pure wine of the grape of the vine, of your own make." This statement is understood to mean new or unfermented grape juice, since the Word of Wisdom declares unequivocally against the internal use of alcohol in any form.

This interpretation is reinforced by the fact that under divine command, water was early in the history of the Church substituted for wine, for sacramental purposes. The revelation reads:

"For, behold, I say unto you, that it mattereth not what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink when ye partake of the sacrament, if it so be that ye do it with an eye single to my glory—remembering unto the Father my body which was laid down for you, and my blood which was shed for the remission of your sins." [^11]

Water is always used by the Church in partaking of the sacrament.

Reference is often made to the supposed use of wine by the Savior at the last supper. It is well known, however, that the words "the fruit of the vine" have been translated as "wine". It is equally well known that in the Old Testament, three different words are translated "wine", two of which, used most commonly, refer clearly to unfermented grape juice. In the New Testament two Greek words, not necessarily representing fermented grape juice, are translated "wine". Intoxicating wine was not a common beverage among ancient Israel. [^12]

The Word of Wisdom Confirmed. Certain it is that the prohibition in the Word of Wisdom against the use of alcohol as a beverage is in full concord with the best knowledge of the day. The direct statement of the Word of Wisdom implying that alcohol is not good for man must be looked upon, in consideration of the knowledge of Joseph Smith's day, as an evidence of divine inspiration.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Bogen, E., and Hisey, L. W. S., What About Alcohol, 1934.

Chapple, W. A., Evils of Alcohol, 1911.

Corradini, R. E., Narcotics and Youth Today, 1934.

Crichton-Browne, Sir James, What We Drink, 1930.

Emerson, H., Alcohol and Man, 1932.

Fisher, I., Prohibition At Its Worst, 1926.

Fisher, I., and Broughamp, Prohibition Still At Its Worst, 1928.

Gordon, E., When The Brewer Had The Stranglehold, 1930.

Harkness and Fort, Youth Studies Alcohol, 1937.

Horsley, Sir Victor, and Sturge, M. D., Alcohol and the Human Body, 1915.

Koren, J., Alcohol and Society, 1916.

Palmer, B. R., A Syllabus of Alcohol Education, 1935.

Pearl, R., Alcohol and Longevity, 1936.

Samuelson, J., History of Drink, 1878.

Transeau, E. L. B., Effects of Alcoholic Drinks, 1933.

Weeks, C. C., Alcohol and Human Life, 1929.

Williams, A. D., and Stoddard, C. F., The Scientist Experiments with Alcohol, 1935.

Alcohol: Its Action on the Human Organism, British Medical Research Council, 1923.

A Review of the Effects of Alcohol on Man, under the auspices of a British Committee, 1931.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Tobacco cannot be freely indulged in without injury to the normal action of the heart. The heart-beats are increased 5 to 10 per minute; the blood pressure rises; there is often palpitation and pains in the head. In the lower animals there are marked changes in the walls of the arteries, which may also be the case with man. There must be a resolute desire to overcome the habit, sufficient to bring the will into action. Usually it is best to make up one's mind to stop at once and then to stop! Doctrine and Covenants 89:8.
[^2] The respiratory system is affected adversely by the use of tobacco. Hoarseness, coughs, bronchitis, tonsilitis, smokers' laryngitis, asthma and tuberculosis, are frequent results of smoking. Find interesting mental, physical, social activities to help take the mind off tobacco. Time, Vol. 28, No. 25, p. 23.
[^3] Disturbances of the digestive tract likewise follow tobaccoism. There is frequent loss of appetite, inhibitory action of the salivary glands, chronic pharyngitis, tobacco dyspepsia, cancer of the mouth, intestinal catarrh, duodenal ulcer and changes in the liver. Eat no stimulating foods. Avoid pepper, mustard and other spices; also all hot or highly seasoned sauces. Drink no alcohol, coffee, tea, or other drug-containing beverages. Williams, H. S., Drugs Against Men, 1935, p. 111, Robert McBride Co.
[^4] It has been observed also that the use of tobacco tends to delay growth, sometimes causes skin eruptions, dimness of the eyes, and other human ailments. Adopt a natural diet, in harmony with the positive factors of the Word of Wisdom. That is, plenty of fruit and vegetables, with grain foods and very little meat. (see chapters 8 to 16) During the first six months of 1937, R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., Liggett and Myers Tobacco Co., and American Tobacco Co., spent for advertising in magazines and over the radio, $5,854,000, or during the year at the same rate, nearly twelve millions of dollars. Huge sums are spent in addition for other advertising such as in newspapers, by mail advertisements, free cigarettes, etc. (Printer's Ink, Aug. 7, 1937.)
[^5] The reproductive powers and functions are interfered with by tobacco. It has been observed that a high death rate exists among children born to habitual smokers, especially where the use is excessive and indulged in by both father and mother. Even sterility may be noted as a result of excessive tobaccoism. [^5] Drink plenty of water—six glasses and upward daily. Schrumph-Pierron, P., Tobacco and Physical Efficiency, 1927, p. 53.
[^6] The degree of injury resulting from tobaccoism depends on the soundness of the individual and the extent of the habit. Those who are subject to degenerative changes, who are diseased, will suffer most directly from the evil effects of tobaccoism. Secure ample physical exercise, and live normally in every way. Journal of Education, 65:485-487, 1907.
[^7] Cigarettes seem worse than pipes or cigars. O'Shea, M. V., Tobacco and Mental Efficiency, 1923, p. 122.
[^8] There is some evidence to indicate that the taste for tobacco may be inherited. Good Housekeeping, January, 1916.
[^9] Tobacco acts as a narcotic upon the nervous system. It usually acts as a depressant, but it may at times, depending upon the condition of the user, serve as a stimulant. It is a sedative, giving the sensation of rest. This of course is the reaction that makes it so appealing, especially to those who are not in full normal health. The effect of the tobacco wears off, however, in a short time, and the process must be repeated. Thus the habit becomes fixed. Meanwhile the nervous system is subjected to chronic tobacco poisoning, and there often follows, in time, neuralgia, headaches, dizziness, irritability and loss of memory, sometimes even paralysis of vision, hearing, taste and smell. Kress, D. H., The Cigarette, p. 32, 1931.
[^10] Hatcher and Crosley, American Journal Diseases of Children, 38:152, 1927; Emanuel, American Journal Diseases of Children, 44:428, 1931; Sherbon, The Child, p. 202, 1934.
[^11] Kress, D. H., The Cigarette, 1931, p. 30.
[^12] O'Shea, M. V., Tobacco and Mental Efficiency, 1923, pp. 112-115.
