John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 6

TOBACCO

"Tobacco is not for the body, neither for the belly, and is not good for man, but is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle, to be used with judgment and skill." [^1]

Historical. The use of tobacco by civilized man dates from the discovery of America by Columbus. The early explorers observed that the North American Indians smoked the leaves of the tobacco plant for ceremonial purposes. Some of the early colonists adopted the practice, and carried it to Spain, England and other European countries. The practice spread slowly over Europe and became current among the American Colonists.

At first it was thought that tobacco-smoking was beneficial and health-giving, but later and longer observation of tobacco users convinced the majority of people that it was injurious to the human system. Laws and royal proclamations forbade the use of tobacco, and smoking became a punishable offense. Victims of the tobacco habit found, however, that these laws were not enforced, and the practice grew.

There were always sharp differences of opinion between the smokers and the non-smokers concerning the effect of tobacco on the user of it. Books and pamphlets were written and speeches delivered, for and against the practice; but in that day, when the scientific treatment of human problems had scarcely begun, neither side could bring convincing evidence to its support. All agreed, however, on two points of major importance: that tobacco was not necessary for human welfare, and that the tobacco habit was exceedingly difficult to overcome.

Such was the condition of the tobacco question in 1833, when the Prophet Joseph Smith received the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom. What is the verdict on the use of tobacco, and therefore on this phase of the Word of Wisdom, by the century since then, the period of the world's greatest scientific progress?

Financial Cost. The use of tobacco has increased greatly during the last half century. During the sixty-year period from 1870 to 1930, the production of tobacco in the United States of America increased from 225,000,000 pounds to 1,635,210,000 pounds or nearly eightfold, far in excess of the increase in population. The per capita tobacco consumption by the American people in 1931 was 3 pounds of snuff and smoking tobacco, 43 cigars and 943 cigarettes—a tidy offering for every man, woman and child in the land. And since there are countless people who are not addicted to its use, some idea may be gained of the per capita amount consumed by those who do use it. In 1934 the national consumption was 134,607,741,257 cigarettes, 4,763,883,947 cigars, 95,875 tons of pipe tobacco and 18,030 tons of snuff. [^2] In 1936, the consumption had increased to 139,968,684,406 cigarettes and 4,863,191,852 cigars.

America produces about 35% of the world's supply of tobacco. It also consumes more tobacco than any other country. In 1930, when the total per capita consumption of tobacco in the United States of America was 5.92 pounds, it was 4.90 in Belgium, 4.76 in Egypt, 2.95 in the British Isles, 2.90 in France, and 2.35 in Italy.

During this period of increased tobacco use, from 1914 to 1931, the per capita number of cigars consumed decreased from 73 to 43; pounds of smoking tobacco from 4.2 to 2.7; while the per capita number of cigarettes consumed rose from 172 to 943, implying a tremendous shift towards the cigarette, which is a most notable factor in any discussion of the tobacco problem. In further illustration of this shift: During the decade 1926-1936, the annual consumption of cigars has fallen from nearly seven billion to less than five billion, while the consumption of cigarettes has risen from ninety-two billion to nearly one hundred and forty billion.

Dr. Henry Smith Williams has calculated that:

"The cigarettes smoked annually in America would suffice, if packed sardine-like, to pave a highway eighty feet wide from New York to Los Angeles. The cigars smoked annually would supply material for a three-foot shoulder on the highway, also from coast to coast. And there would remain 150,000 tons of tobacco for chewing and pipe-smoking, which would load, obviously, 30,000 five-ton vans." [^3]

The recent increase in the use of tobacco, with the shift towards cigarettes, is undoubtedly due, in chief measure, to the whip of an advertising campaign in behalf of tobacco and cigarettes, unprecedented in the world's history. Page advertisements, cleverly designed, artistically drawn and beautifully colored, setting forth the supposed merits and desirability of the cigarette and of tobacco in general, have been published in every magazine of consequence, irrespective, apparently, of the facts in the case. Men and women of influence have allowed their names, often for money, to be used in behalf of the campaign. To fasten the tobacco habit upon youth, moral depths are reached by some manufacturers. Cigarettes are "doped" with habit-be-getting drugs. The desire for the repetition of the experience becomes correspondingly urgent. The advertising campaign for tobacco illustrates as nothing else the warning of the Word of Wisdom against "evils and designs which do and will exist in the hearts of conspiring men". [^4] It is true that some manufacturers are producing denicotinized cigarettes. Some of these are relatively free from nicotine, but the majority contain nearly as much nicotine as the ordinary cigarettes.

The world's tobacco bill is colossal. The value of manufactured tobacco produced in America in 1859 was $30,890,000; in 1929 it was $1,246,242,000. The value of property destroyed annually by fires caused by the matches and cigar and cigarette stubs of smokers is estimated at $30,000,000. The American people pay, therefore, at least $1,276,242,000 annually for the tobacco that they consume in chewing and smoking; and the retail value of these tobacco products is very much greater, approximating $1,500,000,000.

There can be no justification for the expenditure of so vast a sum of money, for an article which is conceded to be unnecessary and decidedly harmful to human welfare. Education, the conquest of poverty, needed national developments, the reduction of the national debt—all point to a better use of the money now spent for tobacco. The people engaged in the industry could with profit to all concerned be redirected into other industries providing the necessities and comforts of man. The economic verdict of the century is against tobacco.

Effects on the Body. In 1822, several hundred years after civilized man began the use of tobacco, it was discovered that tobacco leaves contain a highly poisonous substance, called nicotine, for the French Ambassador to Portugal about 1560, Jean Nicot, who helped spread knowledge concerning tobacco. Nicotine in its pure state is a colorless, oily liquid, a drop of which (as much as is found in a large cigar), taken internally is sufficient to kill a man. In former days, when tobacco was employed in medicine, numerous deaths resulted from the administration of tobacco, due to the presence of the deadly poison, nicotine. Today, tobacco is seldom used in medical practice. The amount of nicotine found in tobacco varies from about one to nine percent.

In the plant, nicotine is combined with various organic acids, forming nicotine salts which are easily soluble in water. Therefore, when tobacco is chewed, the nicotine is dissolved in the saliva and absorbed into the blood; when it is smoked, the heat of the burning material volatilizes the nicotine which is then brought into the body in a gaseous condition. Whether tobacco is chewed or smoked, the poison, nicotine, enters the body; when smoked, a number of combustion products, such as carbon monoxide, acrolein and furfurol, highly injurious to the body, are also inhaled. The first attempt to smoke, as is well known, usually produces an intense illness because the body reacts against the introduction of the inhaled poison. By repeated use, a certain tolerance is acquired, though the body continues to be injured by the practice. Immediate serious results following the chewing or smoking of tobacco are prevented by the gradual introduction of the injurious substances, a process which gives the body an opportunity to distribute them before they accumulate in excessive amounts. Therefore, tolerance for an otherwise poisonous substance is established.

This information should be sufficient to declare that tobacco injures the human frame. A person who takes poison into his system naturally should expect injury to follow. Yet in the face of the knowledge of the composition of tobacco and tobacco smoke, many smokers and chewers insist that no injury to the body results from the use of tobacco. This has led to a more careful study of the problem.

In 1918, a Committee to Study the Tobacco Problem was formed, consisting of 59 men eminent in their respective fields, some smokers, others non-smokers. Dr. Pierre Schrumpf-Pierron, a distinguished French leader in medical science, was appointed by this committee to gather the world's knowledge concerning the effects of tobacco upon the human body. The results of his studies were published in 1927 under the title, Tobacco and Physical Efficiency. In this work are gathered the reliable clinical data concerning the subject from all countries. "It is the first really complete compendium of the vast amount of literature of various countries concerning the effects of tobacco upon the human system."

The general findings of this elaborate study are concordant:

Dr. Schrumph-Pierron suggests that undoubtedly, as more direct and refined studies of the subject are made, the evil effects of tobacco upon the human body will become even more apparent than they are today.

The author urges a more sober use of tobacco, or better still, complete abstinence or abandonment of it. One cannot deny that, upon the world's substantiated knowledge, tobacco must be declared seriously harmful to the human body.

The Word of Wisdom is again confirmed.

Effects on the Mind. The Committee to Study the Tobacco Problem appointed Professor M. V. O'Shea of the University of Wisconsin to study the mental aspects of tobaccoism. His findings were published in 1923 under the title Tobacco and Mental Efficiency.

In this investigation, the difficulty of comparing smokers with non-smokers was greater than in securing direct evidence of injured bodily tissue. No one would urge non-smokers to take up smoking for experimental purposes, and it became necessary, therefore, to ask smokers to desist from the practice for certain periods, for comparative purposes. Since smokers were used it was not easily determined what a man might do or have done, had he not been a smoker. Nevertheless, in the face of such handicaps, the investigation resulted in some very valuable and definite conclusions.

Seventy thousand high school records were examined. Intelligence tests showed that smokers and non-smokers did not differ much in native ability. When, however, the scholarship performances of smokers and non-smokers were compared, an "antagonism of a serious nature" was found between smoking and scholarship; "they were incompatible in marked degree".

The principals of 206 high schools further cooperated in the study. The general results were the same. Scholarship and deportment decreased with the use of tobacco. Professor O'Shea declares that "one cannot go over the reports from these 206 schools without forming the conviction that tobacco is either directly or indirectly playing a tragic role in the high school."

A number of school principals have from time to time made studies of the mental efficiency of their students afflicted with the smoking habit. Invariably the conclusion is the same: Tobacco is a hindrance to mental efficiency. Professor R. L. Sandwick of Durfield High School, Highland Park, Illinois, made a study of a typical high school:

Average Grade 77 had never smoked...........................84.5 24 had quit smoking...........................80.5 55 habitual smokers, in school................76.0 45 habitual smokers, quit school..............69.0 Average grade of 10 highest non-smokers ..... 90.9 Average grade of 10 highest smokers ......... 78.9

Dr. George H. Meylan, of Columbia University, made a study of 223 college freshmen and sophomores:

Average Grade Failures Average During First During First Entrance Grade Two Years Two Years 110 non-smokers .....91 69 4% 113 smokers .........89 62 10%

Dr. Frederick J. Pack of the University of Utah obtained records from twelve colleges and showed that the scholastic standing of 81 non-smokers was 79.4 and of 81 smokers was 74.5. [^6]

Other investigations could be cited, but with the same conclusion: Smoking lowers scholarship.

A few attempts have been made to determine just "what happens to the intellectual activities of a pupil who uses tobacco". Can he reason as well, add as accurately, read as rapidly, operate a machine as safely? Such experiments are difficult to conduct in view of the many factors to be considered, and especially since, as already suggested, habitual smokers are commonly used in the tests. As far as such experiments have gone, their verdict is against tobacco, for it tends to slow down cerebral activity. This field offers opportunity for most interesting observations.

A paragraph from Dr. Schrumph-Pierron bears directly on this subject:

"It appears from these experiments [on mental efficiency] that smokers who attribute to smoking an increase in their capacity for intellectual and physical work are subjects of autosuggestion; or the increased cerebral circulation from increased heart frequency may seem to produce an increased mental activity." [^7]

It may be said, safely, that the use of tobacco decreases mental efficiency. Again, the Word of Wisdom is shown to be correct.

Moral and Social Effects. Large numbers of honorable, industrious, capable people have acquired the tobacco habit. Nevertheless, there are moral aspects to the tobacco problem that cannot well be ignored.

The will of the smoker is unquestionably weakened. He finds it difficult, often impossible, to overcome the habit, once established. Any injury to the will has a moral equivalent. A will too weak to resist the lure of tobacco may at times find itself too weak to resist other evil offerings. Perhaps man can suffer no more serious handicap than the possession of a weak will. There are few more pitiable objects than the youth who, weakened in body and mind by the early and excessive use of tobacco, does not have the necessary power of will, even under kindly leadership, to throw off the habit and save himself for life's more complete happiness.

It is commonly observed that the smoker becomes careless of little matters of propriety. The cigar or cigarette stubs are thrown into the ash tray; if they miss the receptacle they are allowed to lie where they fall. One need only to note the burned spots in hotel and apartment carpets or in restaurant table cloths. Burning cigarettes are left carelessly on furniture until they burn through the paint into the wood. Cigarette stubs are flung about in the open, resulting in fire damage running into millions of dollars annually. The finer sensibilities of man deteriorate clearly as the tobacco habit grows upon him.

A type of selfishness develops with the tobacco habit. The rights of others are ignored. The smoker on the front seat of the bus will unconcernedly blow his smoke into the faces of the people behind him. He growls if he is asked on a train to confine his smoking to the smoking room. He fills a public dining-room, and often a private one, with tobacco smoke, with utter indifference to the desires of others to whom the habit may be highly offensive. He buys a dime's worth of cigarettes and assumes that thereby he is entitled to foul the air wherever he goes. The disregard of others, a moral weakness, is most easily observed among smokers, though they themselves, by their very condition, are unconscious of it.

Perhaps the most impressive evidence of moral deterioration due to the use of tobacco is the established fact that other injurious habits are usually associated with tobaccoism. While it cannot be said that all tobacco users drink alcoholic beverages, it may be safely asserted that few if any persons addicted to the use, especially the large use, of intoxicating liquors, are free from the tobacco habit. Tobacco and liquor are bond brothers. Moreover, the path to the use of opium and related drugs is usually via tobacco and alcohol. Likewise it is beyond controversy that criminals are in the great majority of cases users of tobacco. Liquor, tobacco and crime always form a close association.

Several investigations on this subject, notably with respect to high school boys, are in agreement as to the results obtained. Superintendent H. D. Hervey, of Malden, Massachusetts, [^8] obtained with the aid of his teachers, the following convincing statistics on the moral conditions of the smokers and non-smokers in his schools:

Smokers Non-Smokers Weak of will ...........32 1 Coward .................15 0 Liar ...................16 0 Degenerate ............. 7 0 Vulgar .................12 0 Influence bad ..........15 0 Disobedience ...........18 1 Disrespectful ..........11 0 Truant .................16 0

Another interesting study was made of boys in the average public schools of New York City by P. L. Lord. [^9] Twenty boys were chosen by lot from non-smokers, twenty from smokers, in the same classes in the same schools. Their ages ranged from ten to seventeen years. The two groups were under observation for several months, and reported upon by ten teachers. The results follow:

Smokers Non-Smokers Nervous .....................14 1 Impaired hearing ............13 1 Poor memory .................12 1 Bad manners .................16 2 Low deportment ..............13 1 Poor physical condition .....12 2 Bad moral condition .........18 1 Street loafers ..............16 0 Out nights ..................15 0 Careless in dress ...........12 1 Truants .....................10 0 Low ranks in studies ........18 3 Failed in promotion .........79 times 2 times Older than average in grade .19 2

The evidence at hand points clearly to a reduction of moral power from the use of tobacco.

Personal Opinions. The personal opinions of thoughtful men, based upon general observation, are always of value. However, when questions of habit or self-interest arise, answers are likely to be colored with personal desires. Only two classes of people are involved in the tobacco question: Those who praise the tobacco habit, and those who condemn it. Smokers and a few others praise it; non-smokers, and a few others condemn it. It is difficult to accept unsupported testimony from either class. Other evidence must be sought.

Among the eminent men of Europe and America since the introduction of tobacco, many smokers as well as non-smokers will be found. Each group have defended their own practice. When, however, the lives of the smokers are carefully studied, the evil effects of tobacco often appear, as in physical disorders, temperamental vagaries, or early death. This subject also is worthy of careful study.

At various times, studies of the subject have been made by asking men, smokers, who have risen high in the activities of life, to give their opinion of the effects of the tobacco habit. The answers have been various; but, so far, none has claimed that his success was won through the use of tobacco. Any testimony in favor of tobacco from such persons is likely to be faulty, for they belong to a highly selected group, of unusual physical and mental strength, sufficient perhaps to offset temporarily the evil effects of tobacco. How many of these prominent people might have achieved more, done better, and found more happiness without the use of tobacco? The real question is, however, concerning the masses of men, those perhaps of lesser inborn gifts. How many of them have been held back, suffered defeat and tasted the bitterness of life because of the tobacco habit? Were such a survey to be made, the evidence already at hand predicts that tobacco would be condemned in unmeasured terms. Perhaps such studies may yet be made.

However, certain facts of value as to personal opinions concerning tobacco still remain.

Nearly every civilized country has enacted laws against the use of tobacco by minors. Few business enterprises will employ juniors who smoke. This must reflect an international experience which cannot be ignored. The united observation of many peoples against the use of tobacco by youth must be given proper consideration.

Numerous men of highest eminence, usually employers of labor, have pronounced directly against the tobacco habit. Dr. W. J. Mayo, Chauncey Depew, Hudson Maxim, Thomas A. Edison, Luther Burbank, E. H. Harriman, Charles A. Lindbergh, Coach A. A. Stagg, Connie Mack, Madame Schumann-Heink, and Henry Ford, are but a few of hundreds who might be enumerated. The smoker would have you believe that everybody smokes. That is not so. The words of Harvey W. Wiley, internationally famous chemist and food scientist may well be pondered by all.

"I commend Mr. Henry Ford, Mr. Thomas A. Edison, and all people who join them in efforts to curtail or restrict, obliterate or destroy the pernicious habit of cigarette smoking. The use of cigarettes is making inroads on the strength of the nerves of all who smoke them, especially boys of tender years or women who smoke them because they think that the practice is smart. The effect may not be so bad on people of more mature years, but not in any case, no matter how old a man or woman, is smoking helpful. Besides constituting a nuisance, the financial strain connected with the use of tobacco stands between millions of people and home comforts.

"A man should so order his activities that he needs no comforter except wholesome food, illuminating literature, a fond family, and a progressive community. He who has to seek consolation in a drug store is going wrong. There is something out of condition in his make-up. He has a false view of life. Happiness consists in accomplishment, contentment, in satisfaction with the environment, not in Lethean passivity. There is no place in the normal life for an illusory delight nor a drug-provoked contentment. Tobacco never has brought and never will bring any real happiness to humanity." [^10]

Effects on Girls and Women. Evil as are the effects of the use of tobacco on men, they are worse on girls and women. Since the World War, girls and women smokers may be seen almost everywhere. Since woman's nervous organization is more delicate than man's it is injured more by tobacco; and women, for the same reason, become more abject slaves to the tobacco habit. It has been well established that women who smoke suffer all the evils of tobaccoism and become prematurely aged, because of the effect on the entire body, especially the complexion. The managing director of the National Beauty Shop Association has said:

"The features of women who smoke grow sharper as the nicotine habit fastens upon them, the skin becomes taut and sallow, the lips lose their rosy color, the corners of the mouth show wrinkles, the lower lip shows a tendency to project beyond the upper lip, the eyes acquire a stare, and the lids rise and fall more slowly." [^11]

More serious however is the effect of smoking on motherhood. Nicotine is a deadly poison to the life germ. The unborn babe is surrounded by fluids containing nicotine. The milk from the breasts of a smoking mother contain nicotine. [^12] The babe often comes into the world sick; and is kept sick. Often it is stillborn or malformed. And such cases are much more frequent among smokers. It is always handicapped for life's journey. In time sterility on the part of the mother may ensue. Motherhood, the crown of womanhood, holy and pure, is exchanged for the cigarette. The future of the race is thus bound up with the use of tobacco. Dr. Hugh S. Cummings, former Surgeon General of the U. S. Public Health Service, declares that "If American women generally contract the [tobacco] habit the physical tone of the whole nation will be lowered—the habit harms a woman more than a man." Tobacco is a racial poison, but especially when used by women. [^13]

Tobacco and the Creative Gift. Tobacco is not necessary to accomplish great artistic creations. Some modern workers in the creative fields, notably in literature, claim that their creative ability depends on the use of tobacco. This is folly. In answer, one need only recite the names of the great ones of old, who, before tobacco was available or who were not tobacco users, produced the major classics of literature and art, such as Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Virgil, Goethe, Phidias, Dante, Rousseau, Raphael, Michael Angelo, Locke, and countless others.

The ancient and medieval classics of literature, the masterpieces of sculpture and painting, the models of architecture, the profoundest of philosophies, the most notable explorations, the sublimest examples of faith and heroism, the seven wonders of the world, and a host of other creative products of man came into being before humanity had general access to tobacco. It cannot be maintained that the original and creative activities of the human mind, the greatest, are dependent upon the stimulus given by this narcotic. [^14]

General Conclusions. Examined from every point of view, in the light of modern knowledge, the prohibition against tobacco in the Word of Wisdom is fully upheld and sustained. The welfare of the race demands the cessation of the use of tobacco. Latter-day Saints should absolutely refrain from its use, both in the interest of their own health and as an example to others. Health of body, clearness of mind, spiritual power and the respect of fellow men will be gained by strict observance of this and the other provisions of the Word of Wisdom.

Curing the Tobacco Habit. It is relatively easy to acquire the tobacco habit. A few days of nausea, headache and vomiting, and the habit sits astride its victim. To stop smoking is quite another matter. It requires the most earnest effort, a fight to the finish. The enemy does not propose to be dislodged.

Many tobacco cures have been suggested. The essence of the successful ones is included in the following six suggestions:

It has been found in repeated hospital experience that the best cure of the tobacco habit comes when a rational mode of living is followed.

Proper Uses of Tobacco. The quotation from the Word of Wisdom at the head of this chapter, indicates that tobacco may be put to beneficial uses. It is in fact used very extensively as a disinfectant and insecticide. The poison that it contains kills living organisms and is therefore useful in destroying those inimical to the growth of agricultural crops. Likewise the antiseptic value of tobacco would make it useful in emergencies in cleansing wounds and preventing suppuration. It has long been known that tobacco may be used in treatment of the diseases of the lower animals, though seldom so used now. Modern scientific discoveries have replaced older methods; but the disinfecting power of tobacco as indicated in the Word of Wisdom, and fitting the day it was given, still remains.

A Word of Warning. Tobacco is only one of various narcotics used by man. The story of opium and related substances is one of awful human degradation. So evident have been the evil effects of the use of opium [the juice of the poppy] that by international agreement the sale of opium and its products is confined to the medical profession, to be used strictly and exclusively for medicinal purposes. Despite the earnest efforts of official agencies for the control of the narcotic traffic, the illicit trade in opium is destroying great numbers of human beings annually.

Among the many plants containing narcotic poison to come to the front in very recent days is the ancient Hashish, or Marijuana, often known as Indian Hemp, now occurring as a weed (loco weed) throughout the United States. The dried plant is usually smoked. Its destructive effects upon body and mind are terrible. In its wake are "murders, suicides, robberies, criminal assaults, holdups, burglaries, and deeds of maniacal insanity," [^15] with the final deterioration of every natural power of the user.

The conscienceless vendor of marijuana and similar narcotics makes youth his chief victim. The first taste demands repetition; the habit is established; the victim is soon enslaved, too often for life, if life it can be called to live under the thraldom of the drug. Fortunately, for the addict, he cannot live long. The hopes of youth are lost in indescribable misery.

The United States Commissioner of narcotics has warned the public that the vendors of marijuana are operating chiefly among high school students, and he declares that the marijuana cigarette is "as dangerous as a coiled rattlesnake." [^16]

It is said that cigarettes may be bought on the open market, made of a mixture of tobacco and marijuana, so that the tobacco smoking habit may be the more quickly and securely fastened upon the beginner. It is difficult to believe that such moral degeneracy may be found in the world of commerce; but parents and all good citizens should be alert in fighting the enemy. Tobacco, while perhaps not as evil as some other narcotics, comes of an evil brood.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Alcott, W. A., Tobacco, 1894.

Anslinger and Cooper, Marijuana, Assassin of Youth, American Magazine, July, 1937.

Bastedo, W. A., What The Physician Should Know About Tobacco Smoking, 1935.

Brown, W. H., Tobacco Under The Searchlight, 1925.

Corradini, R. E., Narcotics and Youth Today, 1934.

Crossland, F. B., The Tobacco Habit, 1928.

Fink, B., Tobacco, 1915.

Fisher, I., Tobacco: A Threefold Study, 1924.

Fisher, I. and Fisk, E. L., How to Live, 1920.

Fisher, G. J. and Berry, E., The Physical Effects of Smoking, 1917.

Ford, Henry, The Little White Slaver, 1916.

Kellogg, J. H., Tobaccoism, 1921.

Kress, D. H., The Cigarette as a Physician Sees It, 1931.

Lander, M., The Tobacco Problem, 1885.

Macfadden, B., The Truth About Tobacco, 1922.

Mendenhall, W. L., Tobacco (Harvard Health Talks), 1930.

Oaks, L. W., Can I Quit Tobacco? Yes, 1932.

Oaks, L. W., Medical Aspects of the Word of Wisdom, 1929.

O'Shea, M. V., Tobacco and Mental Efficiency, 1923.

Pack, F. J., Tobacco and Human Efficiency, 1918.

Roman, F. W., Nicotine, 1923.

Schrumph-Pierron, P., Tobacco and Physical Efficiency, 1927.

Sims, A., The Common Use of Tobacco, 1894.

Slocum, C. E., About Tobacco.

Towns, C. B., Habits That Handicap, 1916.

Williams, H. S., Drugs Against Men, 1935.

Wood, Frank Leighton, M. D., Smoking and Other Habits.

The Case Against Tobacco, L. D. S. Social Advisory Committee, 1921.

Flowers and Bowers, The Menace of Morphine, Heroin and Cocaine.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:9.
[^2] Johnson, J. H., A Voice from the Mountains, p. 12.
[^3] Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 90.
[^4] Improvement Era, 4:943.
[^6] Williams, H. S., Drugs Against Men, 1935, p. 99.
[^7] American Journal of Physiology, 90:380, 1929.
[^8] Oaks, L. W., Medical Aspects of the Word of Wisdom, p. 102.
[^9] Kola contains as high as 2.00%, mate 1.25%, of caffeine.
[^10] Bayly, W. W., editor, What We Drink, 1930, pp. 18-19.
[^11] Kress, D. H., The Cigarette, 1931, p. 30.
[^12] O'Shea, M. V., Tobacco and Mental Efficiency, 1923, pp. 112-115.
[^13] 13. Anslinger and Cooper, American Magazine, July, 1937.
[^14] 14. See, McCormack, G. R., Hygeia, October, 1937.
[^15] 15. Dr. Frank Leighton Wood in Smoking and Other Habits, page 58, states: "Temporary, partial, or even complete impotency results in men."
[^16] 16. Pack, F. J., Tobacco and Human Efficiency, 1918.
