John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 7

HOT DRINKS

"Hot drinks are not for the body or belly." [^1]

The Meaning of "Hot Drinks". When the Word of Wisdom was first promulgated in 1833, the question was at once asked: What is the meaning of "hot drinks?" Was it an injunction against consuming beverages so hot as to burn the tongue or mouth? That did not seem reasonable. Did it mean that the consumption of warm drinks should be reduced? That did not, even in that day, seem so unreasonable, for it was recognized that the stomach lining might be made unduly sensitive by frequent large ingestions of hot liquids. In fact, some clinical results of the modern day indicate that hot beverages, continuously used, predispose the stomach to certain serious disorders.

The question concerning the meaning of "hot drinks," as used in the Word of Wisdom, was at last brought to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He defined "hot drinks" as tea and coffee, the two common household beverages of the day. Joel H. Johnson, with whose family the Prophet was intimate, relates that on a Sabbath day in July (1833) following the giving of the "Word of Wisdom," when both Joseph and Hyrum Smith were in the stand, the Prophet said to the Saints: "I understand that some of the people are excusing themselves in using tea and coffee, because the Lord only said 'hot drinks' in the revelation of the Word of Wisdom. Tea and coffee are what the Lord meant when he said 'hot drinks.'" [^2] On March 17, 1838, when the body of Seventies were preparing for their pilgrimage to the "land of Zion," they agreed that they should see to it that "the commandments are kept, and the Word of Wisdom heeded, that is, no tobacco, tea, coffee, snuff or ardent spirits of any kind to be taken internally". [^3] Sometime later, in 1842, Hyrum Smith, the Prophet's brother, in speaking upon the Word of Wisdom concerning the term "hot drinks" said, "There are many who wonder what this can mean, whether it refers to tea or coffee, or not. I say it does refer to tea and coffee." [^4] Brigham Young, who, as the President of the Council of Twelve, was very near to the Prophet, always taught that "hot drinks" meant tea and coffee.

He once said:

"I have heard it argued that tea and coffee are not mentioned in the Word of Wisdom; that is very true; but what were the people in the habit of taking as hot drinks when that revelation was given? Tea and coffee. We were not in the habit of drinking water very hot, but tea and coffee—the beverages in common use." [^5]

Moreover, from the time that the Word of Wisdom was received, until the present day, the Church as a whole has understood and taught that the term "hot drinks" refers to tea and coffee and all similar beverages. This definition may be extended to include all drinks whether hot or cold in temperature which, like coffee and tea, contain any stimulating substance, for such are detrimental to health.

This definition of "hot drinks" furnishes the key to this part of the Word of Wisdom.

One may well ask: what has modern scientific investigation to say about this definition of the term "hot drinks"? Has the statement been interpreted arbitrarily or are there good scientific reasons why such drinks are injurious to human welfare?

Historical. Coffee and tea are among the oldest beverages used by man. The origin of their use is lost in antiquity. Coffee appears to have come from Abyssinia, the present Ethiopia, and from the neighboring countries, especially Arabia. Tea on the other hand has come from the Far East, India, China, where it has been used from time immemorial.

Both coffee and tea made their appearance in Europe towards the middle of the seventeenth century, about the time of the introduction of tobacco. Today, coffee and tea are the most widely used beverages of man.

Joseph Smith was not the first to advise against the inclusion of coffee and tea in the human dietary. Mohammed, in the Koran, forbade the use of coffee (also alcohol.) At various times, men, observing the deleterious effects of these drinks upon the human system, have written and spoken against them. Even laws have been passed against coffee and coffee houses.

Economics of Hot Drinks. The coffee and tea habit has spread over the world. In the United States alone, in 1936, the consumption of coffee was 1,739,184,000 pounds or a per capita consumption of 13.48 pounds. The value of this quantity in the raw state was $133,961,369. In the same year the United States used 82,476,599 pounds of tea, about two-thirds of a pound per capita, with a value of $17,885,001. To these vast sums the cost of manufacture and distribution must be added. The combined value in the raw state of these two luxuries, which are detrimental to human health, reached in 1936 the great sum of $151,846,370. The cost to the ultimate consumer was undoubtedly several times as large, approximating $650,000,000. Besides, and of most consequence, "the amount of tea and coffee consumed in America is adequate to supply every adult in the land about three grains of caffeine (a large dose, medicinally speaking) every day in the year." [^6] When one considers the numbers of those who do not use these drugs it may be guessed how many over-use them.

The world consumption of coffee in 1933 was not far from five and one-half billion pounds, valued approximately in the raw state, at four hundred million dollars. The world consumption of tea is even larger, but difficult to estimate. Great Britain alone consumed, in 1929, 559,167,758 pounds of tea, valued in the raw state at $187,791,410. China and Great Britain are the chief tea-drinking countries in the world; America and the Scandinavian countries, the chief coffee consumers.

Since all of these and similar beverages are not only unnecessary for human welfare, but actually injurious to the body, the huge expenditures for tea and coffee and similar substances cannot be defended. The money might better be used for the normal, necessary requirements of man.

It seems clear that the "hot drinks" habit has increased greatly in recent years. For example, in the United States the per capita consumption of coffee in 1830 was 2.99 pounds; in 1933, 12.52 pounds—a four-fold increase. The increase in the use of tea in the United States, not a tea-drinking nation, while not so great is substantial.

Composition of Coffee and Tea. At the time of the receiving of the Word of Wisdom little was known of the composition of tea or coffee. The study of the ingredients of the natural products of the plant kingdom was in its infancy, as indeed was the whole science of chemistry. It was of course assumed, since these beverages had a distinct effect upon the body, that they contained some "active principle."

In 1821, a white, silky substance, odorless and bitter to the taste, was extracted from coffee and named caffeine. Six years later, the same substance was found to exist in tea. Thousands of chemical analyses of tea and coffee have been made during the last century. Coffee contains small quantities of several substances of questionable value to man, such as trigonelline and the depsides; and also from one to two percent of caffeine. Tea, in addition to several other somewhat harmful substances, contains three to six percent of caffeine and over ten percent (at times as high as 25 percent) of tannin. A small quantity of tannin is found in coffee also. A cup of tea or coffee contains about one to one and one-half grains of caffeine.

Caffeine has been shown since that time to be one of a series of chemical compounds known as purin derivatives. These compounds, alkaloids, are found rather widely distributed in the plant kingdom. In their chemical nature they are related to urea, a waste product of the animal body. Whether these purin derivatives, alkaloids and poisons, are the products of the disintegration of the protein substances in the plant, as the corresponding substances are formed in the animal body, is not yet known. The suggestion has been made that they serve the purpose, because of their taste and after effect, of protecting the plant against destruction by wild animals.

Three substances are of special concern in the study of "hot drinks": caffeine and its near chemical relatives, theophylline, and theobromine. These have to some degree the same or similar physiological effects. They are usually associated in nature, though caffeine predominates in coffee and tea, and theobromine in chocolate and cocoa. The special importance of theophylline is that it is made synthetically and is no doubt often used in commercial beverages.

Effects Upon the Body and Mind. Caffeine found in tea, coffee, and other foods and drinks, is a drug, an alkaloid, related to some of the most violent of poisons. When it enters the human body, it produces at first a feeling of stimulation, followed in due course by a period of depression, relief from which is sought by the use of more caffeine. It is, therefore, habit-forming, so that the power of the will is weakened. It deceives the user into the belief that he is better off, when in fact he is laying the foundation for an increasingly worse condition. The causes that led to the taking of the drug remain just the same, for they cannot be removed by drug taking. Drugs cannot build up the body; they merely mask the truth, temporarily. Only by natural processes such as rest and proper food can fatigue be overcome and new power acquired. Like all other drugs of its class, these alkaloids—caffeine, theobromine, theophylline—fasten their hold upon the victim with a firm, unyielding grasp.

In recent years it has been found that trigonelline, which occurs in coffee to the extent of about one-fourth of one percent, may act as a poison upon people with "acid" stomach. Trigonelline is hydrolized by acids into methyl nicotinic acid, a near relative of nicotine. This acid is a poison to the human body. An "acid" stomach changes the trigonelline into this injurious acid, often with serious results. Aged and sedentary people, for this reason, if for no other, should avoid the use of coffee.

Tannic acid, found in coffee in small quantity as tannin, but in tea to a large extent, is an astringent. It is found in oakbark and is the active substance in the tanning of leather. When tannic acid is taken into the body, its astringent nature affects the lining and the contents of the stomach and intestines, tending to cause many serious disorders. A practical recognition of the injurious effect of tannic acid is the advice to steep tea quickly in hot water, so that the caffeine, which is very soluble, may go into solution, while the less soluble tannic acid in large part remains behind. Long continued steeping of tea leaves brings the tannic acid into more complete solution and makes the resulting tea a more dangerous beverage.

Coffee and tea, very much alike in their immediate physiological action, both contain dangerous drugs. Like all other such poisons, their effects differ with the quantity given and the condition of the user. A person with a sensitive nervous system or one not in full strength is affected most quickly. A small amount of a drug may give a feeling of exhilaration while a large dose may produce death. Nevertheless, the constant taking of small doses of a poisonous drug has a cumulative effect and leads eventually to disease.

The physiological effects of caffeine have been studied experimentally by many investigators, especially in Europe. All have come to practically the same conclusion. All agree that the use of caffeine-containing beverages is harmful to the body and reduces normal health. No principle laid down in the Word of Wisdom has received more complete vindication by progressing science.

Coffee and tea act directly upon the brain. A small dose of caffeine, as found in a cup of coffee, stimulates the mental powers and banishes drowsiness. Connected thought becomes more difficult, for impressions come more rapidly. However, the period of reaction and depression more than offsets the artificially induced brilliance. Throughout a period of a week, month or year, the person who depends upon normal foods, rest and play for the regeneration of the power spent in daily activity will produce more and better work than the person can possibly do who resorts to artificial unnatural stimulation to accomplish the tasks before him.

The wider effect of caffeine upon the brain was put to experimental test by Professor Storm van Leuwen, of the University of Leyden, Holland. A dog was confined in a cage which registered every movement of the animal. After a small dose of caffeine, the movements of the dog increased more than three times; and a very small dose resulted in extreme restlessness during sleep. Caffeine has the same effect upon human beings. All coffee and tea drinkers may suffer, sooner or later, and usually do so, from insomnia, irritability, loss of memory, high blood pressure, headaches and other nervous disorders.

Dr. Hawk administered coffee "over a prolonged period," one to three times daily to 100 normal young men. The nervous system was "very definitely" and unfavorably affected and as a result the mechanical and mental efficiency of the coffee drinkers was materially lowered and they became less efficient human machines. [^7]

The heart and circulatory system are likewise affected by caffeine. Several investigators have demonstrated that not only are the heartbeats somewhat increased after coffee or tea drinking, but there follows also an irregularity of the heart, and an increase in the blood pressure. This means that more work is placed upon the heart. The increased rate of breathing after a cup of coffee is well known to every coffee user. There is direct action also upon the muscles, which has given rise to the statement that more muscular work may be done by men under the influence of caffeine. This is true, for a brief period, but as with the apparent mental brilliance after coffee drinking, the work done over a longer period of time is greater by a non-user of caffeine.

The irritation or injurious stimulation of the kidneys by caffeine, is a major evil of coffee and tea. These delicate organs should not be unduly, improperly and frequently excited as in the case with the habitual user of coffee and tea.

The whole body is more or less directly affected unfavorably by the use of caffeine-containing drinks. It has been reported that injury to eyes and ears and various glands has come from this habit. It seems clear that normal metabolism is interfered with by caffeine, since it disturbs the equilibrium that should exist between the nervous system and the various parts of the body. Indigestion and loss of appetite are often found among coffee and tea drinkers. Coffee poisoning is a malady of frequent occurrence.

All informed persons, whether users or not of "hot drinks," advise against allowing children the use of them, for the coffee or tea habit disturbs the nervous system, hinders nutrition and retards the normal growth and development of children. The reason, then, why the habitual adult caffeine-user does not at first suffer as much is that he possesses greater resistance, but to some degree he does suffer as does the child from the invariably injurious effects of habitual coffee and tea drinking.

Dr. L. W. Oaks calls special attention to the effect upon her child of the coffee and tea consumed by the nursing mother. The caffeine taken in by the mother is passed on in part through the mother's milk to the infant with corresponding injury.

"Many nervous, crying babies no doubt owe their unstable and irritable temperaments to the absorption of caffeine from the milk of tea or coffee-drinking mothers." [^8]

The expectant mother who uses caffeine-containing beverages is laying a foundation for failure in life for the unborn child. The human misery due to the caffeine habit is beyond estimation.

The best knowledge of the day fails to produce any good argument for the use of coffee or tea or any similar habit-forming drug. The fact that many people use them or have used them is no argument in their favor. Injurious things are often consumed through ignorance or because of the wilfulness of man. Those who never acquire the habit are better off, physically, mentally and economically. Undoubtedly, the habitual use of tea and coffee shortens many thousand lives each year and is the indirect cause of much suffering and inefficiency.

Other Stimulating Beverages. The drug caffeine is found in many other plants than tea and coffee, such as yerba, mate, Cola nuts, guarana paste and yonpon tea. [^9] Decoctions of these and similar plants are often used where found for their stimulating effects and for commercial purposes the world over. They do not bear the names coffee and tea but have the same effect, because they usually contain the same poisonous drugs.

Caffeine is separated in large quantities from the coffee bean, to make decaffeinated coffee on the one hand, and caffeine-rich soft drinks on the other. Stimulating substances of this class are also made synthetically and given fancy names. Whenever a drink is advertised to "give you a lift," the "lift" is likely to be caused by the drug which it contains. Such soft drinks are decidedly harmful and habit-forming, even though sold by the millions. Such caffeine-containing drinks, offered by every soda fountain and most eating places, and consumed in large quantities, should be known and avoided. There is an added danger from the association of the caffeine with the syrup of the drink, for then one is apt to take much more caffeine than one would do if taking tea or coffee. Often the amount of caffeine in a portion of these drinks is larger than in a cup of strong coffee. The caffeine habit is soon developed, difficult to overcome, and body and mind are injured. Many unnecessary failures in life may be traced to the caffeine-habit as acquired elsewhere than by the use of coffee or tea.

Cocoa and Chocolate. The most common of the substances similar to caffeine widely distributed in nature and largely used by man, are the products of the cocoa bean—chocolate and cocoa. The United States consumes about 40 percent of the world's production of cocoa beans, which with other cocoa and chocolate importations amounted in 1936 to 631,883,818 pounds, with a value in the raw state of $33,000,803. The cocoa bean contains about 50 percent of fat and varying amounts up to 3 percent of the substance theobromine, a near relative of caffeine. Cocoa is usually the ground cocoa bean from which some of the fat has been expressed. Chocolate consists of ground cocoa bean from which the fat has not been removed, mixed with white sugar, starch and flavorings. The percentage of theobromine is therefore somewhat smaller than in the bean itself. Theobromine acts upon the body, especially upon the kidneys, very much as does caffeine. While it does not have as strong an effect upon the central nervous system, it is more irritating to the kidneys. Chocolate also contains considerable fat which has food value, but which sometimes is a combination too rich for weak digestions. Chocolate contains less theobromine than cocoa, and chocolate candy still less. However, the accompanying concentrated sugary preparations used excessively, are a menace to human health. (see chapter 12) The chocolate habit, which is related to the caffeine habit, is a matter of common observation, and should be controlled. The wise person tries to emancipate himself from the use of every habit-begetting drug.

Theophylline. Theophylline, less known, is more like caffeine in all of its physiological effects. It occurs in nature in small amounts, but since it is now made synthetically at a reasonable cost, it is a factor to be considered, for it is likely to appear more and more in a variety of beverages offered the public.

Curing the Caffeine Habit. As with the alcohol and tobacco habits, so with the caffeine habit. Assuming a will directed towards the conquest of the habit, the most direct way to success is through a natural, normal life. The observation of the positive factors of the Word of Wisdom—proper food, ample sleep, exercise, recreation and righteous living—would enable a person of reasonable self-control to overcome the caffeine habit. The well-nourished body has no unnatural cravings and does not need a "lift." (see chapters 8 to 16)

Avoid "Hot Drinks." Caffeine, the essential principle of tea and coffee, was discovered, as a chemical substance, a few years before the Word of Wisdom was received. This knowledge was, however, buried in scientific publications. It is very unlikely that the Prophet Joseph Smith had heard of it. It was many years after 1833 that the physiological effect of caffeine was established by science. In the days of Joseph Smith, tea and coffee did not come in for the disfavor shown by some towards alcohol and tobacco. Indeed, people were often advised to use tea and coffee as a means of conquering the liquor habit.

That the expression "hot drinks" was used in the Word of Wisdom rather than "coffee and tea," is notable; for by so doing a host of other injurious habit-forming beverages now used (or that may be used) become subject to the Word of Wisdom. Indeed, the use of the words "hot drinks" implies a knowledge beyond that possessed by man when the Word of Wisdom was received. It is remarkable indeed that Joseph Smith could so boldly declare himself against coffee and tea, as against all similar hurtful beverages, at a time when the world's learning could not safely make the statement.

Human experience, since that day, is all against the use of coffee and tea, and similar beverages. They gradually influence harmfully the mind and the body of the user, especially if excesses are indulged in, and the tendency of the habit is to demand more and more.

W. E. Dixon, M.A., M.D., F.R.S., in an exceedingly temperate study of caffeine beverages (1930) concludes that they tend to produce a condition of neurosis and chronic dyspepsia with all the attendant evils. He says:

"If a man drinks too much spirit his condition is easily recognized, but with tea and coffee the effects are much more insidious, since they act on the brain much as strychnine acts on the spinal cord. . . . Tea and coffee drinking may be directly responsible for, or at all events a contributing cause of, a large number of neurotics, just as surely as these drinks are known to produce chronic dyspeptics; and there is reason to believe that England and America (tea and coffee-drinking countries) show a larger proportion of neurotics in their population than other civilized countries." [^10]

Dr. Dixon, speaking to Great Britain, suggests that the habit of drinking tea and coffee is becoming sufficiently serious to justify consideration by politicians, public health agencies and temperance societies. One of the gravest dangers accompanying the caffeine habit is the failure to recognize fully the evil until perhaps later middle life, when the harm done to the body may be beyond recovery. Caffeine addiction may seem to give immediate exhilaration, but in the end destroys the joy of life, and also does irreparable injury for the future.

It is to be emphasized that cold or iced tea and coffee come under the ban of "hot drinks". The drug contained is just as injurious in iced as in hot coffee or tea. Moreover, iced drinks of any kind, unless drunk very slowly, may injure health.

Wise people, especially Latter-day Saints, should lay aside the caffeine-habit, if formed, and should avoid the use of all such beverages in the home, as should the whole world. True physical and mental enjoyment, and complete health cannot be won by those who are subject to the habit of drinking "hot drinks"—coffee and tea and related beverages. The waste of money alone, for unnecessary and harmful products, justifies opposition to all caffeine products except for industrial and medical purposes.

A Common Question. Those who defend the use of alcohol, tobacco, tea and coffee often ask, "If these substances are abolished by man how can the large numbers of people who will be thrown out of employment be cared for?" The most obvious answer is that moral evil is never justified by economic good. It may also be answered that the money now expended for these injurious substances would more than care for the unemployed in a state of idleness. However, such a solution is not necessary. A redirection of effort would clearly be required. Other crops and activities would have to be found, and would soon develop. Men labor for bread; the tobacco road is not the only avenue that leads to food, clothing and shelter. In our farflung society, if the will were correctly directed, such changes would soon and effectively be accomplished. If civilization has built a false structure, civilization must remedy its faults. Moreover, a new age is dawning, in which the farmer, through cooperation with the manufacturer, will find new, sound markets for present crops and many more for all that he can produce.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Baker, Walter & Co., Cocoa and Chocolate, 1917.

Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness, 1935.

Crichton-Browne, Sir James, What We Drink, 1930.

Cushing, A. R., Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 1928.

Fisher, I., and Fisk, E. L., How to Live, 1932.

Hutchinson, Food and Dietetics, 1914.

Kellogg, J. H., The New Dietetics, 1923.

Leeuwen, W. Storm van, Studien uber die Wirkung von Caffeine.

McCollum, E. V., and Becker, J. E., Food, Nutrition and Health, 1933.

Oaks, L. W., Medical Aspects of the Word of Wisdom, 1929.

Schulte, R. W., Einfluss des Kaffees auf Koerper und Geist, 1929.

Wilcox, Materia Medica and Therapeutics.

Williams, H. S., Drugs Against Men, 1935.

Wood, H. C., Therapeutics, Materia Medica and Toxicology, 1886.

Manual for Teaching the Effects of Alcohol, Stimulants and Narcotics Upon the Human Body, Department of Education, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, No. 11, 1933.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 88:118.
[^2] Doctrine and Covenants 89:18, 19.
[^3] Documentary History of the Church, Vol. 5, p. 90.
[^4] Improvement Era, 4:943.
[^5] Discourses of Brigham Young, p. 283.
[^6] Williams, H. S., Drugs Against Men, 1935, p. 99.
[^7] American Journal of Physiology, 90:380, 1929.
[^8] Oaks, L. W., Medical Aspects of the Word of Wisdom, p. 102.
[^9] Kola contains as high as 2.00%, mate 1.25%, of caffeine.
[^10] Bayly, W. W., editor, What We Drink, 1930, pp. 18-19.
