John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 8

FOOD CONSTITUENTS

"And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." [^1]

Positive Instructions. The Word of Wisdom gives quite as many instructions as to what man shall do as to what he shall avoid, to secure and maintain health of body. These are the positive factors of this health law. It is more important to keep the body well nourished, thereby to prevent all unnatural cravings for injurious substances, than to try to cure injurious habits of food and drink once formed. "Prevention is better than cure."

One who is poorly nourished (and malnourishment may be the lot of one whose food is too rich or unbalanced as well as of one who is too poor to buy the necessary foods for health) is greatly tempted to ease the natural craving for the right nourishment with food or drink containing deceiving drugs, such as have been discussed in earlier chapters, and which give only temporary relief with injurious after effects. A well-nourished body is the best defense against an unnatural appetite.

It happens too often that those who have refrained all their lives from the things forbidden in the Word of Wisdom, suffer from grave maladies, all too prevalent today. This must be in part, at least, the result of failure to obey the positive instructions of the Word of Wisdom, whether done willfully or ignorantly. Nature has no favorites; those who break any of the laws of health must suffer the consequences. Only when all the laws indicated in the Word of Wisdom are kept may one claim in full the promised reward that "they shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones . . . . and shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint." [^2] How many today may really claim these precious blessings? Conscientious study and application of this law of health, including its positive directions, will permit all to do so.

This does not mean that one should be always fussing about one's food or be conscious of every mouthful eaten. That would be a bore as well as an unhealthy attitude. It does mean that all should learn the best food practice and why certain foods are conducive to health or disease. One-third to one-half of the average family income is spent for food; it should purchase good health. If circumstances make it necessary to economize in food expenditures, it is all the more important that the money spent for food shall purchase the maximum value in the foods most necessary for growth and health. A taste for the right food may be cultivated and maintained as easily as a taste for that which is imperfect or injurious.

Scientific Confirmation. It is certainly faith-promoting to know that the latest findings within the field of nutrition, as reported in the most authoritative books, are in the main in strict accord with the teachings of the Word of Wisdom.

Reliable scientific knowledge is necessary if one is to be guided safely in this important subject. Feeding experiments with numerous foods are constantly being made, and new truths are gradually coming to light. Advancing science must be understood; then it may be shown to interpret the Word of Wisdom. It is so easy for "food fads" to creep in, and for "food quacks" to give instruction, unsupported by scientific facts, on the vital subject of food and health. On this as on all other subjects, the truth must be learned and practiced.

Necessity of Proof. Many agencies in most civilized countries are today investigating different phases of human nutrition. While many truths pertaining thereto are discovered from time to time, it is not wise to "jump at conclusions" or to accept blindly the unproven hypotheses of investigators.

Occasional statements are made by reputable scientists in opposition to some of the principles of the Word of Wisdom, but further study shows that they are not supported by well-established facts. Up to date nothing has been discovered to set at naught any truth taught in the Word of Wisdom, and if we may judge by the past, all statements made therein will in time be proved true. Members of the Church may feel safe in accepting all views concerning human welfare if and when they agree with the truths taught in this inspired document. New, well-substantiated discoveries in the field of nutrition are welcomed by Latter-day Saints and should be known by them. It is the duty of everyone to learn the facts concerning human nutrition as known today, to accept confirmed truth and to reject unfounded hypotheses, and to avoid all food fads. As new nutritional truth is discovered, it should be accepted and applied in the daily diet. It is not enough to have knowledge; one must apply and use knowledge if one would be wise.

Functions of Food. The first and most important function of food is to build and repair the tissues of which the body is composed. During the first year of life the body doubles or trebles its weight, and a gradual increase should go on to full maturity. During growth and thereafter comes wear and tear upon the body tissues from daily living. If the food is wholesome and sufficient, the body develops normally; if it is poor in quality or robbed of its vitality by being refined or "doctored" for commercial purposes, the body will probably be stunted or diseased; or both. The most obvious function of food is to supply the material needed for growth and the repair of worn out tissues.

Another function of food is to maintain body temperature. Food is burned within the body. Since blood temperature (98.6 F.) is many degrees higher than the air of an average day, it takes much energy to keep the heat of the body up to its requirement for health, especially during cold weather.

Yet another function that food performs is to furnish energy for work. Every act of life requires an expenditure of energy. The source of this energy is the food eaten. The body may be likened to a machine or engine, and the food to the fuel which feeds it. If the fuel is poor the fire burns low, in the body as in a furnace.

The Six Groups of Food Constituents. The constituents of foods are classified under the following headings: (1) proteins, (2) carbohydrates, (3) fats, (4) mineral salts, (5) vitamins, (6) water. One clever writer in this field, Mrs. Lulu Hunt Peters, has called them the "Food Sextette" which makes it easy to remember the different food classes.

(1) Proteins are the body-building foods, essential for growth and repair. They are found in meat, cheese, milk, grains (gluten or gluey substances) and vegetables. White of egg is the purest form of protein. Every day the body must have its full quota of protein foods, for the cells of the body are being constantly destroyed through the activities of life. These must be replaced if health is to continue. (see chapter 15) The amino acids which make up the natural proteins are composed of the elements hydrogen, oxygen, carbon and nitrogen (the last, the characteristic element); some protein-building amino acids also contain sulphur.

(2) Carbohydrates include the starches and sugars of fruits, vegetables, and cereal grains. They are the energy or fuel foods which keep up the body temperature, and provide energy for all life processes, and for mental and physical work. The source of the fuel foods is mainly from the plant kingdom. (see chapter 12) Carbohydrates are composed of the elements hydrogen, oxygen and carbon.

(3) Fats are energy foods like the carbohydrates, but are more concentrated. They are utilized to produce heat and to supply energy for work. They probably have other, more obscure functions, for if absent from food an intense craving for them ensues. In cold countries this need seems to be imperative, but is less in warmer climates. The most used fats are butter, meat and fish fats, and vegetable oils. Animal fats are most valuable because of their content of Vitamin A. (see chapters 10 and 12) Fats, like carbohydrates, are composed of the elements hydrogen, oxygen and carbon but are very different in constitution. A fat is composed of a fatty acid and glycerine. Some of the fatty acids found in natural fats, as for example in butter, appear to be indispensable to complete health.

(4) Mineral salts are the inorganic or non-combustible portions of food, the ash or residue which remains when food is burned. Their importance in the food cannot be overestimated, for they regulate most body processes. (see chapter 9)

(5) The vitamins are essential chemical substances present in minute quantities in many foods but in varying amounts. They act as body regulators, and promote reactions without which full nutrition is impossible. When vitamins are lacking in the diet the body becomes diseased and in time perishes. Vitamins are present in most natural, fresh foods, but may be partially or even totally lacking in certain refined or preserved, or dried foodstuffs. (see chapter 10)

(6) Water is the solvent of all foods and is a part of every living cell. It may be designated a food because of its importance as a regulating substance in nutrition. It is necessary for the blood, digestive juices, and for the processes of elimination.

Only when these six food constituents are present in the daily diet in correct proportions and suitable amounts can full health be expected. Such a well balanced diet must provide: Protein, for building and repairing tissues; Carbohydrates, for producing heat and energy; Fats, for producing heat and energy, and if containing certain fatty acids, to secure in a manner not yet well understood, the nutritive welfare of man; Minerals, for building bones, teeth, blood and for regulating body fluids; Vitamins, for promoting the assimilation of foods and giving vigor to body cells and membranes; Water, for the health of every living cell and for all life processes. All natural foods such as fruits, vegetables, cereals, milk and nuts, contain all these food constituents in varying amounts. They are the storehouses of nature's food wealth.

The positive instructions of the Word of Wisdom provide for this complete and balanced diet, as will be shown in the following chapters.

The essential thought remains, that to abstain from the things forbidden in the Word of Wisdom as injurious to health is not sufficient; it is equally important to partake of foods that build the body properly and meet bodily needs.

Men may heed the natural laws of life and live; or they may ignore or pervert them and suffer disease and finally perish. It is so written, and has been so proved throughout thousands of years of history.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Atwater, W., The Chemistry and Economy of Food, 1895.

Chaney, and Ahlborn, Nutrition.

Eddy, W. H., Nutrition.

Kellogg, J. H., The New Dietetics, 1923.

Lusk, G., The Science of Nutrition, 1919.

McCollum, E. V., and Becker, J. E., Food, Nutrition and Health, 1933.

McCollum, E. V., and Simmonds, N., The Newer Knowledge of Nutrition, 1925.

Rose, M. S., The Foundations of Nutrition, 1937.

Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934.

Sherman, H. C., Chemistry of Food and Nutrition, 1937.

Sherman, H. C., Food and Health, 1934.

Stanley, L., and Cline, G. A., Foods, Their Selection and Preparation, 1935.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:16.
[^2] Genesis 2:7, 8, 9.
