John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 9

"OUT OF THE GROUND"

"That which yieldeth fruit, whether in the ground or above the ground." [^1]

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food;" [^2]

"And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat." [^3]

"Dust Thou Art". This describes the body of man—not his soul. If a portion of "dust" or fertile soil be taken to the chemical laboratory and analyzed, it will be found to contain many elements, so-called, of which oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, iron, calcium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, and iodine are among the best known by name, though there are other elements equally as much a part of the soil. It is from these and other necessary elements that the body of man is formed.

Under the influence of sunlight and soil moisture, plants feed upon the inorganic constituents of air and soil. From the air they take the gas known as carbon dioxide, which supplies the element carbon, the basis of the organic or combustible portion of plants. From the soil they take water and minerals, the latter incombustible and remaining in the ash when the plant is burned. The water is the solvent by means of which nutritive materials are carried from the soil to plants and from place to place within the plants. Part of the water combines, in the process known as photosynthesis, with the carbon taken from the air to form starch. This, in turn, combines with nitrogen and other elements to form protein and the great variety of substances occurring in plant structures. In all these transformations, resulting from plant growth, the mineral substances taken from the soil, "the dust of the earth", are indispensable. If mineral food is not available in suitable variety and quantity, the plant is stunted or fails to mature. In short, through the processes of plant growth, simple inorganic compounds are transformed into intricate and varied organic plant compounds and structures.

The complex body of man cannot use directly the elements of air and soil and is therefore dependent for its life and growth upon the substances prepared by the plant. Thus the elements of plant products—won in part from the soil—become incorporated into the body of the one who eats them. Indeed, the mineral substances necessary for life are in the main available to man only through the food which comes directly or indirectly from the plants and fruits of earth.

Composition of the Body. If the body of man be analyzed, the elements from which it is made are found to be those which exist in the air and in the soil, that is, the earth's crust. The following comparison between the composition of the human body and that of the earth's crust shows the close relationship existing between the body of man and "the dust of the earth"

Approximate Elementary Approximate Elementary Composition of the Earth's Composition of the Adult Crust with its Oceans and Human Body Atmosphere (Clarke) Chemical Element Percent Chemical Element Percent Oxygen .......... 65.0 Oxygen .......... 50.02 Carbon .......... 18.0 Carbon .......... 0.18 Hydrogen ........ 10.0 Hydrogen ........ 0.95 Nitrogen ........ 3.0 Nitrogen ........ 0.03 Calcium ......... 1.5 Calcium ......... 3.22 Phosphorus ...... 1.0 Phosphorus ...... 0.11 Potassium ....... 0.35 Potassium ....... 2.88 Sulphur ......... 0.25 Sulphur ......... 0.11 Sodium .......... 0.15 Sodium .......... 2.36 Chlorine ........ 0.15 Chlorine ........ 0.20 Magnesium ....... 0.05 Magnesium ....... 2.08 Iron ............ 0.004 Iron ............ 4.18 Manganese ....... 0.0003 Manganese ....... 0.08 Iodine .......... 0.00004 Silicon ......... 25.80 Copper,zinc, very minute Aluminum ........ 7.30 flourine, silicon, amounts Titanium ........ 0.43 (aluminum?) Fluorine ........ 0.10 Barium .......... 0.08 Others in lesser amounts.

The inorganic elements of air and soil are built by plants into forms suitable and necessary for the use of man. Thus, all life depends upon Mother Earth. In very deed man is made of the "dust" of the earth.

Effects of Soil Upon Plant Composition. Since the mineral constituents of plants are derived from the soil, it follows that the composition of the soil will measurably determine the quantities and relative amounts of these elements in plant tissues. Plants grown on soils rich in calcium generally contain relatively more calcium. Those grown on soils containing calcium in the available form of carbonate will contain more calcium than those grown on soils in which the calcium is in the less available form of silicates. It is so with all the other essential mineral plant foods.

This matter has been tested by the artificial application of different mineral foods to the soil and noting the effects upon the composition of the crops. It has been found possible by this means to change the relative amount and the quality of all crop constituents, protein, fats and carbohydrates, also to influence size, structure, quality, flavor, resistance to disease, and reproductive power, etc. Indeed, the presence of proper mineral food in the soil produces almost spectacular results in the size and flavor of crops grown, as well as their resistance to pests and various plant diseases. [^4]

Some soils contain mineral substances that may prove injurious to the animal body. Crops grown upon such soils are often valueless in animal nutrition. Recent investigation has shown large areas of land on which, for the above reasons, crops should not be grown for animal consumption.

Since the composition of the food eaten determines largely the effect upon the body, this subject becomes of prime nutritive interest. This whole field is somewhat new, but of vital importance. As it is explored, a new understanding of the relationship of foods to the place of origin will develop. Farmers in various localities will learn what substances to add to their soil to obtain health-giving crops.

Necessary Minerals in Foods. According to present knowledge, thirteen "mineral elements" are necessary for full health. There may be others, but if so, they are probably present in minute, though sufficient quantities in all natural foods, unless grown on impoverished soil. The mineral elements, now known to be necessary, are: Calcium, magnesium, iron, manganese, copper, sodium, potassium, sulphur, phosphorus, chlorine, iodine, zinc and possibly cobalt.

The total mineral substances in the commonly used foods vary from a small fraction of one percent to five percent or more. The proportions of the essential minerals in the total are not the same. Unless the source of the food product is known, the amount and kind of minerals in it cannot be foretold.

A diet which contains amounts of any of the necessary elements below the daily requirement cannot maintain the body in good health. One element may not be substituted for another. Each one is essential. In most fertile soils all of these are present in sufficient quantities for plant production, though potassium, chlorine, calcium, phosphorus, iron, iodine and copper must sometimes be added to the soil of certain regions for full plant production.

Drs. Greaves and Greaves and others have shown that the mineral composition of foods affect directly the composition of the body. In one experiment two kinds of wheat, one high-calcium, the other low-calcium, were fed. [^5] In every instance the animals receiving the high-calcium wheat had more calcium and phosphorus in their bones, and more calcium and phosphorus in their blood. The relation of the mineral composition of foods to human health is a subject that should be given careful attention.

Minerals and Body Functions. Each of the essential elements promotes some life-functions. For example, calcium, which is of first and utmost importance, is found as the chief ingredient of bones and teeth. Dr. Henry C. Sherman states that:

"Calcium is in many ways the outstanding mineral element, both in the purely scientific study of the chemistry of nutrition and in the every day practical problem of meeting the nutritional needs of our own and our children's bodies. . . . To be normal and healthy the full-grown human body must be richer in calcium than in any other mineral element; yet every human being is born calcium-poor." [^6]

Calcium is essential to the activity of every cell of the body—and their number runs into the billions. It is necessary in the blood; without it the heart will not beat and the muscles will refuse to function properly. Its importance in bodily functions generally is most essential. The body demands more calcium than any other mineral element, and from birth to age one must make sure that the food eaten contains its full share of this mineral. Iron is needed by the blood to enable it to become purified by the oxygen of the air and is also otherwise used. Chlorine is needed in the blood for the same reason, and for others as well. Iodine is necessary for the health of the thyroid and other glands. So indeed are all the minerals essential for bodily well-being—each has a definite purpose and place in maintaining health.

This view is reiterated by all present day reliable scientific workers in the field of nutrition. [^7] Much illness results from the lack of certain essential mineral elements in the food of man. One should be informed on this subject because of its vast importance in human diet.

A normal adult under average conditions of activity and diet excretes daily through the organs of elimination, 20 to 30 grams (about one ounce) of mineral salts as chlorides, phosphates, sulphates, etc. This loss must be made good through the daily food or the body suffers. [^8] Indeed it is impossible to overestimate the importance of the mineral content of food.

Minerals and Psychological Attitudes. Psychological as well as physiological effects are conditioned upon the presence or absence of certain minerals in the food. A study made by Dr. Walter Timme of the Neurological Institute was reported in an address given before the New York Academy of Medicine. He stated that:

"Crossness, tiredness, misbehavior and all the other symptoms of problem cases, both child and adult, result when the blood has too little calcium."

When the supply of calcium is reduced:

"There is apparently a disturbing effect on the nerves and subsequent conduct of the individual who then misbehaves, showing inordinate fatigability, irritability of temper and at times even incorrigibility, non-amenability to discipline or even assaultiveness.

"Such cases are easily aroused to a high pitch of anger at the slightest provocation, a word, an insinuation or even a glance being sufficient to arouse intense antagonistic reaction. These patients became problem cases at home, at school or in whatever environment they found themselves. Occasionally, their behavior became so exaggerated that apparently hypomaniac states developed therefrom and several of these patients had to be confined in institutions until the symptoms were ameliorated. At home, a harsh word from any member of the family, at the table for instance, would result in a plate or knife or some other utensil being thrown at the aggressor. In school, a blow, a shout or a curse would be hurled at a fellow student or even at the teacher."

A shortage of this element seems to produce abnormal functions in the:

"Relationship of the glands and nerves which are responsible for many of the drug and alcohol habitues and the easily led characters among the criminal classes." [^9]

There is a definite relationship between the mineral content of the food and the healthy functioning of all glands and nerves. Parents and teachers should therefore be very sure that they themselves or their so-called "naughty children" are not innocent victims of mineral shortage and improper nutrition. Many cases of so-called "nervous collapse" in adults may have some such dietary lack as the primary cause.

Shortage of Minerals. Mineral shortage in the food predisposes to many conditions of disease. The part played by phosphorus, iron, iodine and other minerals is of as great importance as that of calcium. The lack of iron is first felt in the blood and is one cause of the disease anaemia. The lack of iodine is known to upset the normal activity of the thyroid gland producing the condition known as goitre in one of its many forms. Drs. McCollum and Orent found that magnesium also plays a vital role. If it be absent in the food of rats for eleven days it would cause death in the vast majority of them. They state that:

"When magnesium is omitted from the diet, calcium and phosphorus are drained out of the body so that not enough is left to make an X-Ray picture of the rat's skeleton." [^10]

Source of Minerals. Vegetables, grains and fruits form nature's storehouse of food minerals. If grown on fertile soils all the edible plants and vegetables usually contain, in varying proportions, all the minerals vital in maintaining bodily health. For example, vegetables rich in calcium are beans, cabbage, carrots, cauliflower,

CONTENT OF MINERAL ELEMENTS IN FOODS Other Foods Foods Rich In: Good for Foods Poor Mineral in Mineral Calcium Phosphorus Iodine Iron Salts Salts Milk Cheese Sea Foods Egg yolk Nuts Fat Pork Cheese Egg yolk Iodized Leafy Legumes Bacon Vegetables, Milk salt vege- Dried Lard and especially Meat Vegetables, tables fruits Suet leafy ones Whole fruits Meat, Fresh Butter Egg yolk grains and espe- fruits Salad Oil Whole grains cially and Sugars grains from liver vege- Confec- non- Whole tables tionery goiterous grains Purified regions starches White flour

parsnips and turnips; those rich in phosphorus are cauliflower, legumes and greens of all kinds, parsnips and potatoes; those rich in iron are legumes, nuts and nearly all greens, especially dandelion greens, spinach and cress. All grains, nuts and fruits are rich in minerals, especially in calcium, phosphorus and iron. Milk and eggs are rich in calcium and phosphorus, but poor in iron. Meat is rich in iron and phosphorus but poor in calcium. Onions are rich in iodine though sea foods are perhaps its best source. Since the proportions of minerals are not the same in all plants, the use of all edible vegetables is advisable to secure a full mineral ration.

Daily Supply of Minerals. To insure enough minerals in the diet, each adult should have daily, at least 1 pint of milk (children 1 quart), the liberal use of all vegetables in season, especially leafy ones (and always some of them raw in salads), "eggs or cheese frequently and meat occasionally but not all of them every day", the frequent use of sea foods, fresh or canned, if in a goiterous region, and the use of whole grain breads and cereals, especially for growing children. [^11]

A grave warning is given by students of this subject with respect to reproduction. When the food is impoverished in its mineral or vitamin content, miscarriage is apt to result even though the mother may remain in seeming health. This need is imperative and should be understood by all parents and future parents.

The Minerals Most Lacking. In the American and European diet the minerals most lacking are calcium, phosphorus, iron and iodine (in certain sections).

Most authorities agree that there is probably a greater lack of calcium than of any other chemical element. [^12] Since milk is a ready source of calcium it has been said that to be unable to take milk is a dietetic tragedy! There should be an ample supply of green leafy vegetables as well.

In the sections of the country where iodine is lacking in the soil (and the Great Basin of North America and portions of the Rocky Mountain area are two such sections), the food should contain some supplemental source of iodine. The American Medical Association's Committee on Foods has approved iodized salt for general use. Most scientific opinion agrees that iodized salt can be safely used and is a convenient means of meeting the nutritional need of iodine. [^13] This advice is for normal people; those with an abnormal thyroid gland should use iodine only on the advice of a reliable physician.

One should study the subject of food minerals and be wise in applying it to the personal and family food supply.

The Teeth as an Index. Mineral starvation is felt throughout the entire body and character, as indicated, but it shows itself definitely in the structure and composition of the teeth. It is most important that the pregnant mother shall have foods that contain the necessary minerals, else the babe comes into life with a severe handicap. Few people realize that the first set of teeth begins to form during the fourth month of pregnancy, and is completely formed at birth, though embedded in the jaws. Also, that during the seventh month of pregnancy, the foundations are laid for the second or permanent set of teeth. If the mother does not get her full quota of calcium and other minerals in her food, nature provides that the child shall rob the mother—hence the frequent experience of women's tooth trouble during pregnancy. These truths apply to the child's and mother's bony structure as well as to the teeth.

Teeth are an index of correct feeding. It is not enough to keep them clean and visit the dentist often—though that is certainly desirable—yet if the teeth are not properly nourished by wholesome food of full mineral and vitamin content they will decay in spite of the very best dental care. Savages and "nature people" do not know what a tooth brush is, yet they have hard, white, solid teeth—until they begin to use civilized man's food. Then they, too, have the experience of tooth decay as do the white men. Our forefathers had little need of dentists or tooth pastes.

Acid and Alkaline Foods. The question of minerals in the diet concerns also the acid or alkaline reactions of the body fluids. The ash that remains when plant or animal substances are burned in the laboratory contains the mineral matter of the foods. This ash may be acid or alkaline in its reaction, depending on the predominance of acid-or base-forming substances, in turn depending on the kind of food eaten. Organic substances are also formed during metabolic processes which, if acid, may be neutralized by alkaline mineral substances. Therefore, whether foods are to be classified as acid-forming or base-forming (alkaline)—a matter of great importance—depends in part upon the nature of the mineral matter in the food. The blood must be kept just on the alkaline side, for then it is conceded to be most resistant to infections and other unnatural conditions.

The dangers from eating too freely of acid-forming foods are two fold. First, the kidneys are overworked when required to handle too many of the acid by-products of digestion; second, the calcium carbonate of the bones and teeth as well as the basic substances of the tissues are attacked in neutralizing acids that may predominate in the body. Thus, acid-forming foods may in reality rob, not nourish the body. Another reason for keeping the body on the alkaline side is that then the food minerals are less likely to be excreted and are more completely utilized in the processes of metabolism. It has been found also that neither muscles nor nerves will perform their work properly unless bathed in tissue fluids which contain ample mineral constituents in their proper proportions. Indeed, the possession of the much prized vim, vigor and vitality seems to depend as much upon the maintenance of the "alkali reserve" of the body as upon the presence of ample vitamin B. [^14] Yet it must be understood that there must be "balance" in the body; it is as dangerous to have the food too alkaline as too acid. All food must be eaten with understanding and in moderation.

The alkaline, or base-forming foods are: most fruits and vegetables (especially beans, spinach, beets, carrots, parsnips, and white potatoes,) nuts, raisins, and milk. [^15] The following foods have been found to be very efficient in reducing body acidity: Apples, bananas, melons, citrus fruits and potatoes. From fruits and vegetables should be chosen the bulk of the food in order to keep the body chemically right, for they are important sources of necessary minerals and vitamins.

Acid-forming foods are: eggs, meat, poultry, fish (especially oysters and other shell fish), bread of all kinds, including crackers, macaroni, spaghetti and noodles, cereals, rice, pastry of all kinds and especially candy and sweets. This list also includes tea, coffee, cocoa, chocolate. It may be noted that very often the acid-forming foods form the greater portion of the modern dietary. Health may be seriously impaired thereby if the practice is long continued, for the body functions best when the alkaline-forming foods predominate.

Acid fruits such as citrus fruits are sometimes avoided for fear that they may cause "acidity". This is not the case, for when digested and used by the body they leave an alkaline residue which is distinctly acid-reducing, and helps to neutralize the acid residues of protein and other acid-formers. For this reason many people have found that "a lemon a day keeps the doctor away"—taken with plenty of water, of course. All citrus fruits are valuable alkalinizers as well as being rich sources of vitamin C. In many cases where people suffer from nettlerash from eating certain fruits, it has been found that these fruits could be eaten more freely if wholemeal bread and flour and other foods which contain more minerals, were substituted for the highly refined foods. [^16]

The practice of the principles indicated in the Word of Wisdom provides all the necessary mineral elements necessary for full health.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness, 1935.

Chaney, and Ahlborn, Nutrition.

Hartwell, B. L., Influence of Fertilizers on Crop Quality, 1932.

MacLeod, and Nason, Chemistry and Cookery.

McCollum, E. V., Recent Advances in Nutritional Research, 1937.

McCollum, E. V., and Becker, J. E., Food, Nutrition and Health, 1934.

Mitchell, H. H., and McClure, F. J., Mineral Nutrition of Farm Animals, 1937.

Plimmer, R. H. A., Food, Health, Vitamins.

Rose, M. S., Foundations of Nutrition, 1927.

Sherman, H. C., Chemistry of Food and Nutrition, 1937.

Sherman, H. C., Food and Health, 1934.

Science Supplement, Oct. 18, 1929 and Nov. 8, 1929.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:10, 16.
[^2] Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family, footnote on p. 17, Nisbet and Co.
[^3] Plimmer, R. H. A., Food, Health, Vitamins, p. 2.
[^4] Bogert, Nutrition and Physical Fitness, p. 115.
[^5] Eddy, W. H., Nutrition, p. 190, 1928; Rose, M. S., The Foundations of Nutrition, p. 288
[^6] Mottram, Food and The Family, p. 76.
[^7] McCollum, E. V. and Becker, J. E., Food, Nutrition and Health, 1933, pp. 5 and 8.
[^8] Davis, Adele, Optimum Health, 1936, p. 103; Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family, 1928, pp. 18-19, 70-71.
[^9] Science, Supplement, Oct. 18, 1929. Undoubtedly with a mineral shortage as quoted, there would be other factors of malnutrition present.
[^10] Science, Supplement, Nov. 8, 1929.
[^11] Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness, pp. 174-198, 1935.
[^12] Sherman, H. C., Chemistry of Food and Nutrition, 1937, p. 279; Sherman, H. C., Food and Health, 1934, p. 93.
[^13] Sherman, H. C., Chemistry of Food and Nutrition, 1937, p. 344.
[^14] Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness, pp. 98, 189, 192.
[^15] McCollum and Becker, Food, Nutrition and Health, pp. 113, 114.
[^16] Plimmer, R. H. A., Food, Health, Vitamins, p. 80.
