John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 12

GRAINS

"All grain is ordained for the use of man and of beasts, to be the staff of life, not only for man but for the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven, and all wild animals that run or creep on the earth. . . . All grain is good for the food of man." [^1]

Use of Grain. Grains, or cereals, were ordained to be "the staff of life" for human and animal consumption, and so they have been almost from the beginning of time. All races consume large quantities of cereal products unless it be the peoples of the frozen north or south where grains cannot grow. This consumption has increased greatly from earlier ages owing to the increased cultivation of the earth, made possible by improved methods of agriculture. The popularity of grains as food is augmented by their excellent keeping qualities, the ease with which they may be handled, and their relatively low cost. They furnish an economical source of energy, and it is difficult to plan a satisfactory diet without them, especially where the cost of food must be considered.

Composition of Grains. Grains contain the six necessary food elements already enumerated, though not in the same proportions. They are characterized by a high carbohydrate (starch) and rather low protein content. That is, they are largely carbohydrate or energy foods.

The ash or mineral content of the grains is fairly high. Phosphorus and calcium are both present in a notable degree, while iron, copper and manganese, necessary to full health, are usually found in more than sufficient amounts. The inclusion of grains in the dietary insures a relatively large ingestion of the necessary minerals. (see chapters 9 and 11)

The grains are also excellent sources of the valuable vitamins B and E with smaller quantities of vitamins A and G. From every point of view, grains are good human foods.

All Grains Are Good Food. The grains most used are rice, wheat, rye, corn, oats and barley, and in this order is the relative extent of their use as food. Today more than half of the human family subsist largely on rice, the staple food of all Oriental peoples. Among the so-called white races, wheat is the favored grain because of its ease of production, its bland flavor and the porous loaf of bread that may be made from it.

In many countries of Europe, rye is used as a staple food, virtually displacing wheat products. These peoples are well nourished, when other food habits are good, for the minerals and vitamins are distributed throughout the rye kernel and are not so apt to be discarded in the process of milling as is the case in wheat flour. Barley will grow where wheat does not thrive, therefore it is used for bread in such places. Oats are used in most countries for a type of mush or similar breakfast dish for which they are an excellent, nutritious food, if not too highly milled and refined. The people of Scotland for generations have used oats for cereals and cakes, more largely than wheat or rye, and are, when ample milk is used with this otherwise good diet, well fed and healthy. Corn is used in many countries both as bread and for other popular dishes.

Human experience has shown that any or all of these grains are wholesome human foods. This is confirmed by chemical analysis. The following table gives the comparative composition of the grains most commonly used:

Inorganic Carbo- or Mineral Proteins Fats hydrates Constituents Whole Wheat Flour ...... 13.8 1.9 71.9 1.7 Corn Meal .............. 9.2 1.9 75.4 0.7 Rice (polished) ........ 7.2 0.2 76.0 0.5 Rye Flour .............. 8.0 0.9 76.0 0.7 Barley (pearled) ....... 8.5 1.1 77.8 1.3 Oatmeal ................ 16.1 7.2 67.5 1.9

Breakfast Cereals. A favorite way of taking grain as food is by the use of breakfast cereals. These must be properly cooked. The whole of the wheat grain should be used, for the minerals and vitamins are found in the germ and the outer covering of the kernel. The grain may be ground as fine as desirable or eaten whole as preferred.

Prepared cereals are easy to serve but are relatively expensive; in such shape, grain is often sold at the rate of $25 a bushel. Also through the process of manufacture they are likely to become deficient in some of the vitamin and mineral content of the grains inasmuch as they will not keep fresh unless devitalized. One of the simplest and best cereals is made by grinding whole wheat to any desired fineness in an old-fashioned coffee grinder. The following partial list classifies some standard breakfast cereals with respect to the manner of their preparation:

WHOLE GRAIN HIGHLY MILLED Oatmeal Cream of Wheat Pettijohn's Light Farina Puffed Wheat Corn Flakes Shredded Wheat Cornmeal (white) Dark Farina Hominy Wheatsworth Grapenuts Wheatena Pearled Barley Graham Mush White Rice Wild Rice Puffed Rice [^2]

Starch and Sugar in the Diet. The grains are rich in carbohydrates—that is, in sugars and starches. When many molecular sugar groups are linked together, a starch is formed. Similarly, when a starch is subjected to a hydrolizing, disorganizing process, as in digestion, sugars are formed. When starch is eaten, its first digestive change is its reduction to sugar. Therefore, sugars and starches are practically identical in their effects upon the body. This explains why it is a dietetic duplication to combine sugar and starchy foods as is often done with sugar on cereals or in the rich pastries and desserts of the modern dietary.

As a rule, starches are easily and fully digested when properly cooked and taken alone. Partial cooking of starches which has occurred where the inside of hot bread or biscuits is of a doughy consistency, leads to retarded digestion. Starches are also much harder to digest when fried, for fat covers the starch granules and keeps them from being properly and promptly reached by the digestive juices (as in doughnuts, fried foods, etc.). They are also less digestible when blended with fat as in pastry or in undercooked gravy or cream sauce. Such a combination tends to ferment in the stomach and intestines, causing delay in digestion and in time producing distressing symptoms which often lead to irritation and later to serious trouble.

One of the commonest dietary errors of today is the overeating of starchy foods, with or without fats and sugars, such as macaroni, rice, cereals, cakes, pastry and desserts—thereby satisfying the hunger so that no desire remains for foods that contain building materials with regulating minerals and vitamins. The excessive use of starch, sugar or fat, unbalances the diet by supplying an excess of one of the essential food elements, the energy producing one.

Sugar as Food. Sugar is a carbohydrate food which has come into general use since the Word of Wisdom was given to the world. The revelation deals only with grains, fruits, vegetables—nature's products—and with meat to be used sparingly in cold or famine, but it does not follow that foods not specifically mentioned in the Word of Wisdom are prohibited. Milk and many other good foods are not mentioned, yet should be used intelligently, with wisdom and prudence, which includes knowledge.

The use of sugar as food is a recent development. Before 1600 A.D. it was used in Europe as a medicine or a curiosity and was handled only in the apothecary (or drug) shops and sold for $1.50 or more a pound. Later it was used only as a flavoring and in minute quantities. Its use as a staple article of diet has gradually increased with the ease and extent of its manufacture, from an annual 10 pounds per capita one hundred years ago, to over 120 pounds per capita today. [^3] The annual candy bill alone is well over a billion dollars. The people of the United States have become known as the "sugar gluttons" of the world.

The body needs sugar; it is a physiological necessity, for it is found as glucose in the blood (about one part to one thousand) and provides fuel for heat and muscular energy. However, there is much difference, in sugar concentration, between the sweet foods that occur in nature and those manufactured from cane or sugar beets. Pure sugar is one of the most concentrated foods known, one lump containing an amount equal to that found in about three feet of sugar cane. In Mexico and other countries where the diet is more simple, sugar cane is sold on the markets and is used as a natural sweet-meat. This is desirable, for then the teeth get exercise and the minerals as well as the natural sweets are obtained from the juice. In the manufacture of sugar the mineral content of the cane or beet passes into the molasses, which in the case of beets is never used for human food. Even nature's sweet foods, fresh or dried fruits, honey or syrup, are good foods, but their proper use should be understood and followed; they should be eaten moderately, usually as a dessert.

There are many disadvantages resulting from the excessive use of sugar as food. It is an artificially prepared product, is totally lacking in proteins, mineral salts and vitamins. It is distinctly a habit-forming food; those who have never used it do not like it, but a taste for it is easily acquired, after which one is tempted to overeat on sweet foods which leads to an unbalanced diet. This habit-forming nature has contributed greatly to the consumption of sugar. [^4]

The process of starch and sugar digestion is well known. The gland known as the pancreas secretes a digestive fluid which is emptied into the upper small intestine. This secretion contains a hormone called insulin which tends to lower the concentration of glucose in the blood, and is essential for the utilization of all carbohydrate food—starches and sugars.

McCollum states that:

"Sugar, being readily soluble, is quickly absorbed from the digestive tract, and if eaten too freely at one time tends to enter the blood faster than the liver and other tissues can abstract it and causes a high tide of sugar in the blood. It is not improbable that when this high tide of sugar occurs the pancreas puts out more insulin than is necessary, thus putting a strain on the insulin-forming structures. If this is true, eating excessively of sugar over a considerable period may tend to bring on diabetes. . . . Nature did not intend that we should eat freely of the simple sugars and did not make them available. She gave us much starch instead. This was a wise provision, since starches eaten with an ordinary meal require several hours for complete digestion and absorption, hence the resulting glucose enters the blood slowly and does not cause the high tide of blood sugar." [^5]

When one overeats on starches, which become sugar in digestion, and eats sweets as well, the pancreas becomes overworked and loses its power to dispose of the sugar which then accumulates in the blood and is excreted in the urine. The result is the disease diabetes which follows an insufficient supply of insulin. Many food experts claim that the excessive use of carbohydrates, sugars and starch in the diet may be the direct cause of diabetes, and all agree that the increased use of these foods certainly does greatly aggravate the disease. Dr. Plimmer states:

"The Americans, with their love of candy, are the largest sugar eaters in the world. Incidentally, cancer and diabetes, two scourges of civilization, have increased proportionately to the sugar consumption." [^6]

In the United States alone diabetes has doubled its incidence since 1900 and cancer has come to be the second greatest cause of death among all classes. The cause of these diseases is not definitely known but wrong diet, including excessive eating of meat and sweets, may safely be said to aggravate them. The over-use of sugar in the daily diet certainly irritates the delicate lining membrane of the alimentary tract, and persistent irritation predisposes it to the formation of ulcers, as is well known. Excessive use of sweets also affects adversely the liver and kidneys, with a consequent lowered resistance to disease.

All foods rich in sugar, such as candies, syrups, jams, jellies, "soda fountain treats," and rich, sweet desserts should be eaten in great moderation and never between meals nor on an empty stomach. This is especially true for children who should receive much of their sugar supply from sweet fruits, honey, molasses and first-class candy used with wisdom as dessert. [^7] Mary Swartz Rose is authority for the statement that candy and the "delectables of the soda fountain and ice cream parlor," should be avoided by every one except at the end of a regular meal. Even then they are not desirable for children. She and other experts agree that candy should not be eaten by children until after their fifth year and then only the simplest kind and a minimum quantity as a dessert. [^8] Cheap, highly colored candies should be avoided.

After a meal, a sweet dish, not too heavy or rich, gives one a satisfied feeling; but the habit of eating rich desserts is an acquired taste. The French and other continental peoples usually serve after a meal a very simple dessert, or more often some fruit in season. This latter custom is by far more hygienic. If heavy desserts are desired they should follow light meals; with a light dessert after a heavy meal.

The Word of Wisdom Confirmed. The Word of Wisdom advises the use of grains as food. It declares all grains good for man. Science has confirmed this view. They may be (and in the temperate climates they should be) "the staff of life." Everyone should use intelligence and demand that foods shall be as nature intended and that dependence shall not be placed on devitalized foods or a "broken staff." Again, the Word of Wisdom points the way to health and happiness; and again the prophetic power of Joseph Smith is made evident.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness.

Davis, A., Optimum Health, 1936.

Eddy, W. H., Nutrition.

Lane, W. A., Secrets of Good Health.

Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family.

Sherman, H. C., Food and Health.

Stanley, L., and Cline, G. A., Foods, Their Selection and Preparation.

Williams, H. S., Drugs Against Men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:17, 16.
[^2] McCollum and Simmonds, The Newer Knowledge of Nutrition, 1925, p. 129.
[^3] Swanson, Wheat Flour and Diet, pp. 105-107.
[^4] Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934, pp. 172, 196.
[^5] Forbes, Bulletin No. 256, Ohio Agricultural Experiment Station.
[^6] Chaney, and Ahlborn, Nutrition, pp. 218-219.
[^7] Journal of the American Dietetic Association, July, 1932, p. 147.
[^8] Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934, pp. 150, 158, 159.
