John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 13

"WHEAT FOR MAN"

"Nevertheless, wheat for man. . . . All grain is good for the food of man." [^1]

Wheat, Man's Staff of Life. It has already been shown that wheat is valuable as a food because it furnishes some protein (body building) and much starch or carbohydrate (fuel producing); also because it is a source of several necessary mineral elements, including calcium, iron and phosphorus; and especially because it contains vitamins B and E, indispensable to human health and happiness. While wheat may not be a complete food for man, it approaches that definition so nearly as to be in reality a "staff of life."

The Word of Wisdom, after declaring that "all grain is good for man," adds "nevertheless, wheat for man." This implies clearly that wheat is to be preferred over other grains in the dietary of man; that it more nearly supplies the needs of the human body than other grains.

This statement in the Word of Wisdom is supported by history. Wheat is the most ancient and most widely distributed of the grains. It has been used from times immemorial in all parts of the earth. Varieties of wheat are adapted for practically every condition of soil and climate. Wheat has always been held in the highest regard. Mythology records wheat as a divine gift to man. The nations of antiquity flourished most when wheat was their "staff of life." It has seemed always to be associated with high standards of progressive living, and does so today.

Science has made only a beginning in the study of this subject. However, as far as investigations have gone, it has become evident that the grains differ in nutritive value for various kinds of animals. For example, in Chapter 14 it will be shown that for cattle, corn is a better single food than wheat. The cause for this difference lies very probably in the chemical nature of the various grain proteins, concerning which much new knowledge is being developed. Dr. McCollum frankly declares that "no cereal grain has yet been studied which contains proteins superior to those of wheat." [^2] All authorities agree that the "prominent place of wheat in the diet of mankind is justified by the results of experiments on animals." As far as modern science goes the statement in the Word of Wisdom, "nevertheless, wheat for man," is fully justified. For the people to whom the Word of Wisdom was given, living in a certain zone and under a certain climate, the statement is unquestionably correct. In countries where other grains thrive better, other grains than wheat may be used successfully in the human dietary. (see chapter 12)

The importance of wheat and wheat products in the human dietary justifies the following discussion.

Structure of the Wheat Kernel. There are three well-defined parts of the wheat kernel: (1) the bran or outer covering, (2) the germ, in which the new life is located, (3) the internal portion or endosperm, which forms the bulk of the kernel. The bran consists of four layers, the three inner coats of which are rich in protein (aleurone), minerals and vitamin B. The germ, under proper conditions of warmth and moisture will germinate, hence is the living part of the grain. It is very rich in vitamins B and E, in protein, fat and mineral matter. The endosperm or central part is composed of starch with about one-sixth as much gluten (protein) enmeshed in cellulose (woody fiber), but is devoid of vitamins and contains very little mineral substance. The organic phosphates, essential for the nutrition of brain and nerves, and the inorganic minerals, calcium and other phosphates concerned in the formation and growth of bone and teeth, are found mainly in the bran and germ, while the endosperm, from which white flour is made, is very poor in these important salts, containing less than one-tenth of the amount found in bran. [^3] For all these reasons "wheat for man" is good advice. But to secure the full value of wheat, man should eat the whole grain.

The average difference in composition among whole wheat, white flour (the endosperm) and the bran (the outer covering), is shown in the following table:

White Wheat Wheat Wheat Kernel Flour Bran Water (moisture) ............ 12.00 13.50 13.00 Mineral Matter (ash) ........ 2.00 0.40 5.80 Protein (nitrogenous matter) ....... 12.00 11.00 15.40 Fat (ether extract) ......... 2.00 1.25 3.60 Starch and Sugar (carbohydrates) ............ 70.20 73.60 53.20 Cellulose (crude fiber) ..... 1.80 0.25 9.00 100.00 100.00 100.00

Why Wheat is Milled. Information concerning flour and the bread made from it is of special importance because in most families bread forms the largest item in the dietary—is in fact the "staff of life". Milling of the wheat kernel, resulting in refined flour, reduces the proportion of mineral elements and fiber, largely eliminates the vitamins, and increases the proportion of starch. Since the substances lost by such milling are valuable human foods, the reasons for producing refined flour, when it would be easier to render the whole kernel into flour, may well be sought.

There are three main reasons for milling: (1) Flour, white in color, is preferred by many people. To cater to this taste the highly refined flour is often bleached a sickly white. (2) It still seems to many people that to be able to eat white bread is proof of a superior station in life. (3) Most important, white flour keeps much better—weevils and worms do not care for it (they would starve to death on it!); it may therefore be shipped great distances, and kept indefinitely if necessary in the miller's or grocer's storerooms.

The present world-wide industrial era, in which commodities are exchanged over the earth, have forced many questionable practices on the public. While many advantages accrue to the food supply from long distance shipping facilities, such as making it possible to enjoy fruits and vegetables throughout all the year, yet there are disadvantages in the case of other commodities, which should be known and then corrected through modification of the daily diet.

The Value of White Bread. Refined white flour with a high gluten content makes a loaf that is palatable, light and spongy in texture, and because of its white color is more attractive to the eye. It is easily digested—with little residue—in fact, so completely digested that its very perfection may be its great drawback, for bulk is necessary in good digestion. Yet civilized man is living largely on white bread which, by that fact, is shown to be an acceptable food, though not necessarily fully nutritional.

Nutrition authorities differ somewhat on the value of white bread. Some prefer it because it is more quickly digested and is said to be non-irritating. All explain, however, that the necessary minerals and vitamins must then be provided from other sources.

Those who urge the use of white bread should remember that (1) most people do not know what other foods must be eaten to supply the deficiencies of white bread and other refined food products. In their ignorance of the subject, or lack of interest, the food of many people is faultily balanced and their bodies improperly nourished. (2) The average person is apt to take the bulk of his food from devitalized products, such as white bread, crackers, macaroni, breakfast cereals, pastry and other package food, convenient to purchase and easy to cook. By such a diet the natural craving for food is satisfied, for the time being, and there is little appetite left for the salads, vegetables, and fruits which should form the bulk of the food. "Eat your salad, Johnnie" or "You haven't eaten your vegetables" are remarks often heard at the family table. The common reply is "I'm not hungry, I can't eat my salad this time," or "I don't like this vegetable". Thus the body is gradually being impoverished. (3) Most people are not able to afford the fresh foods necessary to supplement the diet after devitalized foods are purchased and used for "the daily bread". Too many people use their scanty store to purchase foods which have been robbed of their most precious life-giving elements, either for commercial gain or convenience.

Hot Breads. The use of hot breads (whether as griddle cakes, waffles, rolls, biscuits or buns) is often questioned. They are difficult to masticate thoroughly and when taken with butter and syrup or other sweets are digested with difficulty. Therefore, they should be used very sparingly if at all, and never as the bulk of a meal. Dr. Rose states that they should never be eaten by children under 14 years of age and seldom thereafter. On this restriction list she also includes soft cakes and pastries. [^4]

The Value of Whole Wheat Bread. Whole wheat bread, as here discussed, means bread made from the flour resulting when the whole wheat kernel, bran and germ included, is very finely ground and made into a wholesome loaf. It does not refer to the coarse cracked wheat or bran bread nor to the "brown bread" which may be colored with molasses or otherwise and seldom consists of the entire 100% wheat kernel. Whole wheat, ground fine, gives just as much bulk as when coarsely ground and is much more desirable.

The evidence for the nutritional value of whole wheat bread has long been known. More than ninety years ago, the English chemist, Thomas Graham, on the basis of analytical studies of wheat and wheat flour, urged the British public, as many British health authorities do today, to use whole wheat flour. Indeed, in many parts, whole wheat bread continues to be known as Graham bread.

The valuable vitamins lost in milling for white flour, are needed by the body. Vitamin B, abundant in the germ and outer layers of the wheat kernel, is seldom sufficiently supplied in ordinary diets to meet the full demands of the body. Whole wheat bread helps supply this deficiency.

The wheat kernel contains five times or more mineral substances than does refined wheat flour. These mineral substances are of utmost importance in maintaining a proper composition of the blood. (see chapter 7) The following table shows that the minerals are found in smaller percentages in white wheat flour than in the whole wheat kernel. [^5]

White Wheat Kernel Wheat Flour Potassium .............. 0.520 0.050 Sodium ................. 0.031 0.110 Calcium ................ 0.050 0.019 Magnesium .............. 0.130 0.016 Sulphur ................ 0.198 0.145 Chlorine ............... 0.084 0.070 Phosphorus ............. 0.373 0.088

There is in the wheat kernel ten times more potassium than in white flour; two and one-half times more calcium; eight times more magnesium; one and one-third times more sulphur; three times more phosphorus. The relatively unimportant sodium and chlorine, because they are obtained from common salt, either approach or exceed in white flour the percentage in the wheat kernel.

All the evidence points to whole wheat foods as the more completely nourishing food for man. [^6] Exceptions are people who, because of some physiological idiosyncracy or stomach weakness, cannot use the whole wheat products. In such cases extra care must be taken to see that the needed vitamins B and E and food minerals are taken in some other form; for the sick person needs them quite as much if not more than the one who is well.

The need for some indigestible materials in the human diet is another reason why wheat, ground fine, is such a valuable food. The cellulose or fiber of plants cannot be considered as food because it is largely indigestible. Yet it has a distinct nutritional function, since it is necessary to have some substance in the bowels after the food has been absorbed to help cause their contents to pass along the alimentary tract. Without "bulk" in the bowels, furnished by fruits and vegetables as well as by grains, the "churning muscles" which cause peristalsis become stale, just as any muscle loses tone through lack of exercise. However, it must be reiterated that bulk alone will not prevent stasis in the large bowel (constipation); there must also be ample vitamin B, necessary for the health of the nerves controlling bowel action. Whole wheat contains the necessary roughage as well as vitamin B, while seaweed and slimy seeds contain no vitamins or minerals.

Roughage or bulk to encourage peristalsis must be bland and non-irritating to the alimentary tract or serious trouble may ensue. Natural wheat bran or whole wheat has been found to have no ill effect on the normal digestive tract, especially when ground as fine as desired or required. Besides, when thoroughly moistened in the digestive juices, natural bran is softened and is well utilized by normal people. Many interesting experiments have been undertaken to prove this. One such was reported by Rose, MacLeod, Valteich, Funnell and Newton, entitled "The Influence of Bran on the Alimentary Tract". Bran in different quantities was fed to human beings and to laboratory animals with the results carefully noted.

"In every one of the 22 rats fed bran as well as the two controls which ate no bran, the tissues were diagnosed as normal, no lesions of any kind being found. Therefore it is concluded that bran, fed in moderate quantities, such as is usual in human consumption, will not damage the tissues of the normal alimentary canal." [^7]

Corroborative experiences with human beings are also quoted.

The same experiment showed that bulk alone is not sufficient to avoid constipation; for when fiber not containing vitamin B was given there was no improvement; but when bran which was rich in vitamin B was added there was marked improvement. Thus it should be understood that while it is important to have roughage in the alimentary tract, the most important factor of bowel health is vitamin B.

The use of whole grain cereal and bread for children is questioned by some nutrition experts, even though it be ground very fine. However, such an opinion is not universal. Dr. Mary Swartz Rose in her food program for children, even for the second year, says that from one-half an ounce to one ounce of thoroughly cooked cereal may be taken daily by the healthy two-year-old. Preferably this cereal should be prepared from the whole grains. [^8] This advice is given for everyone, throughout childhood as well as for adults, and she insists that cereal foods be eaten without sugar. [^9] Also that hot breads be avoided and only a day or two old bread eaten so that thorough mastication may be encouraged. [^10]

For the normal person the use of whole grains as bread or cereal properly prepared, may be highly recommended. However, when the alimentary tract is sensitive, which may easily happen as a result of a too concentrated diet of starches and sweets or meat, then of course, all fibre of fruits and vegetables as well as grain must be avoided.

It is poor economy, physiologically and financially, to discard all the essential roughage from the diet, eating only the refined foods of the modern dietary, and then to spend countless dollars in buying seaweed, slimy seeds and other bulk-forming products to do the work which natural food was intended to do. It is far worse still to use drugs or mineral oil to overcome constipation for, in time, distress and disease are sure to follow, for vitamins A, D, and E tend to be absorbed by the oil and pass out of the body. One cannot be properly nourished under such conditions. This is explained by R. A. Dutcher, Harris and others in the Journal of Nutrition for September, 1934, also in an editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association for November 17, 1934.

An Experiment With Whole Wheat. The value of whole wheat in the diet has been shown by countless experiences. Dr. M. J. Rowlands and Dr. Ethel Browning reported an interesting experiment as follows.

"Twenty rats of the same breed and the same age were selected. These were divided into two lots, each of five males and five females. Those in Cage A were fed with wholemeal and those in Cage B with white bread.

"On August 2, the occupants of Cage A (wholemeal) weighed 840 grammes and those of Cage B (white bread) 952 grammes. So that there should be no question as to the animals suffering from a lack of variety of food their diet was varied from week to week.

"Each cage was provided with a food hopper identical in size, and Dr. Browning undertook the feeding. At no time were the food hoppers allowed to be empty; they were replenished immediately. While the rats in Cage A (wholemeal) never finished their supplies, those in Cage B (whitebread) were always wanting more. The actual weight of food consumed during the experiment by the rats in Cage A (wholemeal) was 72 oz., by those in Cage B (white bread) 199 oz.; i. e. more than double the amount consumed in Cage A.

"All the animals were weighed at stated intervals.

Cage A Cage B (Wholemeal) (White Bread) August 2 .......... 840 grammes 952 grammes September 5 ....... 1,316 grammes 1,176 grammes September 15 ...... 1,484 grammes 1,211 grammes

"It will thus be seen that in the thirty-four days between August 2 and September 5, the rats fed on wholemeal, although they did not eat all the food given them, increased in weight by 476 grammes, while those fed on white bread increased by only 224 grammes, while in the next ten days the "wholemealers" added another 168 grammes, or nearly five times as much as those fed on white bread.

"Further, the 'wholemealers' remained sleek and healthy in appearance, while those fed on white bread showed obvious signs of debility, were listless in movement, lost their hair, and showed every sign of dying. One has, in fact, died, its weight at its death being 63 grammes, or roughly 7 grammes less than its weight at the commencement of the experiment."

Experiment 2

"Four rats were fed on a deficiency diet containing no vitamin B. At the end of a month two of the rats were suffering from complete paralysis of the hind legs. They had lost weight and were having 'fits.' It was decided to place these two animals on test, the worst being placed on a diet of wholemeal, and the other, not so paralyzed, on white bread. Within three hours the rat that was given wholemeal containing the vital vitamin B, which it ate with avidity, was rapidly recovering, but the other, hardly touching the white bread, continued to sink. When wholemeal was offered, it ate ravenously." [^11]

One should not deduce from the above experiment that wholemeal as food will cause unusual size or unnecessary fat. Indeed the exact opposite is the case. It is the excessive use of starches and sweets which tend to cause overweight or underweight. The use of wholemeal cereal and bread, with fruit, vegetables, milk and meat (sparingly) will cause one to reach normal development, being neither too fat nor too thin. However, one would much rather be healthy though plump than to be thin, if ill-health were the price paid. There can be little doubt about the superior value of bread made from whole wheat flour, though it should be said that the too abundant use of bread, whether refined or whole, or other cereal foods, should be avoided, primarily because bread is acid-forming and must be balanced with other alkaline foods.

Our present knowledge of the nutritional value of wheat is in full confirmation of the Word of Wisdom. The use of grain as man's food is well established from earliest times. The Word of Wisdom therefore but adds its sanction when it states "wheat for man".

Diets of "Nature People". (See also chapter 15) If proof were needed to substantiate these findings of science among human beings, it could be furnished by the Arabs and the hill-tribes in India, whose food is largely coarsely ground, unmilled grain products and amongst whom diseases of the alimentary tract—ulcers, appendicitis and cancer—are practically unknown. [^12]

Dr. McCarrison states:

"For nine years of my professional life my duties lay in a remote part of the Himalayas, among isolated races, far removed from civilization. Certain of these races are of magnificent physique, preserving until late in life the characters of youth; they are unusually fertile and long-lived, and endowed with nervous systems of notable stability.

"During the period of my association with these people (nine years) I never saw a case of asthenic dyspepsia, of gastric or duodenal ulcer, of mucous colitis, or of cancer, although my operating list averaged over 400 operations a year." [^13]

Another eminent authority, Dr. Ernest H. Tipper, who served for many years in the West African Service, in his book The Cradle of the World and Cancer, a Disease of Civilization, makes the statement:

"The average daily number of cases seen during my twenty years service in West Africa was about sixty, exclusive of official rating, yet I only saw six cases of cancer altogether; five of these were in coast stations, the other one away in the grass country, but not one amongst those two million people in the heart of the Niger Delta: and I only once came across a case of appendicitis when in charge of a coast station, and that was not a clear case. The Equator is the cradle of the world, and amongst the race of which I write, where conventionalism is absent and food perfectly natural and abundant, where the natives have never lost touch with the first principles of feeding, and there is no such thing as constipation, there is no cancer. At the first dawn of civilization amongst them this disease makes its appearance; where civilization is advanced, it is rife." [^14]

The diet of these nature people is described as consisting of unmilled grains, fruits and vegetables, with a certain amount of milk and butter and goat's meat only on feast days—just such a diet as is outlined in the Word of Wisdom.

It may be said here that from earliest times students of the subject have believed that a close relationship exists between disease and diet. For example, since the days of Galen (131-201 A.D.) physicians have urged a natural low meat diet as a preventative and cure of cancer—such as milk, eggs, whole grain cereals, fruits and leafy vegetables. In 1923 Dr. Alfred C. Jordan of London published the following dietary principles as a prevention of cancer: (1) Eat live foods (milk, cream, butter, cheese, fresh fruits, vegetables, nuts); (2) laxative foods, fresh fruits and vegetables; (3) avoid foods that decompose readily in the bowels (meat, fowl, game, and sugar); (4) avoid all food and drink that irritate the mucous lining of stomach or intestine (pickles, vinegar, strong condiments and all alcoholic beverages).

Dr. D. T. Quigley reported in July, 1935, a study covering ten years, and including 2,707 patients. He reports that all were found to be living on diets more or less deficient in minerals, especially calcium, iodine, iron, in all of the vitamins, and in roughage. Over 95% of them suffered from constipation and other stomach or intestinal disease. It is very likely that diet may be found a valuable ally in the fight against cancer. [^15]

These and other studies make it evident that in very truth, the counsel given in the Word of Wisdom will lead one to enjoy the blessing of health, that all may "run and not be weary, may walk and not faint."

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Chaney, and Ahlborn, Nutrition.

Davis, A., Optimum Health, 1936.

Eddy, W. H., Nutrition.

Hindhede, Fuldkommen Sundhed, 1934.

Hornibrook, E. A., Whole Meal, 1927.

Lane, W. A., Blazing the Health Trail.

Lane, W. A., Diseases of Civilization.

Lane, W. A., Secrets of Good Health.

McKellop, M., Food Values, 1925.

Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934.

Sherman, H. C., Food and Health.

Ullmann, E. V., Diet in Sinus Infections and Colds, 1934.

Journal of the American Dietetic Association, July, 1932, pp. 133-155.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:17.
[^2] Journal of Physiology, vol. 34, p. 112, 1906.
[^3] Research Bulletin No. 17, 1912, Hart, McCollum, Steenbock and Humphrey.
[^4] Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934, pp. 172, 196.
[^5] Forbes, Bulletin No. 256, Ohio Agricultural Experiment Station.
[^6] Chaney, and Ahlborn, Nutrition, pp. 218-219.
[^7] Journal of the American Dietetic Association, July, 1932, p. 147.
[^8] Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934, pp. 150, 158, 159.
[^9] Ibid., pp. 158, 172, 196.
[^10] Ibid., pp. 172, 196.
[^11] The Staff of Life, New Health Society of Great Britain, pp. 15, 16.
[^12] As reported by Dr. McCarrison, Director, Deficiency Disease Inquiry of Pasteur Institute, Coonor, South India.
[^13] Lane, Wm. A., Blazing the Health Trail, 1929, p. 31; also, Hindhede, Fuldkommen Sundhed, p. 156.
[^14] Lane, W. A., Diseases of Civilization, 1929, p. 55.
[^15] Sure, Barnett, Hygeia, September, 1937, p. 792. See, also, Hoffman, Frederick L., Diet and Cancer, 1937.
