John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 14

"CORN FOR THE OX"

"Corn for the ox and oats for the horse, and rye for the fowls and for swine, and for all beasts of the field, and barley for all useful animals." [^1]

Food for Animals. The above statement in the Word of Wisdom implies that seeds of a certain plant may serve the needs of one kind of animal better than of another. Little careful study has as yet been made of this subject, yet present knowledge confirms well this principle foretold in the Word of Wisdom.

Varying Composition of Foodstuffs. While much has been learned about nutrition during the last few decades, nevertheless every sane student of the subject is convinced that the borders of nutritional knowledge will continue to be extended during the coming years. That which has been learned may be safely used, but it will be added to, for better use, as new discoveries are made.

This is especially evident in the study of the component parts of the commonest foodstuffs. Most of them may contain protein, but not necessarily the same kind of protein; many may contain fat, but not with the same properties; all may contain carbohydrates, but of different kinds. It does not follow that every kind of protein, fat or carbohydrate has the same nutritive value for every kind of animal.

Then there may be present in foodstuffs some unknown substances of distinct physiological effects, many of them as yet undetermined. This whole field is only partly explored. Whenever it is touched new knowledge is uncovered.

Physiological Effects of Different Rations. Moreover, it has long been recognized, though poorly defended, that the same food or ration, though complete according to present standards, may not have the same effect on different animals. Each class of animals has its own specific nutritive needs and responses. Likewise, two different rations, both apparently complete, may have very different effects on the same class of animals. For example, two investigators, Watson and Hunter, [^2] fed one lot of rats with boiled oatmeal and skim milk, and another with bread and skim milk. Of the fourteen rats fed the oatmeal, twelve died; of the rats fed bread, none died. In another experiment, of 93 young, born of meat-fed rats, only 19 were alive at the end of two months, while of 97 young, born of bread and milk fed rats, 82 were alive and healthy at the end of the experimental period. The foods, oatmeal, bread and meat all met dietary standards, but bread and milk was the best combination for the rats.

"Corn for the Ox". One of the most enlightening experiments in this field was conducted at the State Agricultural Experiment Station of the University of Wisconsin. [^3]

Sixteen shorthorn heifer calves, six months old, were divided into four lots of four animals each. All were fed normal rations balanced according to approved standards. However, one lot was fed wholly with products of the corn plant—grain, stover and gluten feed; another with products of the wheat plant—wheat meal, straw and gluten feed, the third with products of the oat plant, and the last with a ration made up one-third each of the corn, wheat and oat rations.

The experiment was continued throughout four years. At various intervals the animals were weighed and photographed. Digestion tests were made, urine and other excreta analyzed, the milk weighed and tested; several of the animals were slaughtered and the meat and fat subjected to chemical study. It was a very thorough and painstaking experiment.

Almost from the beginning the different rations had different effects upon the animals. All increased in weight but the gain was largest with the corn-fed and smallest with the wheat-fed animals. After a few months it was noticed that in addition to the increase in weight, the corn-fed animals looked best, had smoother coats, fuller barrels, and were generally in a better state of nutrition; while the animals that were wheat-fed looked worst, with rough coats, small of barrel, gaunt and thin in appearance as if in a low state of nutrition.

More conclusive results were obtained when the cows had calves. The corn-fed cows carried their calves to within a few days of the normal time, but the wheat-fed mothers dropped their calves two to five weeks before the calculated time. The calves from corn-fed cows weighed an average of 73 pounds at birth; from wheat-fed cows, 46 pounds. All of the calves from the corn-fed cows lived and were vigorous and healthy; while of the four calves born to the wheat-fed group one was born dead, one died 12 hours and another 12 days after birth.

At the next time of calving, the corn-fed cows dropped four calves weighing 84 pounds each, all of which lived and were normal in every respect; but the wheat-fed group dropped only two calves, weighing 52 pounds each, one of which lived nine hours and the other 22 hours. One of the cows of this latter group died from anthrax and another had no more young.

The corn-fed cows gave most milk; the wheat-fed least. In one year the corn-fed group gave three times more milk than the wheat-fed animals.

These apparently decisive experiments were then made more emphatic. After three years, the ration given the cows was changed. The wheat-fed cows, which had done so poorly, were placed on a corn ration and soon became healthy and vigorous, looked better, and dropped normal calves at normal times. On the other hand, the vigorous corn-fed animals that were placed on the wheat ration declined in health, became afflicted with stiffness and swollen joints, and had to be returned to the corn ration.

The two groups of animals that received the oat and the mixed ration stood, in all the tests, between the corn and wheat-fed lots.

Conclusion. The above experiment certainly shows that corn is the best food for cattle. In the words of the experimenters, the wheat-fed cattle were unable to perform normally and with vigor the physiological processes of life; but the corn-fed animals were strong, healthy, in splendid condition, and their calves were of great vigor. With this experiment in mind it seems indeed remarkable that Joseph Smith so many years before the birth of the science of nutrition, would declare "corn for the ox".

The value of "oats for the horse" and the other grains mentioned in verse 17 for the animals and beasts of the field is generally accepted knowledge today, though scientific demonstration is not yet available. In view of past experience, as new knowledge accumulates, the correctness of the other statements at the head of this chapter are likely to be more strikingly confirmed. The grains best suited to the needs of various animals will doubtless be found to correspond with the dictum of the Word of Wisdom.

Application to Human Beings. It is clearly evident that food has a profound effect on the health and well-being of the individual and of the race as well. If the food eaten during the period of pregnancy could have such an effect upon the general health and resistance of the cows and their young in the experiment just described, surely there must be similar results to be expected in the feeding of human mothers. This has been found to be true. Every wise expectant mother will study well the right kind of food to procure health and vigor for herself and her offspring. She will understand that she must secure blood especially rich in all vitamins and the necessary minerals as well as those furnishing other requirements. Children were meant to be well born; parents must understand what is their share in this grave responsibility.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness.

McCollum, E. V., and Simonds, N., Newer Knowledge of Nutrition, 1925.

University of Wisconsin, College of Agriculture, Research Bulletin 17.

University of Wisconsin, College of Agriculture, Research Bulletin 49.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:12, 13; see also, 49:18, 19.
[^2] Rose, W. C., Science, October 1, 1937, p. 298.
[^3] Chittenden, Physiological Economy in Nutrition, 1913.
