John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 15

"MEAT . . . . SPARINGLY"

"Yea, flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air, I, the Lord, have ordained for the use of man with thanksgiving; nevertheless they are to be used sparingly; and it is pleasing unto me that they should not be used, only in times of winter, or of cold, or famine." [^1]

Building Foods or "Protein". Protein is the name given to the food constituents which are used in the body to produce growth in the young, and to repair or renew the tissues torn down by the stress of life at all ages. Protein differs from fats and carbohydrates in ultimate composition, in the possession of the element nitrogen. Proteins are found in all natural foodstuffs, but of varying composition, in differing proportions and with varying digestibility. The many proteins differ also in nutritive value. For instance, the proteins in wheat are not as useful for some animals as are the proteins in corn. It is well established that the proteins are made up of certain chemical compounds, known as amino acids, of which there are many. The difference in the proteins is possibly due to the different amino acids of which they are composed. It has been shown recently that ten amino acids are indispensable to body growth; and that the many others are not needed. [^2] This whole subject is being studied intensively in several laboratories and much new information may shortly be expected which will clarify numerous obscure problems in nutrition. Meanwhile, the fact remains that proteins are indispensable for the maintenance of life.

The following table of selected analyses, together with the brief table in chapter 10, illustrates the presence of protein in all ordinary foodstuffs. The percentages vary, but protein is always present.

Calories Proteins Fats per lb. Beef (loin) .................15.9 17.3 1025 Beef (kidney) ...............16.6 4.8 520 Pork (ham) ..................12.4 50.0 2345 Chicken .....................19.3 16.3 1045 Codfish .....................16.5 0.4 325 Halibut .....................18.6 5.2 565 Salmon ......................22.0 12.8 950 Beans (navy, dried) .........22.5 1.8 1605 Beans (soy, dried) ..........33.0 21.0 1993 Peas ........................24.6 1.0 1655 Lentils .....................25.7 1.0 1620 Walnuts .....................18.4 64.4 3200 Wheat Kernels ...............13.8 1.9 1675

There are also small amounts of inorganic mineral matters in flesh foods, usually under one percent.

Animal Protein. Meat, fish, eggs, milk and cheese are foods rich in protein—the white of egg and lean meat being nearly pure protein. The proteins in these animal foods are easily and completely (97%) digested, and in most cases are valuable as healthful articles of diet. Milk, cheese and eggs are most valuable and should form the bulk of the protein requirement. To many persons these have the added advantage that they do not require the taking of life. However, diet experts agree that a certain amount of flesh food is beneficial, even necessary, in the normal diet, especially in severe, cold climates.

Milk, an important source of protein, contains other valuable food substances. It is a well balanced food, with about 87% of water, the remainder being 3.3% of protein, 4.0% of fat, 5.0% of milk sugar and 0.7% of mineral matters including calcium and phosphorus. Milk also contains vitamins A, D, G, and some B, especially if cows are fed on green pasture. Cheese is the protein separated from milk, often associated with some mineral and fat. Butter is the fat separated from milk. Whey, which contains the milk sugar and most of the minerals of the milk, is an excellent food. It is often evaporated to form a palatable cheese, widely used in European nations, and could, with profit to the health, be more often used in this country.

Eggs contain about 74.0% of water. The 26% of dry matter is made up of protein and fat in about equal proportions. The fat, however, as also the vitamins A, B, D, E, and G, and the mineral salts occur in the yolk. The white of egg is rich in vitamin G.

Vegetable Protein. Protein is found in all plant tissues in varying amounts. Dried peas, beans and lentils contain as much protein as lean beef and even the grains contain much protein. However, since vegetable proteins are rather dense and solid in character, they are digested less rapidly and completely than animal proteins. Atwater reports the percentage digestibility of cereals to be 85, of dried legumes 78, of vegetables 83, and of fruits 85. This lower digestibility of vegetables as compared with animal protein does not of itself affect the value of vegetable protein in properly supporting human life.

It is believed by many that grains, fruits and vegetables are chiefly valuable as foods for other than their protein content. This is incorrect, for a properly selected low meat or wholly vegetarian diet, if supplemented with milk, cheese and eggs, will support life completely. The above conclusion is fully borne out by experiments carried out by men of the highest professional training and integrity. (see chapter 10)

Perhaps the most notable investigation of the kind in this country was conducted in 1903 and 1904 by Dr. Russell H. Chittenden, then Director of the Sheffield Scientific School of Yale University. He and four of his professional colleagues, with thirteen men detailed from the Hospital Corps of the United States Army, and eight university students trained in athletics, were placed on a diet low in animal protein, in some cases wholly vegetarian. The metabolism of these men was followed with detailed scrutiny. The men remained in good health or improved in health, and showed an increase in physical vigor and strength. Dr. Chittenden concluded from these exhaustive experiments that the ordinary daily intake of animal protein may be reduced one-third or one-half with distinct bodily benefit; that "too great indulgence in flesh foods may have its serious side"; and that all good foods may be used safely in moderation. [^3]

Experiments of equal or greater importance have been conducted for nearly half a century by Dr. M. Hindhede of Denmark. [^4] Under his leadership in the Danish Institute of Nutrition, numerous notable experiments have shown conclusively the beneficial effects of a low protein diet, and also the possibility of subsisting on an exclusively vegetarian diet with resulting increased mental and bodily health.

During the World War Dr. Hindhede had the opportunity of carrying out the greatest large scale nutrition experiment in the world's history. The war blockade compelled Denmark which imported cattle and hog feeds, to slaughter and sell four-fifths of its hogs and to reduce the dairy cattle by 34%. The farm products thus saved were made a part of the new dietary of the Danish people. A low meat, that is a low protein diet, became necessary. A "war bread" was made from whole rye flour, mixed with about 15% of wheat bran. By governmental order, under Hindhede's advice, each person (from October, 1917) was allowed a daily diet, carefully weighed out, of very little meat, small amounts of butter and milk, and substantial quantities of the above bread, cereals and potatoes. Alcoholic beverages were forbidden; tea and coffee were unavailable. Ordinarily, the average person would turn up his nose at such a diet. Within a few months, the beneficial effects of this diet upon the national health became evident. During the year of the experiment the Danish death rate fell nearly one-fifth, and became the lowest ever known in Europe. When, in October, 1918, the influenza epidemic broke out, Denmark was the only non-combatant nation in Europe with a death rate, during the course of the disease, below the pre-war mortality records. Abstinence from alcohol, tea and coffee, no doubt was a great factor in winning these remarkable results, but careful statistical studies have shown that the simple, natural diet was a prime factor in reducing the normal death rate and in giving the nation resistance against the influenza scourge.

From these experiments, and many others that might be quoted, it may be held that men can live well on vegetable protein, alone, but that flesh foods need not be prohibited. An understanding moderation in dietetics is of first importance, and is the spirit of the message of the Word of Wisdom.

Meat as Food. Meat dishes are easily prepared, are very appetizing, and permit of a pleasing variety in the menu. If ease of preparation and digestion were the chief consideration, one could say offhand that animal foods should form the bulk of the protein supply. But the effects of excessive meat eating show that meats should be eaten in great moderation.

During digestion, chemical changes occur in the stomach and intestines which make a part of the food soluble so that through the intricate process known as assimilation, it may be absorbed into the blood stream. Many products of meat metabolism are distinctly acid (uric acid and others) and may cause serious harm to the body if excessive in quantity. Besides, the waste products from meat, that is, protein-metabolism, are disposed of through the kidneys, therefore, excessive meat eating may place an undue strain upon these delicate organs. It is well substantiated that kidney diseases increase in a community with an increase of meat in the diet above that desirable for good health.

The undigested portion of food is passed through the intestines. If too much meat is eaten this undigested portion may decompose in the bowels, and this intestinal putrefaction is usually attended with discomfort and ill health.

Indeed, intestinal poisoning from excessive meat eating is not uncommon. This has been shown by numerous experiments. For example, Dr. Pawlov, world famous physiologist, in a delicate operation, directed the blood of a dog directly from the intestine to the heart, without passing through the liver. As long as the dog was fed vegetable food, he lived on as usual, but when he was fed flesh foods he suffered convulsions and died. This would indicate that in the decomposition of animal protein poisonous products are formed which are removed to some extent by the liver. Carniverous wild animals are characterized by large livers. Man has a relatively small liver. [^5]

Within recent months it has been shown experimentally that rats fed a high protein diet are likely to become subject to nephritis. [^6] Moreover, the heavy meat eater does not as a rule eat sufficient amounts of the other necessary foods. Milk and its products are seldom used and only a small supply of vegetables. This, as has been shown in earlier chapters, is a dangerous practice; especially since an excessive use of meats, always acid-forming, disturbs the acid-alkaline balance of the body. The ingestion of the necessary minerals and vitamins is also diminished when meat forms a large part of the dietary. (see chapter 9)

The old doctrine that meat is peculiarly able to endow men with strength, endurance and courage has long been shown to be fallacious. Vegetarians have often excelled in competitive sports. This was clearly shown in the Chittenden and Hindhede experiments to which reference has already been made.

The economic phase of meat eating is important. Meat proteins are more expensive than vegetable proteins. The animal often consumes six to eight pounds of vegetable protein, and other valuable foods, to produce one pound of animal protein. This economic waste points to the desirability of the substitution of vegetable for animal protein, in many cases.

Naturally, children need more easily digested and assimilated protein food than adults, since they have constant need to form new body substances. This is best met by the use of milk, eggs, and cheese. Feeding meat to children is questioned by many safe authorities. Therefore, where the income is small, children must be given special consideration in all dietary matters so that they may receive sufficient protein in other than animal forms. The nursing or expectant mother has also special need of protein and her needs are of prime importance.

It must be emphasized again that while there must be some protein in the food every day, it may be other than meat protein. It is unwise to eat meat and economize in milk, cheese and eggs. In summer, when the consumption of meat should be curtailed, great care should be exercised to secure protein from other sources.

How Much Protein is Necessary? One may well ask: how much animal or vegetable protein should be eaten to keep well? Food chemists and dietitians have agreed, with few exceptions, that as a general guide about one-sixth of the food eaten (on any basis) should be protein, and that this amount should be subdivided into animal and vegetable proteins. [^7]

The actual amount of protein required would differ somewhat in different climates and for people of different occupations. Naturally, those who perform the most vigorous kinds of work need more building food (protein) than those who work in offices. It is generally agreed from experimental evidence that a man weighing 150 pounds may get along on one ounce of protein daily, but that as a matter of safety this amount should be doubled. Even this is a low protein amount. The confusion in this field is due to the fact that many dietary standards have been based upon actual practice, often faulty and opposed to the best knowledge. Children need less, and people doing hard physical work need more. The average high total amount of protein for an adult male is one hundred grams (3 1/2 oz. dry weight) per day. Other investigators hold that half or two-thirds of this amount is sufficient to maintain a person in good health. Of this total daily protein, not more than one-third need be from the animal kingdom—as flesh in cold weather, or milk, eggs or cheese—while the other two-thirds may be from a vegetable source. [^8]

If much more than this amount of protein (3 1/2 oz.) be eaten the body may suffer. Expensive protein is burned in place of the cheaper and more healthful carbohydrates. Mary Swartz Rose claims that if children have an ample supply of milk, eggs and vegetable protein, meat is unnecessary. [^9] When the child is eight or nine years old it may be given a little meat, not more than one ounce a day, [^10] or better, a little more two or three times a week. Even during adolescence, it should be taken in moderation, from two to four ounces a day at most. [^11]

Economy in Meat Eating. One-third of the American dietary consists of meat. This is too high both from the physiological and the economic point of view. Meat is necessarily expensive. Only a small portion of the vegetable protein fed to an animal becomes available as human food. Often there is a loss of three-fourths of the vegetable protein used in the transformation. Undoubtedly, if the present amount of meat consumed in America were cut in half, better health, greater resistance to disease, keener zest of life, and truer enjoyment would wait upon the people. Dr. Sherman's advice that not more than one-sixth of the food budget should be spent for meat instead of one-third as at present should be heeded. [^12]

Statistics indicate that in America there is a distinct trend towards the reduction of the consumption of meat, with an increase in the use of dairy products, vegetables, and fruits—a trend towards a more wholesome dietary. A great variety of desirable food products are now found in every village, to be used by all who desire health.

Carnivorous Men and Beasts. The Eskimo and all carnivorous animals live almost entirely on meat and fish, with an addition of a good part of blubber or fat, and maintain good health. What is the explanation? First, it must be remembered that the Word of Wisdom was given to people living in a temperate climate and under civilized conditions. Second, and of more importance, flesh-eating animals feed upon all parts of the carcass, the internal organs as well as the muscle meat, and often drink the blood. From such sources they obtain their minerals and vitamins. Third, they eat their meat raw or practically so, and thus preserve the vitamins which would be destroyed by cooking. That is, they eat natural foods. Fourth, in season they eat many eggs from sea birds, milk from reindeer. Both the milk and the eggs are rich in calcium and vitamins.

Thus nature provides for the need which exists in sections where meat must be the main food. These Northern people could not, in a hot climate, eat meat to the same degree, cooked as chops, steaks and roasts, and survive in health over long periods of time, and for generations.

A Comparison. A comparison of the findings of modern science regarding the eating of meat, with the injunction of the Word of Wisdom given over one hundred years ago, is most interesting. Two modern scientists have used almost the exact words employed by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Dr. Mottram, Professor of Physiology in the University of London says:

"Meat is chiefly of value as a source of protein. . . . It is, however, wise to use it in moderation (italics ours) and to substitute milk and cheese for it whenever possible. This is true from the points of view of individual and national economy as explained above. The idea that meat promotes energy above all foods is a myth that lingers on. Possibly the myth has its roots in some old folk lore, for the scientific ground, if there ever was any for it, disappeared years ago. . . . To sum up: Meats are dear foods; they could be partly or wholly replaced by cheese and milk." [^13]

Another distinguished scientist, Dr. Henry C. Sherman, Professor of Chemistry in Columbia University says:

"The undesirable putrefactive bacteria find a favorable medium in meat. It is partly for this reason that meat should be eaten sparingly (italics ours) and when eaten should always be well chewed so as to reduce it to the smallest possible particles in the hope that its putrefactive bacteria will be largely killed by the gastric juice." [^14]

Moderation in meat eating is taught by nearly all students of nutrition. The Word of Wisdom declares that meats are to be used sparingly.

"In Times of Famine and Cold". Meats have the power to sustain life for a time if nothing else is eaten, provided that the blood and internal organs—heart, kidneys, liver and brains—are eaten. Under such conditions, the proteins which normally are body builders are burned and used as energy producers. It is clear therefore that in times of famine there could be no objection to using meat as the only article of diet.

In hot weather the meat intake should be reduced, and vegetable proteins substituted.

Professor Mottram, speaking of climate and meat eating says:

"Proteins are rather wastefully utilized by the body and a point for the vegetarian is that there is less wastefulness with cereal proteins than with meat proteins. A practical outcome is that in hot weather, or in the tropics, the proteins should be cut to the minimum and vegetable protein practically substituted for animal protein." [^15] (Italics ours.)

The Word of Wisdom Confirmed. At the time that the Word of Wisdom was given, meat, when it could be obtained, was largely used by all classes. It was generally looked upon as the best and most necessary food for full health. Those who raised their voices in opposition to this view were held to be fanatical, untrustworthy "food faddists". Alas! Some people hold that opinion today!

It was therefore a courageous departure from accepted practice to teach that meat should be used "sparingly", and further to suggest that man may live without meat as implied in the words, "they should not be used, only in times of winter, or of cold or famine".

The prophetic power of Joseph Smith is emphasized in the recent demonstration by the modern science of nutrition that meat should, indeed, form a minor part of the human dietary, and that, in fact, the plant kingdom contains the necessary food constituents characteristic of meat.

The Word of Wisdom does not contain a prohibition against meat eating, but urges its sparing use. Unfortunately, this advice is not generally observed, and man's health suffers in consequence. Many people eat too much meat; a few do not eat enough.

The advice in the Word of Wisdom concerning the use of meat is proof of the inspiration of the modern Prophet. How could any man of his own knowledge dare to teach, in the name of God, so long ago—long before the science of human nutrition was born—truths which coincide so startlingly with modern findings? Not one word in the revelation could be changed for the better by the most advanced food chemist of our day!

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Chittenden, Physiological Economy in Nutrition, 1913.

Davis, A., Optimum Health, 1936.

Fisher, I., and Fisk, How to Live, 1931.

Hindhede, M., Die Neue Ernaehrungslehre, 1923.

Hindhede, M., Fuldkommen Sundhed, 1934.

Hindhede, M., Sund, Billig, og Velsmagende Kost, 1935.

Lusk, G., The Science of Nutrition, 1919.

McCollum, E. V., and Becker, J. E., Food, Nutrition and Health, 1935.

McCollum, E. V., and Simonds, N., Newer Knowledge of Nutrition, 1925.

Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family.

Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934.

Sherman, H. C., Food and Health, 1934.

Stanley, L., and Cline, J. A., Foods, Their Selection and Preparation, 1935.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:17.
[^2] Nye, Noel, What Shall We Drink? p. 7.
[^3] Chittenden, Physiological Economy in Nutrition, 1913.
[^4] Hindhede. M., Die Neue Ernaehrungslehre, 1923; also Hindhede, M., Fuldkommen Sundhed, 1934.
[^5] Hindhede, M., Fuldkommen Sundhed, 1934, pp. 142, 143, 1934.
[^6] Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 109, No. 15 October, 1937.
[^7] Sherman, H. C., Food Products, 1924, p. 250.
[^8] Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family, p. 130.
[^9] Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, p. 173; also Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness, p. 419.
[^10] Ibid., p 183.
[^11] Ibid., p. 196.
[^12] Sherman, H. C., Food Products, 1924, p. 250.
[^13] Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family, pp. 216, 217, Nisbet & Co.
[^14] Sherman, H. C., Food and Health, pp. 61, 62, 1934.
[^15] Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family, p. 76, Nisbet & Co.
