John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 16

HEALTHFUL DRINKS

"And barley for mild drinks, as also other grain." [^1]

Definition. The Word of Wisdom is explicit as to what man shall not drink but in only one place does it mention what shall be drunk for health. If the drinks most commonly used by man are injurious then one must define and advocate some which are appetizing and health-giving. It is clearly evident that the "will and word of the Lord" is not intended to be a "thou shalt not" for all appetizing drinks but only for those which are definitely injurious to the human system.

The term "hot drinks" (which are forbidden in the Word of Wisdom) may be fairly defined as follows: Any drink regardless of temperature, which contains a drug the action of which affects the heart or nervous system and which is habit-forming. (see chapter 7) Such a definition would include not only all kinds of alcoholic drinks, coffee, tea and chocolate, but any and all drinks, advertised to "give you a lift" or "pick you up in 5 minutes". It includes iced tea and coffee, for they contain the same drugs as when hot. Moreover, drinks that are icy cold are as injurious as those taken too hot, whether soda fountain drinks or home made fruit drinks. Ice water is equally undesirable.

Water and Health. The drink most precious is clear, pure water, which is by far the most satisfying thirst quencher. Shakespeare speaks of "honest water which ne'er left man in the mire". Another writer has said that "drinking water neither makes a man sick, nor in debt, nor his wife a widow."

"Beautiful water! There is no blood in its crystal depths, no madness and no murder in its foam! It never broke a mother's heart! It never ruined a reputation! It never sent a poor wretch shrieking to the gallows! No poison bubbles on its brink! Never did pale-faced wife, or starving child, or broken-hearted mother weep into it a bitter tear; never did drunkard howl back from his deathbed a fearful curse upon it! There is no curse here. . . .

"Young women, in the glory of your womanly beauty, speak out and tell us; young men, in the majesty of your intellectual power, stand up and tell us. Have we not common sense on our side when we would dash from the lips of the young forever the drink that debases and degrades, and give them as their best and purest beverage the gift of God, brewed in beautiful places for His children?" [^2]

The author of the above is John B. Gough, the remarkable orator. He uttered the words with a glass of water in his hand.

About two-thirds of the body weight is water. All the processes of living, including digestion, depend upon the circulation of liquids freely within the body. It is the concensus of opinion that since an average size man loses by means of the lungs, skin and kidneys, about 80 ounces of water every twenty-four hours; and as this loss has to be made good, about four pints (eight glasses) of water must be taken in an average day.

This should be taken largely between meals and not more than a glass at a time. It should be taken slowly and whether or not one feels thirsty, for the need is there even though not recognized. However, no hard and fast rules may be given, since the amount should vary according to the activity of the individual, the warmth of the day, and the amount of liquid present in the food.

Most people are unaware that many of their physical discomforts, including "hacking coughs" and frequent colds, are a result of an insufficient supply of water as a part of their daily diet. Also, the waste products of metabolism may be completely carried off through the eliminative organs only when there is a sufficient liquid intake. However, one must not take too much liquid for then it becomes a tax on the kidneys and bladder. Again, moderation and intelligence are the keywords of health.

Vegetable Juices. These are very desirable in the daily menu, for they contain in abundance different mineral salts and vitamins. By right combinations and judicious seasoning they may be made very palatable as well as nutritious. Such vegetables as carrots, beets, celery and rutabagas are especially desirable for their vitamin and mineral content. The well equipped modern kitchen has a vegetable juice extractor and the wise homemaker serves a raw vegetable or vegetable juice to her family at least once a day. They are appetizing and refreshing and by proper seasoning make a real health drink.

Fruit Juices. There are many occasions when people enjoy and need a drink other than water—one which has color, a piquant taste, a health-giving tang. Such drinks, however, should add to one's health, not detract therefrom. There are many healthful drinks which will do just that. All the citrus fruits, pomegranate, pineapple and some other fruits yield juices that may be taken as prepared by nature without added sugar. The juices of other fruits may be diluted with water and slightly sweetened, preferably with honey. Fruit juices, if taken fresh, are nearly always palatable and invigorating, refreshing as well as healthful. Moreover, they contain much of the precious mineral matter and vitamins of the fruits.

Unfermented juices of the grape, apple, strawberry, raspberry and other fruits make drinks "par excellence", especially if home-made and of good flavored grapes such as the Concord, and ripe fruits in season. They should not be too sweet and may be sweetened with honey.

Warm drinks or punches, indicated in cold weather, may be served in many possible variations as suggested above for cold drinks. The flavor may be varied with different spices or fruit combinations. Such drinks add to health if not too sweet and give one a feeling of warmth and well-being.

Changes of flavor in drinks made from fruit juices may be had by skillful blending with mint or ginger (ground or candied), or other spices, such as cloves, cinnamon, cardemom, or by adding ginger ale or for a little tang some carbonated water. A decided change of flavor may be had by adding to a drink a small amount of the non-alcoholic syrup called grenadine, sold in large stores. One guest with epicurean taste was served the following fruit drink: equal quantities of lemon and orange juice, a little cut fruit in season; honey added to suit the taste, a dash of grenadine and enough carbonated water to increase the palatability of the drink. He remarked that it was so good he couldn't believe it was non-alcoholic. There are many possible variations of such delicious health drinks. Why then tamper with those which are dangerously habit-forming as well as injurious?

The Cocktail Habit. The custom of serving cocktails has come into vogue because alcoholic beverages depress the higher brain centers and allow the lower controls to come into ascendancy. Thus certain inhibitions and cautions are removed, and the drinker is supposed to become more talkative and jolly. Also, the cocktail is supposed to rouse a jaded appetite.

Everyone should know that cocktails are much more harmful than beer or wine, also that a person with a "jaded appetite" should not eat, especially a heavy meal. It is a poor compliment for a hostess to insinuate that her guest has to be put in good humor by artificial and dangerous stimulation or for a guest to come to dinner with little appetite for the meal his hostess has gone to much trouble and expense to prepare. If the guest comes with a normal, healthy appetite, the taking of drinks and snacks before the meal is apt to lessen just so much the appetite and the enjoyment of the meal to follow. From all angles the cocktail habit is not a good one. The wise hostess chooses as guests only those who are congenial. When a good time is to be had, a person needs all his powers to enjoy it to the full. One's highest self must be in the ascendancy if one is to be an ideal hostess or guest, or if one is to have any real pleasure and enjoyment. How may anything be enjoyed to the full if one is only "half there"?

Health cocktails such as the following are permissible and may be served if desired. A citrus cocktail, (described by Adolphe Menjou as his favorite) made of equal portions of orange and lemon or grapefruit juice with a sprinkling of ground ginger; also those made of tomato, oyster, clam or any preferred vegetable juices mixed as desired. One used in England, called "Grand Man", consists of an oyster in tomato juice with lemon, a dash of Worcestershire sauce and paprika. The "Orange Honey Cocktail", a real "pick me up", one that does not "let you down", allows for each person one-third cup of orange juice, 1 tablespoon each of lemon juice and honey, and a pinch of salt. Mix in shaker. Honey is a great restorer and is one of nature's choicest natural sweets. It is good for young and old, in moderation.

Grain Drinks. Many people claim that since barley as a drink is mentioned in the Word of Wisdom it must refer to beer, for barley as malt is used therein. Certainly, that cannot be the meaning, for, when grain is fermented, alcohol is formed and alcohol is explicitly forbidden. How then may the reference be interpreted?

Barley and other grains are often browned lightly in the oven and then ground and made as coffee, into a brown cereal drink. Dry crusts of bread are sometimes so used. Such drinks are permissible unless browned too much and taken in too large a quantity. The excessive heat required to brown any food—even toast—destroys all vitamins and if it is browned too much it tends to cause a deterioration in the starch and fiber of the grain. Therefore browned grain drinks must be used with discretion.

"Harvest drinks", those made from natural grains and wheat or rice bran, are very healthful because of their vitamins and may be made appetizing. They are usually made by pouring boiling water over the grains or bran, boiling a few minutes, and allowing the mixture to stand until cool. It may then be served with milk and brown sugar, or with the addition of lemon or other fruit juices, or spices or even hops and other herbs may be added to give flavor and to tone up the system. Such health drinks made from the extracts of barley, oatmeal, bran of wheat or rice, or even from the germinated barley or malt, are very healthful.

Milk and Egg Drinks. Milk and egg drinks are really foods and must be taken slowly and thoroughly mixed with saliva before swallowing. They are actually foods, nutritious and desirable for strength-giving or upbuilding purposes, but can hardly be classed as drinks, to meet the need of the body for liquids.

Herb Infusions. Infusions of herbs or herb teas are used in many countries of Europe. In France one may be served "infusion" of dried leaves of the verbena, mint and many herbs or the flowers of camomile, orange, or linden trees, much more frequently than the real China or India tea. A consequent improvement in health may definitely be noticed. They act as a tonic to the system and prove very beneficial. Every one remembers the hop tea, dandelion or camomile teas of grandmother's day which were given as the annual spring tonic. There are many times when warm (not too hot) herb drinks are indicated and desirable.

Names for Health Drinks. Bright and intriguing names for health drinks are most desirable and do much to make them successful. Some suggestions are: Grape Delight, Elysian Draught, Nectar of Eden, Desert Refresher, Western Glory, Golden Slipper, Apple Royal, Celestial Cooler, Peach Pop, Gingerette, Harvest Home, Wisbru (a bran extract), Stokos, Barlikos, Raisin Tea and many others. One may concoct different combinations and devise one's own names, for there are many possibilities. Ingenuity in making fancy names for permissible infusions avoiding the use of the words "tea" or "coffee" should be exercised.

Ciders and Root Beers. Cider and home-made root beers may be harmless if taken when freshly made but if allowed to ferment at all they contain alcohol (which gives the tang) and are just as harmful to the body as though they were not home-made. Every fermented drink contains alcohol and it has been definitely shown that any degree of alcohol is injurious to the brain and nerves as well as being forbidden by the "word and will of the Lord".

Many a confirmed drunkard and derelict traces his passion for the "deadly drink" to the so-called harmless root beers or hard ciders prepared by father and mother in his childhood's home. Since there are so many really harmless as well as delicious drinks one wonders why otherwise good parents will put temptation in the way of themselves and loved ones. It may be true that a person doesn't get "dead" drunk on lightly fermented root beer or soft cider; but who knows when the taste for liquor which, a sleeping giant within, may be aroused. Besides, if son or daughter is given fermented root beer or cider by mother at home, why not take the "doctored" punch from sweetheart or friend at the party? The risk is so great that here the part of wisdom is to shun the very semblance of a taste for alcohol.

"Soda Pops". The occasional use of some artificially flavored drink, made from carbonated water and syrups may not be harmful; but, certainly, one should not make a habit of taking such drinks. Too much carbonated water may become decidedly irritating to the delicate linings of the alimentary tract, and, with other unnatural food and drink may in time cause distress. Drink as well as food is best for man when made in nature's laboratory from fruit and vegetable juices, mixed with pure water.

Chemical Flavors and Colorings. A warning must be given against soft drinks, candies and all foods flavored or colored with chemical substances of unknown physiological properties. Such flavoring extracts or colorings should not be used unless it is definitely known that they are harmless. Since such chemical products are much cheaper, there is a temptation to use them in preference to the known natural flavorings and vegetable colorings. The long continued use of harmful ingredients, even in small doses, may become dangerous.

In the magazine Life of March 1, 1937, a series of pictures show recent efforts to recognize and cure cancer. On page 13 is a picture of skin cancer on a rat produced by "repeated applications of benzpyrene, a coal-tar derivative" which is one of the recognized cancer-promoting agents. There is little likelihood of benzpyrene in artificial flavors and colors, but there may be other coal-tar derivatives as yet unrecognized which are mildly irritating to animal tissue and which may be used, innocently enough, by manufacturers. Before using "pops" and manufactured drinks, no matter how well advertised or recommended, if they are artificially colored (or flavored, and prepared synthetically, usually from coal-tar products) one should be certain that they are harmless. The delicate linings of stomach and alimentary tract are much too precious to be experimented with because questionable artificial flavors are cheaper. Certain it is that ulcers of the stomach, which often lead to cancer, are greatly on the increase, for which there must be some cause or causes.

Again one comes back to the advice given in the letter as by the spirit of the Word of Wisdom. Natural foods, as prepared by Mother Nature, are best for man and beast. Beware of all artificial synthetic food products or drinks made by man for commercial gain. It is wiser to spend a little more money for natural foods than to spend it to cure or alleviate a diseased body.

Neither man's food nor his drink should be monotonous and of this there is no need, for nature has been lavish in her bestowal of health-giving delights.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Berg, Ragnar, Die Naehrungs und Genussmittel, 1929.

Crichton-Browne, Sir James, What We Drink, 1930.

Kneipp, Sebastian, My Water Cure, 1893.

Nye, Noel, What Shall We Drink, 1933.

Mottram, V. H., Food and the Family.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:11.
[^2] Ibid., 10:4.
