John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 17

"PRUDENCE AND THANKSGIVING"

"All these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving." [^1]

Wisdom and Health. The Word of Wisdom is essentially a nutritional guide. Other factors of health are not discussed in it. Yet on various occasions the Prophet Joseph Smith received revelations that bear in part on the maintenance of health.

All things, even the practice of the Word of Wisdom, should be done in wisdom, in moderation and with the right appreciation of life's requirements and opportunities. That is made clear in verse 11 where the statement is made with reference to desirable foods, "all these to be used with prudence and thanksgiving."

Prudence. The dictionary defines prudence as the quality of being wise, frugal, having foresight and knowledge and using good judgment. This definition certainly includes wisdom in the use of knowledge. Moderation is an essential principle in every human activity including the Word of Wisdom. Food fads and fancies do not overtake the prudent man who weighs with intelligence all the requirements of life, and practices them in moderation. Such prudence was early indicated to Joseph Smith, the Prophet: "Do not run faster or labor more than you have strength". [^2]

If prudence is knowledge applied to daily needs, then one with an intelligent interest in food and good life habits is in no sense a faddist or crank. Indeed, every one should have such a sound fundamental knowledge of nutrition that it would be a very part of one-self and applied without conscious effort in everyday life.

A good wholesome diet composed of all nature's food "in season" should be the rule—and one should learn to enjoy all natural foods—excluding none; for each food possesses some special element or substance needed by the body mechanism. In this practice, parents must set the right example to children who are unconscious imitators.

The prudent mother or provider of food must be intelligent in these matters and not believe all that is told by shrewd advertising whether by radio or the printed page. If she is prudent she knows that "conspiring men in the last days" have commercial interests at stake and are far more interested in their own pocket-book than in the public health. Her own and her family's health depends upon knowledge of food values, more so today than at any time in the past. Knowledge and use of knowledge give health as well as power.

Thanksgiving. The term thanksgiving used in the text implies that one's mental attitude should be right. To understand a subject and to apply its truths is important, but if one is cheerful and thankful for all blessings, the food and drink will be greatly enhanced to his good. Especially true is this of thanksgiving directed towards God and his goodness to men. Thanksgiving which recognizes the relationship of man to his Heavenly Father, brings the greatest happiness. For, man's body is a mortal tabernacle for a spirit child of God and its care and development should be a sacred trust.

Work. Work is enjoined upon the Latter-day Saints. Honest labor is a blessing to man. Idleness is held in abhorrence. "Thou shalt not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer." [^3] Punishment follows idleness. "The idler shall be had in remembrance before the Lord." [^4] "Wo unto you poor men . . who will not labor with your own hands!" [^5] Even Church membership may be forfeited by idleness. "Let every man be diligent in all things. And the idler shall not have place in the Church, except he repent and mend his ways." [^6] The wisdom of the requirement that men should work is now more evident than ever before. Health is promoted by the exercise of body and mind in honest labor. Much unnecessary suffering is the result of idleness, made possible by wealth or unemployment or derived from unnatural conditions in life.

Rest. Proper rest is also urged upon Latter-day Saints, especially sleep, which is "nature's sweet restorer". A few months before the Word of Wisdom was given, the following appeared in a revelation to Joseph Smith: "Cease to sleep longer than is needful; retire to thy bed early, that ye may not be weary; arise early, that your bodies and minds may be invigorated." [^7] That does not mean that one should sleep a certain minimum number of hours. In this requirement people differ. Nine hours is a minimum for some adults, while others seem to keep healthy on seven or less. Brigham Young's division of the twenty-four hours is fair and moderate: Eight hours for work; eight hours for recreation, including eating, light home duties, Church activities and actual play; and eight hours for sleep. If some adults need less they should not feel that those who need more are lazy and slothful.

Children need much more sleep than adults, for growth and proper development. Authorities on child nutrition insist that many undernourished children are lacking not good food but proper rest. The body utilizes its food and restores its energy during rest and sleep. [^8]

Change from routine duties is looked upon as a rest. The provision by which every member of the Church may become active in Church affairs, furnishes a high-grade, wholesome change from the regular bread-winning duties of life. "Every man who is obliged to provide for his own family, let him provide, and he shall in nowise lose his crown; and let him labor in the Church." [^9] The proper amount of sleep, occasional change of occupation, rest and actual play or recreation, are all essential to full health. The Church has demonstrated its power through its organizations to provide healthful change and recreation for its members.

A Sound Religious Philosophy. A correct mental attitude dependent upon a sound religious philosophy is equally necessary for good health. The mind is connected closely with the body, and is its master. Love will promote health; hate will undermine it. An angry person does not digest his food well, and other bodily reactions are upset. Here is a recipe for happiness among many that might be selected from the revelations to Joseph Smith: "See that ye love one another . . . as the gospel requires; . . . cease to be unclean; cease to find fault one with another; . . . and above all things, clothe yourselves with the bond of charity, as with a mantle, which is the bond of perfectness and peace. Pray always." [^10] Faith, hope and charity, and a constant seeking after the truths of life and the universe, with a determination to accept them when found, form the foundation blocks for good health. A sound religious philosophy is a prerequisite for perfect health. The Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ in its fullness as restored through the ministry of Joseph Smith answers the questions lying deep in every human heart, and has contributed much to the unusual health record of Latter-day Saints.

The Future and Prudence. The most ardent Word of Wisdom enthusiasts cannot claim that this inspired document gives the last detailed word in nutritional advice. Scientific knowledge concerning man's diet is yet in its infancy. Many new angles to old truths are constantly being discovered. When such are definitely established in the best laboratories of nutrition to be facts, not mere theories, then they may be accepted and used, and they will be found to be in harmony with the general principles set forth by the Word of Wisdom. The advice in the Word of Wisdom to use prudence in all these things implies that one should be ready to accept and apply new truth.

REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING

Bogert, L. J., Nutrition and Physical Fitness.

Cornaro, L., The Art of Living Long (Butler edition).

Davis, A., Optimum Health, 1936.

Lane, W. A., Secrets of Good Health.

Lane, W. A., Blazing the Health Trail.

Lane, W. A., The Diseases of Civilization.

Lorand, A., Old Age Deferred, 1910.

Rose, M. S., Feeding the Family, 1934.

Ullman, E. V., Diet in Sinus Infections and Colds.

Widtsoe, J. A., Discourses of Brigham Young, 1925.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 89:2.
[^2] Ibid., 89:18-21.
[^3] The measure of the rewards promised by the Word of Wisdom is made possible by the use of statistics gathered by the Church over a long number of years. At the beginning of each year the bishops of the wards of the Church, more than one thousand in number, assemble the vital data pertaining to the groups of people placed in their care, and forward these to the Presiding Bishop's Office for recording and collating. In the majority of the wards the population is under one thousand. The bishop and his two counselors, with the ward clerk are usually personally familiar with every family. There is no great likelihood of error; especially as the bishop checks his findings with the physicians' certificates sent in to the state. Moreover, the consistency of the reports from year to year indicates their reliability. They are probably fully as reliable as those gathered by the State. It should be said, however, that Church statistics deal only with the stakes of the Church; such reports have not yet been secured from the missions. Educational statistics are also gathered at various intervals, as also other statistics of interest to the Church.
[^4] Only the data of U. S. A. from the year 1930, '34 and '35 were available in the report used in this study.
[^5] Church data from Office of the Presiding Bishop. U. S. A. data from Public Health Reports, April 30, 1937, U. S. Public Health Service.
[^6] Deseret News, Church Section, Jan. 16, 1937.
[^7] General Conference Report, October, 1937.
[^8] Harris, F. S., and Butt, N. I., The Fruits of Mormonism, 1925, p. 136.
[^9] Doctrine and Covenants 29:34, 35.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants 88:123-126.
