John A. Widtsoe, Word of Wisdom: A Modern Interpretation ( 1937)

Chapter 19

CONCLUSION

The Word of Wisdom Summarized. The code of health, known as the Word of Wisdom, and in which resides the power to correct many evils of the day, may be summarized in eight rules:

Supplementary Rules. The Word of Wisdom dealing with food is the most important factor of health, but not the only one. Others must be observed also for full health. For example:

Pure, fresh water should be drunk freely, at arising and between meals, during the day. Fruit juices and grain extracts, notably of bran and barley, may well supplement the intake of water.

Milk, a food rather than a drink, should be used in the complete dietary.

Health requires regular and steady physical labor and intellectual effort. Whether taken in one's regular business or as recreation, such exercise of body and mind is necessary to make obedience to the Word of Wisdom most effective. Physical exercise in the open air is always desirable. Daily reading of good literature and all forms of proper recreation help promote good health.

Equally important is sufficient, regular, preferably early sleep, ending in the early morning. When this health requirement is violated in our fast-moving, unnatural age, many of the benefits of the Word of Wisdom are defeated.

Frequent bathing should be made habitual.

There should be daily elimination of the waste products within the body.

The full benefit of the Word of Wisdom can be obtained only when the mind is at peace. A correct mental attitude, one of faith, hope and love, is indispensable for full health. That really means that a pre-requisite for perfect health is a sound religious philosophy. The Gospel relieves the anxieties of the spirit by answering the deep questions of life, and thereby becomes a factor for good health. Activity in the Church, always unselfish if properly done, likewise helps greatly in the maintenance or restoration of health. The spirit is an ally with the body of man to make life joyous.

Need of the Word of Wisdom. Humanity has need for the warning and help offered by the Word of Wisdom. There are few really healthy people in the world. Too many live with only half their possible energies at their command. There is too much disease, too many colds and hay fevers. There are too many widows. There is too much deception by fraud and lying drugs. There is too much poverty, because money is spent for things injurious to the body, too much suffering in drunkards' homes, too much crime by people sick in mind and body. There are too many broken homes, too many divorces traceable to violation of the law of health. There are too many flabby wills; too little self-conquest. There is not enough faith; not enough prayer. These conditions need not exist; the Lord does not desire them to continue; by obedience to the Word of Wisdom they may be corrected.

Effect on Coming Generations. The test of any regime of life is that the posterity of an individual, as well as the individual himself, shall be sound and healthy. Many persons blessed with a strong inheritance survive their mistakes and live to a high age, but, too often, their children and children's children die in youth or live with poor health. Parents are the keepers of the welfare of the coming generations. The descendants of those who keep the Word of Wisdom in its fullness will be blessed.

Benefits of the Word of Wisdom. Conformity to the Word of Wisdom will help solve many of the most perplexing problems of our age. Disease will largely be overcome. Life will be lengthened and health will rule while life endures. Economic prosperity will follow the direction into useful channels of the vast sums of money now spent for things injurious to health. Cultivation of home gardens on the thousands of vacant neglected spots in every city, would profitably replace night brawls in dress suits or rags. Social happiness will come with the elimination of the poverty, crime and squalor due to drink and drugs. A new mental health will reveal "hidden treasures" of knowledge. There will be means available for the education of all. Appetites are conquered and character developed as men and women use their wills to accept the provisions of the Word of Wisdom as against the temptations of pleasures that end in disaster. Such conquest of self will lead to a surrender to the will of God, which is the ultimate victory, and will enable humanity to attain the higher spiritual reaches of life. Obedience to the Word of Wisdom brings spiritual communion and strength.

Self-Correction. Special strength is not needed to conform to the Lord's law of health, for obedience to it provides the means by which bad habits and unwise appetites may be avoided or corrected. Obedience to the positive factors helps destroy the appetite for the negative factors.

Evidence of Inspiration. Throughout these pages fact has crowded upon fact in support of the declaration of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, that the Word of Wisdom was revealed to him from heavenly sources. He would have stood helpless before the problem of human health had he relied on current knowledge or upon his own shrewd guesses. There are statements in the revelation that, in the light of modern knowledge, cannot be explained by any other means than that of inspiration.

Indeed, today, after 104 years, the Word of Wisdom stands as one of the most convincing evidences of the divine inspiration of Joseph Smith, the "Mormon" Prophet.

Finale. The followers of the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ are grateful for the gift of this Law of Health, and offer it to all the world as one means by which full health may be won by all men. The rewards of obedience to this divine law are appealing. Health of body, mental strength, endurance, protection against the devastating scourges of earth, economic security, social welfare, treasures of knowledge, spiritual development and an understanding peace of mind. Finale. The followers of the restored Gospel of Jesus Christ are grateful for the gift of this Law of Health, and offer it to all the world as one means by which full health may be won by all men. The rewards of obedience to this divine law are appealing. Health of body, mental strength, endurance, protection against the devastating scourges of earth, economic security, social welfare, treasures of knowledge, spiritual development and an understanding peace of mind.
