“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

“The heavens declare the glory of God.”

1 2 2 2 2“The heavens declare the glory of God.” Th e Bible Teaches... Atheism Claims... 11 “The heavens declare the glory of God.”

–Carl Sagan “The heavens declare the glory of God.” 3 Q:“The heavens declare the glory of God.” Q:“The heavens declare the glory of God.” What Can We Know About the Existence of God?

Atheism Claims... “The heavens declare the glory of God.” 3 Q:What Can We Know About Right and Wrong?

Many atheists have a high regard for Christianity has a high regard for Since God does not exist, neither do

reason with a bias toward empiricism (that reason, but recognizes its limitations transcendent moral absolutes. Morality is

which can be measured by the senses). in defi ning a God who is by nature relative to one’s personal perspective or cultural

Since God cannot be measured and unlimited. Th e God of the Bible norms. Th ere may be some widely accepted

quantifi ed, there is no viable evidence for has revealed much about himself and enduring values, perhaps to aid in our

his existence. Science and philosophical that is conclusively knowable. God survival. Because values do not come from

reasoning argue against the existence of reveals himself through creation, God, they must originate with human beings.

God. Since evolution explains human communication through his Word, An individual’s judgment or the decision of origins, God is unnecessary. If the universe and conscience.

is eternal or can be shown to have come Creation Our complex universe the majority determines societal values. Some

into existence spontaneously and by shows evidence of a Creator. Sensory atheists favor utilitarian ethics, where “the

chance, then God is also unnecessary. input from the physical world good” is what is best for the greatest number

Agnosticism Claims... provides knowledge through which of people over the long run.

Agnostics are skeptical of reason and all other we know God. Sometimes called Making God the source of morality is fl awed.

systems of knowing. As a result, they shy general revelation, these are things If God simply declares something good or bad,

away from claiming certain knowledge about God reveals about himself through his decision seems arbitrary, but if God merely

reality or God. One cannot or does not know nature to everyone (Romans 1:20). acknowledges the good that already exists,

anything for certain; therefore one cannot Communication Th e content of the God seems unnecessary or less than the good. or does not know if God exists. Although Bible gives evidence of divine origin. Agnosticism Claims...

agnostics claim not to know whether God Th is communication is called special Depending on the individual agnostic,

exists, many function as atheists. revelation; these are the things God there are various views of morality.

question of ethics. As a result, ethics are

“... the most plausible times in history. told to specifi c people at specifi c Some will apply their agnosticism to the

answer to the question Conscience Th e moral law written also unknowable; however, these kinds

of why something exists on human conscience points to a Moral of agnostics would approve of a social

rather than nothing is that Lawgiver (Romans 2:14-15). contract form of ethics.

God exists.” Cosmological argument2 In order for society to properly function,

• Everything that had a beginning has it is generally in everyone’s best interests

–William Lane Craig, Reasonable Faith a cause.

• The universe had a beginning. moral standards. to go along with culturally accepted

You Should Also Know... • Therefore, the universe had a cause. You Should Also Know...

Design argument3

Atheism claims that if moral values

While atheists in particular exalt human • Every design has a designer. exist, they must have their source in

reason and the capacity to interpret • The universe—and life—has highly human beings. But atheists believe

reality scientifi cally, the very nature of complex design.

human beings are products of

reason is in question if God does not • Therefore, there is a Great Designer. impersonal chance and time. However,

exist. If humans are the products of Moral argument4

moral values dictate

evolutionary chance, why should our • Moral laws require a lawgiver. between personal beings. How is it that

reasoning abilities be trusted? • Absolute moral laws exist. personal morality? an impersonal universe could result in

Arguments for the existence of God: • Therefore, there is an absolute

Moral Lawgiver.

This free e-Chart is taken from the pamphlet 10 Questions & Answers on Atheism and Agnosti- © 2012 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, cism ISBN 9781596361232. The full-color, glossy, and easy-to-understand pamphlet gives a but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your comprehensive examination of what atheists and agnostics believe and the evidence for the biblical friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

God. Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com. Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Worldviews Comparison

This comparison of worldviews helps you know what

you believe and why. A worldview is the “big picture”

view of the world, one that attempts to answer all the

big questions of life: What is real? If there is a God,

what is God’s nature? What is a human being? How

can we know what is right or wrong?

Pamphlet ............ 9781596361492 ...........$3.99

Also available as PDF and Wall Chart.

Creation & Evolution

The bestselling Creation & Evolution pamphlet shows

how scientific findings in the areas paleontology,

genetics, biochemistry, astrophysics and mathematics

cannot be explained by Darwinian Evolution. The full-

color glossy pamphlet reveals the basic lack of proof

surrounding Darwinism and delves into the exciting

recent findings.

10 Questions & Answers on Atheism and Pamphlet............9781890947019............$3.99

Agnosticism

Also available as PDF.

What can we know about the existence of God? What can we know

Complete Christianity, Cults & Religions DVD-

about right and wrong? Is belief in God compatible with science? Is there

based Small Group Study Kit - 6 Sessions

scientific evidence supporting the belief in God? If there is a good God,

This excellent small group study teaches what the

why is there evil? What about all the evil done in the name of God? Is the

Bible says about God, Jesus, salvation, life after death,

Bible an unreliable collection of myths? Is there meaning and purpose

and more. Christianity, Cults & Religions provides

to life? This pamphlet provides a comprehensive yet understandable

an in-depth examination of Mormonism, Jehovah’s

examination of what atheists and agnostics believe and also explains the

Witnesses, Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam.

evidence for the biblical God.

DVD .................... 9781596364134 ...........$99.99

Pamphlet ....................9781596361232 ................$3.99

Also available as PDF, Pamphlet, Spanish and PowerPoint®

Also available as PDF and PowerPoint®. Quantity discounts available.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible e-Charts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

ROSE PUBLISHING/ASPIRE PRESS

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
