Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

PREAMBLE

So often my writings have turned in one way or another to the continuing challenge and adventure of discipleship. To ask why is a fair question.

First of all, discipleship is the fundamental process in which we are to be "anxiously engaged" (D&C 58:27). Furthermore, only discipleship"follow me"connects beliefs and behavior, focusing on what we are becoming as well as what we are thinking and doing. Thus, discipleship cannot be merely intellectual. Did not Jesus prescribe and describe this convergence by saying, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me?" (Matthew 11:29). Moreover, the deepest development of discipleship occurs only in this particular manner, small though our yokes may be compared to His.

True, so very many in the world don't even know about Jesus, let alone know enough to respond to the question, "What think ye of Christ?" (Matthew 22:42). Additionally, of those who are aware of Him, many are desensitized and diverted, because He is "far from the thoughts and intents of [their] hearts" (Mosiah 5:13). But genuine Latter-day Saints clearly know who He is and, further, that building up His kingdom is what we are to do "first" (JST Matthew 6:38). No true disciple can be distant from his Master anyway: Christ alone marks the way perfectly. Amid life's uncertainties, His summoning trumpet always gives a certain sound.

Meanwhile, the distracting and intruding things of the world press upon us. In their times and moments, these things are often powerful, even prevailing, in the lives of many. These cares can preoccupy us, if we let them. Whatever these external tugs and pulls are, however, and whatever their lures and perks, the things of the world do not compare to the adventure of discipleship, the trek of treks. Furthermore, serious discipleship is ripe with joyful promise.

But this trek is a difficult, even rugged, journey at times. A great abundance of available spiritual direction and nutrition is needed for this trek. The harvest of the Restoration is truly "enough and to spare," just as the Lord said of the earth's resources (D&C 104:17).

A virtual lifetime of study has long since fully persuaded me that Jesus’ gospel is, indeed, an inexhaustible gospel. It has proved to be even more exciting in my sunset years, when age itself might have dulled my interests. The gospel invites scrutiny by study, and it induces the on-going introspection necessary for genuine discipleship. Whenever we can help each other along the path of discipleship by words, deeds, and examples, we truly bless each other.

The chapters to follow, therefore, concern the relevancy of the Restoration for our time, its abundance, and the attributes of God on which we constantly depend and which we are to emulate. There are also some samplings of "all these things" which constitute the stiff, tutorial challenges but bring much joy. Because the gifts of the Holy Ghost are so significant, these are given more attention than I have ever given them before, though still not enough.

The book likewise invites us to cast our minds forward to the adventure awaiting us all in the spirit world, where the Lord's work continues with even greater scope and intensity. Finally, a different salute is made to the Prophet Joseph Smith out of deep appreciation for what he accomplished while serving as the Prophet of the Restoration. Try as they haveand willJoseph's detractors will never dissolve the loyalty of the vast majority of members, for the promise is that "thy people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors" (D&C 122:3).

As is my custom, extensive use is made of the scriptures throughout this book. In the abundance of Restoration scriptures are some which produce a sense of wonder. These scriptures are not drenched in detail; they give, instead, bare-bones but vital information, such as about the demographics of dissent expressed in the premortal world: "And also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he [the devil] away from me because of their agency" (D&C 29:36).

Likewise, a declaratory revelation about the nature of the Holy Ghost comes in a terse verse: "The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit" (D&C 130:22). Very essential information is thus often given but without elaboration!

Other gospel gems, however, give us important salvational data, while simultaneously disclosing tender and insightful things about prophetic personalities. Such was surely the case with eloquent Jacob, as he taught regarding the chastity and fidelity required by the seventh commandment:

"Wherefore, it burdeneth my soul that I should be constrained, because of the strict commandment which I have received from God, to admonish you according to your crimes, to enlarge the wounds of those who are already wounded, instead of consoling and healing their wounds; and those who have not been wounded, instead of feasting upon the pleasing word of God have daggers placed to pierce their souls and wound their delicate minds" (Jacob 2:9).

Equally eloquent is Enoch's splendid, self-revelatory, and extensive conversation with the Lord, descriptive not only of His doctrine, character, and emotion, but of the Lord as well:

"And it came to pass that the God of heaven looked upon the residue of the people, and he wept; and Enoch bore record of it, saying: How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?" (Moses 7:28).

There is no parallel to that disclosure of divine emotion known to me, and what follows it is drenched in doctrine as well.

There are verses of scripture which teach while reflecting linguistic loveliness but without major doctrinal elaboration, such as this lamentation over human disregard for spiritual wisdom:

"Yea, they are as a wild flock which fleeth from the shepherd, and scattereth, and are driven, and are devoured by the beasts of the forest" (Mosiah 8:21).

Important insights about discipleship are embodied and conveyed in beautiful but succinct ways as in this inspired but haunting interrogatory which deals with the essence of failed discipleship:

"For how knoweth a man the master whom he has not served, and who is a stranger unto him, and is far from the thoughts and intents of his heart?" (Mosiah 5:13).

Alas, many stay at arm's length from Him whose arm is outstretched.

Furthermore, one notices in searching the feast-filled array of scriptures an arresting side-by-sideness, such as when a fleeting geographical fact is juxtaposed with a verse of keen, spiritual importance concerning discipleship:

"And it came to pass that they did multiply and prosper exceedingly in the land of Helam; and they built a city, which they called the city of Helam" (Mosiah 23:20).

A geographical place is noted for reasons known to the Lord but is clearly not salvationally significant to us. Verse 21, however, is obviously vital for us as disciples to know, because it frames the realistic expectations we should have about discipleship:

"Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith."

Thus, while many Restoration verses have doctrinal richness as well as richness of expression, some constitute revelations without elaboration. In developmental discipleship, the scriptures are, therefore, of inestimable worth.

By having and applying "the key of knowledge""the fulness of the scriptures"we accelerate our journey of discipleship (JST Luke 11:53). Less appreciated is the fact that good behavior brings more knowledge (2 Peter 1:8). Again, happy convergence is found in discipleship.

As to the entirety of the Restoration, an introductory caveat is given about the provincialness displayed by most of us in the midst of the enriching expansiveness of all that is now had again.

Given its intellectual range of components, no wonder we believers are still inventorying the harvest basket of the Restoration! Having dashed about the wonder-filled landscape of the Restoration, exclaiming and observing, we should not be surprised if some of our first impressions prove to be more childish than definitive. Brushing against such tall timber inevitably leaves the scent of pine upon us. Our pockets are filled with souvenir cones and colorful rocks, and we are filled with almost childish glee.

There is no way to grasp it all. Little wonder some of us regard a particular tree as if it were the whole of the forest. Or, that in our exclamations, there are some unintended exaggerations. We have seen far too much to describe fully. Indeed, we "cannot say the smallest part which [we] feel" (Alma 26:16).

Yet by seeing things with "an eye of faith" and with the help of the Spirit, we really can better see "things as they really are" and better make our way along the path of discipleship (Ether 12:19; Jacob 4:13).

The times in which we live, however, are and will be such that "all things shall be in commotion" (D&C 88:91). Hope is so much needed in such times, acknowledging thereby the "divine determination" by means of which God brings His purposes fully to pass. To ensure this outcome, our Loving Father has certainly made "ample provision."1

No wonder the greatness of our message should be matched by the meekness of its bearers. We cannot be mute about the message, but we must be truly humble. In our individual discipleship, we need to be capable of spiritual enlargement without swollen hypocrisy (D&C 121:42).

The gospel's strong and stretching framework is matched by its interior consistency: it is striking in its richness and relevance. The gospel of Jesus Christ is not a collection of random aphorisms or of unconnected epigrams. It is a combination of truth, power, and beauty with some truths as stark as they are reassuring.

The requirements of the gospel of Jesus Christ are not simply an arbitrary set of duties designed to make us jump through certain hoops in order to please God. In fact, Christ's teachings and covenants mark the only true way Home. The commandments help us to live "after the manner of happiness" (2 Nephi 5:27). God, Who knows all things, knows the nature of true happiness. Moreover, He wants His children to have all the happiness we truly desire and choosehere and now as well as in the there and then.

The prophetic exclamation "O how great the plan of our God!" is as summational as it is exclamational (2 Nephi 9:13). The very existence of such a "great" plan of happiness should strike us more forcibly and indelibly than it often does. Yet we mortals sometimes strangely resent the means provided to reach that glorious end.

Some may say of the doctrines of the kingdom that they too are daunting and demanding. They do require real faith.

Have not most parents stood in a swimming pool urging their frightened child to trust them, as that child waits anxiously on an edge? Parents earnestly seek to reassure, saying, "Don't worry! I'll catch you!" The child's understandable anxiety is fully answered in Enoch's reassuring words about a loving and rescuing Father God: "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30).

He is!

Note
