Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 1

"ALL THINGS SHALL BE IN COMMOTION"

A striking and repeated prophecy declares that in the last days "the whole earth shall be in commotion"; indeed, "all things shall be in commotion" (D&C 45:26; 88:91; see also Luke 21:9). Clearly this will include seismic and physical shakings, as Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed:

"One of the signs of the times is that the elements (meaning weather conditions and such things as bring about earthquakes and the like) shall be in commotion in the last days. (D&C 88:87-92)." 1

Yet while including such physical disruptiveness, the commotion and unsettlement will go beyond Richter readings. Elder James E. Talmage so observed in general conference in 1918:

"Have you never read that all things should be in commotion in these the last days? This is the day of shaking, when everything that can be shaken shall be shaken, and only those things which are established upon an eternal foundation shall endure." 2

It will take the rivets of the Restoration to keep things from sliding, because the commotion includes not only the geophysical but also the geometric swings away from traditional moral values. Vertigo as to values brings a special dizziness.

In today's relativistic society, we see indulgence masquerading as tolerance. We see the primacy of the "politically correct" substituting for righteous indignation and for moral outrage. Instead of genuine and pervasive concern for the public good, we see intense devotion paid to niche causes. People are often viewed as advocates of causes rather than as neighbors, being stereotyped because of their interest groups. It is anemic enough to know neighbors and others only as functions but worse still to regard them so much more narrowly. Because all others are actually the spirit sons and daughters of God, the new math of the new morality is even more disturbing than it is fuzzy.

It is sometimes said, in spite of media and market hype, that most people quietly go on living decent lives, unaffected by the wave of enticements and inducements flowing from a carnal world. Furthermore, there is a reassuring scripture:

"Now it is not common that the voice of the people desireth anything contrary to that which is right; but it is common for the lesser part of the people to desire that which is not right; therefore this shall ye observe and make it your lawto do your business by the voice of the people" (Mosiah 29:26).

Significantly and subsequently, however, the voice of the people can be eroded and corrupted:

"For as their laws and their governments were established by the voice of the people, and they who chose evil were more numerous than they who chose good, therefore they were ripening for destruction, for the laws had become corrupted" (Helaman 5:2; see also Alma 10:19-20).

Thus, wrongheaded ways can affect more than just those in spiritual swing districts. Any separating membranes are not impermeable, and families are especially at risk from commotion as to values.

If from birth, as in Sodom and Gomorrah, the rising generation is so inundated by the worst of worldliness, what chance do they have, given such conditioning? (Genesis 18:22-23). No wonder, therefore, that through the ages prophets have raised warning voices. It isn't just those at the margins who are at riskit is society itself!

Whatever the nature of the surrounding commotion, however, Jesus’ calming counsel to his followers remains "be not terrified" (Luke 21:9). General anxiety will still be high, and "men's hearts shall fail them" (D&C 45:26). Additionally, there will be "distress of nations, with perplexity" (Luke 21:25). Old-fashioned fear will be pervasive, amid which confusion discipleship will be increasingly demanding (D&C 88:91).

In any case, we have been soberingly advised of our latter-day time: "Behold, the enemy is combined" (D&C 38:12). Encompassing, not random and occasional evil, will finally be the challenge. Yet true disciples can "be of good cheer" (D&C 61:36). Furthermore, some of the turbulence will be redemptive: "For the kingdom of the devil must shake, and they which belong to it must needs be stirred up unto repentance, or the devil will grasp them with his everlasting chains, and they be stirred up to anger, and perish" (2 Nephi 28:19).

Whatever the conglomerate nature of the challenge, it will be of sufficient length and intensity to create some disgorging dissonance, disturbing some especially:

"But it is they who do not fear me, neither keep my commandments . . . and all those that do wickedly and build up the kingdom of the devilyea, verily, verily, I say unto you, that it is they that I will disturb, and cause to tremble and shake to the center" (D&C 10:56).

At the same time, however, others will be contrastingly "stirred up to anger," for "at that day shall [Satan] rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good" (2 Nephi 28:19-20). Isaiah foresaw the time when evil would be called good and good evil (Isaiah 5:20; 2 Nephi 15:20).

The word rage will not prove to be an understatement. An accompanying tactic will be to cause those of little faith to "fear . . . persecution" (D&C 40:2). A contrasting tactic will be to "pacify" and "lull" vulnerable members of the Church (2 Nephi 28:21). Hence, the stirrings will swirl diversely.

There is still much good wheat growing among the seeming tares, however; hence, stereotyping others serves us poorly. Hence, too, the Lord's restraint in coming down in final judgment (D&C 38:12; 86:5). Therefore, we should act wisely lest we judge prematurely or act amiss. Besides, the difficult last days will be shortened for the "elect's sake" (Matthew 24:22; Mark 13:20; Joseph Smith—Matthew 1:20; JST Matthew 24:20).

From such churnings and tumblings, some souls will come into the kingdom bruised but believing. Having made their way courageously through guerilla territory, they will be searching heroically for spiritual libertyeven as forces in the world are relentlessly seeking "to overthrow the freedom of all lands, nations, and countries" (Ether 8:25). More commotion!

At some point, "the world and the wisdom thereof," the pride of the world represented by the metaphoric "great and spacious building," will fall (1 Nephi 11:35-36). Whether in a sudden swoop or incrementally, the collapse will occurresoundingly and visibly. More commotion!

Yet, as already noted, the roiling will create at least some redemptiveness in certain individuals presently insensitive to spiritual things, nagging doubts of their previous doubts, stirring them to consider gospel truths previously neglected or rejected by responding to that which they have "never considered" before, surely including the divinity of atoning Jesus and the reality of the Restoration. The latter constitutes what, beginning with Isaiah, scriptures call the Lord's "strange act" and "strange work" (D&C 101:94-95; Isaiah 28:21; 3 Nephi 20:45; 21:8).

Having been so described, the Lord's work will go against the conceptual and behavioral grain of much of society. The "restitution" of what is unfamiliar, uncommon, unusual, and unique will test perceptivity but will also be refreshing for those who receive it (Acts 3:19).

Without such refreshing vision, people do perish spiritually (Proverbs 29:18). To help individualsincluding by helping them discern between righteousness and wickednessGod will pour "out [His] Spirit upon all flesh" (D&C 95:4; 101:95).

A fresh view is not always welcomed, being jarring to those who are intensely set in their ways. Sin enjoys its own status quo, too. Even the remarkable Enoch was not welcomed by many of his contemporaries. Of him and his labors, it was said anciently, "There is a strange thing in the land" (Moses 6:38).

The Lord speaks of our responsibility to "wise men and rulers" who need to "hear and know that which they have never considered" (D&C 101:94). With the added light brought to people, there is added hope for some emancipating realism.

Sincere, secular solutions to some human problems will nevertheless prove demonstrably ineffective, resulting in further "distress . . . , with perplexity" (Luke 21:25). Besides, the basic cause of much despair has been clearly identified for us: "Despair cometh because of iniquity" (Moroni 10:22). The obvious and cumulative failures of the best laid plans of men"the world and the wisdom thereof" (1 Nephi 11:35)may jar some sufficiently to consider the Restoration's remedies never considered before (D&C 101:94).

Thus it is when things in our personal sector on this planet look grim, we especially need to have faith in a God who can successfully do His work and whose motives are those of a loving Father who desires to redeem His children.

Of course, there are moments when it is difficult for us to see how certain things can ever come to pass. Often our puzzlements are related to questions over God's timing, for He tells us repeatedly that He will do things "in mine own due time" (3 Nephi 20:29; 1 Nephi 10:3; Ether 3:25). Even so, our human tendency is to impose our calendars and clocks as if these were to be a fixed overlay on God's divine plans when, in fact, a specific part of His divine determination is to do things in His own due time as well as in His own way.

Meanwhile, the worldly gravitate toward those things which involve power, authority, ease, and riches"the vain things of the world" (3 Nephi 6:15). God's word is of little interest to them; hence, most of them find it difficult to be "humble . . . because of the word" (Alma 32:14). Yet some may be sufficiently humbled because of compelling events.

Along with the general commotion, a few defectors and dissidents occasionally vex us as they hyperventilate over their particular concerns; however, it is primarily the engulfing effects of a deteriorating world pressing on Church members which constitutes the most clear and present danger. "Evils and designs" really do operate through "conspiring [individuals] in the last days," and the clever "enemy is combined" (D&C 89:4; 38:12). By ourselves, we are no match. Furthermore, we can sometimes be victimized by different mobs.

There is such a thing as a subtle mob of bystandersnot a mob that cries aloud, "Barrabas," nor a mob that obviously holds the cloak of those who are throwing stones (Matthew 27:21; Acts 7:58). Rather, it is a different kind of mob, one which cleverly goes along with a bad trend and even goads on the activists and egoists, seeming not to care what the wrongdoer does as long as he is smooth and cool. Worse still, such subtle mobs are a collection of silent proxy givers. The on lookers might not actually do themselves what the offender does, but they enjoy the vicarious emotions without sensing any seeming accountability. Moreover, such enablers can then quickly slink away when the apogee of acting out is over.

Yet Church members must not be intimidated or lose composure amid the commotion, including seeing once morally unacceptable behavior become acceptable; nevertheless, "be not terrified" (Luke 21:9). One of the most subtle forms of intimidation is the gradual normalization of sinful aberration. Alexander Pope so cautioned:

Vice is a monster of so frightful mien, As to be hated needs but to be seen; Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace. 3

When something is wrong, increasing its commonality cannot really confer respectability.

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn lamented recently, "If state, party and social policy will not be based on morality, then mankind has no future to speak of." 4

With the enemy "combined" (D&C 38:12), it is vital to do all we can to keep ourselves and other members "in the right way" (Moroni 6:4). When the storms come, including "every wind of doctrine" (Ephesians 4:14), orthodoxy in both thought and behavior brings safety as well as felicity. Happily, amid such winds, the Holy Ghost not only helps us to recognize plain truth but also plain nonsense.

Patience and faith will keep us on the path of duty, even though "all things shall be in commotion" (D&C 88:91). Yes, turbulence will still take its toll on the faith and patience of some. Yes, commotion may erode and reduce the gospel commitments of some. But this kingdom, "a marvelous work and a wonder," will roll on, gathering a marvelous momentum (2 Nephi 27:26; 1 Nephi 22:8; D&C 4:1).

Parents should be especially cautious, however, about adding unintentionally to the daily commotion which swirls about them and their children. Our homes should be sanctuaries of peace and love. If we add to daily hecticness unnecessarily by overmuch involvement in outside activities, we can lose the special benefits of home. Parents are much more apt to be appreciated by their children as parents than as taxi drivers.

Once when Nephite members were understandably afraid, the prophet spoke to them and "hushed their fears" (Mosiah 23:28). King Hezekiah played a similar role for ancient Israel (2 Kings 18). Perhaps such may be necessary again in our time!

The last days of commotion will parallel some things as "in the days of Noah" (Joseph Smith—Matthew 24:37). Because of the Restoration, we know more about the dark days in Noah's time. Biblically, we know the earth was "corrupt before God" and "filled with violence" and that "as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be" (Genesis 6:11; Matthew 24:37). Such indicators are important. While, back then, wickedness accumulated "in process of time" (Genesis 4:3), the destroying flood came with some suddenness. In the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, cumulative and gathering wickedness was likewise followed by suddenness. It will be so at the Lord's second coming, arriving, thief-like, "upon you unawares" (Luke 21:34; Matthew 24:37-38; Revelation 3:3). "For as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth" (Luke 21:34-35; see also D&C 45:26).

In Noah's time, people were preoccupied with everyday living, such as eating and drinking, giving and receiving in marriage, suggesting the sometimes sedating role of routineness (Matthew 24:37-39).

Peter speaks of how the "longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah" (1 Peter 3:20). Finally, the wickedness then exceeded that among all God's creations (Moses 7:36). A very cruel society existed, one "without affection" and "hat[ing] their own blood," not unlike the gross decadence in the post-Christ Nephite society (Moses 7:33; Moroni 9). In fact, when Enoch foresaw the sobering and overwhelming wickedness in the days of Noah, Enoch's distress was at first so great he "refused to be comforted" (Moses 7:44).

From certain apocryphal writings5 we receive interesting commentary about later and emerging conditions:

"In those days, the nations shall be confounded. . . . In those days, they (the women) shall become pregnant, but they (the sinners) shall come out and abort their infants and cast them out from their midst" (1 Enoch 99:4-5).

"For in his days there will be a great confusion on the earth. . . . And nation will wage war against nation. And all the earth will be filled with blood and with very evil confusion. Even more than that, they will abandon their Creator. . . . And the adversary will make himself great and will be delighted with their deeds" (2 Enoch 70:5-6).

"Those . . . who do not glorify God, who practice on the earth the sin which is against nature, which is child corruption . . . in the manner of Sodom" (2 Enoch 10:4).

We know from Jesus' prophecies and others' which are scriptural that coarseness and cruelty will be present again as "the love of many will wax cold" and "peace [will have been] taken from the earth" (Matthew 24:12; D&C 1:35).

President Brigham Young described the side-by-sideness of the wheat and tares:

"It was revealed to me in the commencement of this Church, that the Church would spread, prosper, grow and extend, and that in proportion to the spread of the Gospel among the nations of the earth, so would the power of Satan rise."6

With such general decay, society's institutions, which previously may have served reasonably well, will reflect the decay and the inversion of some values. There will likewise be an as yet undefined "great division" among the people (2 Nephi 30:10).

Faithful members of the Church can and will survive spiritually, if we honor and keep our covenants made at the time of baptism and in the holy temples. We can be on the right side during the "great division," if we do not mirror the world. We can make an affirmative difference in the world for the better, if we are righteously different from the world. Happily, there are so very many decent and wonderful people of all creeds and cultures who likewise strive to do so!

Anciently, a small band of Greeks bravely held a mountain pass at Thermopylae against overwhelming numbers of Persians. The Persians demanded surrender, threatening to darken the skies with their arrows. The gallant Spartans said, "So much the better, we shall fight in the shade."7 Outnumbered disciples "armed with righteousness" (1 Nephi 14:14) may know equivalent circumstances, as the children of light move forward, even in darkening conditions.

Jesus provided helpful counsel through the Restoration scriptures. For example

When you hear of wars and commotion, "see that ye be not troubled" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:23).

"Whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:37).

Take the Holy Spirit as your guide (D&C 45:57).

"Watch, therefore . . . be ye also ready" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:46, 48).

It must be so with us in the commotion-filled days preceding the coming of the Son of Man as individuals and as a Church. There is surely more than adequate spiritual nourishment available to strengthen us through the bounteous Restoration.

NOTES
