Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 2

"ENOUGH AND TO SPARE"

In the topsy-turvy, commotion-filled last days, one of the great blessings of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ is its timeliness and also its directing and nurturing abundance. Like the earth's natural resources, which are "enough and to spare," the truths and doctrines of the gospel give us precious perspective (D&C 104:17). Thus, we know not only the essential truths but also the interconnections between the "weightier" and other things (Matthew 23:23).

The eminent historian Will Durant, who sorted out and described many facts and their comparative significance, noted the human need wherein "we want to seize the value and perspective of passing things, and so to pull ourselves up out of the maelstrom of daily circumstance. We want to know that the little things are little, and the big things are big, before it is too late; we want to see things now as they will seem forever'in the light of eternity.'"1

In a time when there are "so many kinds of voices in the world," His sheep know Whose voice to heed (1 Corinthians 14:10; Alma 5:60). The few examples which follow underscore the Restoration's timeliness, abundance, and significance and are intended to reconnoiter and to highlight, not to pause and particularize. Yet, how can one forgo some exclamations, at least in headline form, such as over the expansiveness of the universe?

Before such spiritual realizations can be hastened, however, the Lord had to remove certain "stumbling blocks," including the pinched perspectives within which some view Christ (1 Nephi 14:1).

The central doctrine that Jesus is the Christ, the Atoning and Risen Redeemer, removes those stumbling blocks and restores the true perspective of eternity. Compared to Jesus and the Atonement, all else is subordinate, as the Prophet Joseph Smith taught:

"The fundamental principles of our religion are the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets, concerning Jesus Christ, that He died, was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven; and all other things which pertain to our religion are only appendages to it."2

To know Jesus more and more is to experience His attributes. We thus draw closer by way of appreciation, admiration, and even adoration of Him. We truly accelerate knowing Him, as we become more like Him by means of our imperfect adulation.

His appearances, as in the First Vision and in 3 Nephi, are incredibly important in removing the stumbling block of uncertainty concerning His divinity, His resurrection, and His relationship to the Father. For instance, Jesus is actually the Lord of the universe; long before He was Jesus of Nazareth, He created "worlds without number" under the Father's direction (Moses 1:33; D&C 76:24).

One ancient stumbling block regarding Jesus was the expectation about how the rescuing Messiah would emancipate the people militarily and politically. Jesus was not that kind of an emancipator. Therefore, His violation of expectations and His death were, for some, an unfulfilling stumbling block. The Greeks, on the other hand, regarded the whole idea of a resurrecting Messiah as foolishness. This very irony had been prophesied (Isaiah 8:14; 1 Corinthians 1:23; 1 Peter 2:8; 2 Nephi 18:14). The Jews wanted a sign, and the Greeks wanted wisdom (1 Corinthians 1:22-23). Among other blessings, the Restoration answers key questions that have preoccupied and tormented ecclesiastical councils in centuries past.

For those sufficiently meek, the Restoration provides the resolving remedy with its fulness and its greater and clearer "views of Christ and the resurrection" (Alma 27:28). Thus, the bright sun of the Restoration melts away the icy stumbling blocks of false doctrines, some frozen in place over long centuries (1 Nephi 14:1; D&C 123:7-8).

Just as was foreseen, the scriptures of the Restoration, fusing and growing together with the Bible, have resulted in a "confounding of false doctrines" (2 Nephi 3:12) and "the taking away of . . . stumbling blocks" (1 Nephi 14:1). Because certain prejudices have encrusted mortal lives, men need, as King Benjamin taught, to believe and trust in God, who comprehends all things, while men do not (Mosiah 4:9). Some mortals, strangely, are reluctant to let God be God! (Mosiah 27:31).

Even with the gospel's precious perspective and its provision of much-needed remedies, because of long-standing stumbling blocks and because of the cares and anxieties of the world, comparatively few individuals will finally hear. This is not unlike the situation in which some of Galileo's friends reportedly refused to look through his telescope; they did not really want a larger and more accurate view of things. Some do want the truth but only "in part" (D&C 49:2), amid the boring hedonism or the "humdrum nihilism of everyday life."3 Most of all, however, the Restoration provides us with the vital doctrines, ordinances, authority, and organization essential to salvation and exaltation. No wonder the Lord desires "that all that will hear may hear" and that "faith might increase in the earth" (D&C 1:11, 21).

We should keep in mind, however, the metaphor Jesus used about the harvest basket that was "pressed down, and shaken together, and running over" (Luke 6:38). Surely that metaphor describes the harvest of truths, including truths about God's capacity and determination to bring His purposes to pass. Does He not say to us so reassuringly, "I am able to do mine own work"two times in two verses? (2 Nephi 27:20-21). Likewise, does He not call us to help with His work? Yet how can we help much except we are serious disciples?

The very idea of revelations and prophets continues to be a major stumbling block for many. The "restitution of all things" (Acts 3:21) includes the role of Joseph Smith as the Prophet of the Restoration. For some, alas, he remains a stumbling block.

Hear President Brigham Young: "The first Elders can recollect, when we commenced preaching 'Mormonism,' that present revelation and a Prophet of God on the earth were the great stumbling blocks to the people, were what we had to contend against, and were, seemingly, the most potent obstacles in our way to the introduction of the Gospel."4

President George Q. Cannon agreed: "There was a day in our history when it was considered a crime for us to believe in revelation from God. I do not know that that day is entirely past. There was a day in our history when it was considered very improper for us to believe in Prophets or Apostlesthat is, to believe that they ought to be in the Church. There was a time when we were indicted by a mob in its written proclamation for believing in miracles. . . . You have doubtless thought, all of you, about the character of the men whom Jesus chose to be His Apostles. They were men who were stumbling-blocks to their generation, for they did not belong to the popular classes. They were not learned men, they were not rich menthat is in the worldly sense of the wordthey were not dignified men; and Jesus Himself, the Lord of life and of glory, was a constant stumbling-block to His generation."5

While in the midst of the stirring and shaking and the removing of stumbling blocks, the numerical harvest for the Church will increase more than most of us realize, yet, it will not be massiveat least as the world measures such things. Still, numerical growth will surely stretch us as a people in terms of what we are now used to. Nephi provided some demographic contours:

"I beheld the church of the Lamb of God, and its numbers were few, because of the wickedness and abominations; . . . nevertheless, I beheld that the church of the Lamb, who were the saints of God, were also upon all the face of the earth; and their dominions upon the face of the earth were small, because of the wickedness" (1 Nephi 14:12).

Even so, great things await, for "Nephi, beheld the power of the Lamb of God, that it descended upon the saints of the church of the Lamb, and upon the covenant people of the Lord, who were scattered upon all the face of the earth; and they were armed with righteousness and with the power of God in great glory" (1 Nephi 14:12, 14).

Serious disciples will be "scattered upon all the face of the earth," constituting all the leaven they can. The spiritual growth of the Church, therefore, will be even more significant than its numerical growth (D&C 105:31). Why? Because the spiritual sanctification of Church members is more vital than their numerical multiplication.

The Restoration also reestablished the Lord's process of revelation with God and angels conversing with men, especially regarding the plan of salvation (Alma 12:28-30). This doctrinal diamond, bright with many facets, is rich with implications for daily life as well as for eternity. Accepting the truths about the plan of happiness provides the needed focus for those who have eyes but yet do not see. In the physical eye, an astigmatism occurs when light fails to converge or focus on the single point. No wonder some, unfocused, are forever "looking beyond the mark" (Jacob 4:14).

Our only chance is the help of the Holy Ghost, seeing things with the "eye of faith," and then evaluating things as if with "the mind of Christ" (1 Corinthians 2:16). Such spiritual symmetry is a great protection for us in a contextual situation in which "an exceedingly great many do stumble" (1 Nephi 13:29). Without simple faith and the necessary revelations, people do tend to put down the power and the miracles of God. No wonder the Restoration was needed and was to occur "in mine own power," bringing back "much of my gospel" (1 Nephi 13:34).

Amid doubt and confusion we are reassured that in the presence of God, "all things . . . past, present, and future, . . . are continually before [Him]" (D&C 130:7). This special circumstance forms what the Prophet Joseph Smith described as God's living in "one eternal 'now.'"6 The gospel's deep doctrines really are time-spanning, just as we sing about how truth "steps o'er" the "limits of time."7

What a needed reassurance this is about God's capacity, especially since our mortal "now" is so very different from God's eternal "now." In fact, the mortal present can be genuinely puzzling and even painfulunless illuminated by restored and reassuring perspectives bestowed from the eternal now.

Since we are eternal beings presently living in time, it is sometimes much more than a whisper which tells us "you're a stranger here."8 Embarked on a Homeward journey, we find the skies are often overcast with dark cloud cover, yet disciples will never mistake passing, local cloud cover for general darkness.

Given all we yet lack in our spiritual symmetry, no wonder God uses the little mortal time available, sometimes in compressed ways, to develop us during this brief, second estate (Abraham 3:26). This urgency means that there can be few recesses and certainly no lengthy sabbaticals. Even our deserved reveries must be interruptible in order to hasten God's relentless remodeling of souls.

Amid the vastness of God's creations, if we are meek, God's shaping personalness helps us to develop. He is in the detailsnot only of galaxies, DNA, and moleculesbut, so importantly, in our own lives. He is overseeing individual births and deaths while somehow overseeing cosmic births and funerals, such as when one earth passes away and another is born (Moses 1:38).

Not only does the Book of Mormon constitute "Another Testament of Jesus Christ" but it also brings back many of the "plain and precious things" so sorely needed since the Restoration came to help faith "increase in the earth" (1 Nephi 13:29; D&C 1:21). This latter-day fulness necessarily includes much greater knowledge concerning God's plan of salvation, thus providing a framework for faith, so that life, vexing and puzzling at times, makes sufficient sense for us to strive.

We are helped, for example, to understand considerably better why God, who is perfect in His goodness and power, nevertheless allows evil and suffering in the world. This latter concern is no small cause of sincere puzzlement for many and even resentment for some. We in the Church have yet to digest the relevant doctrines fully, let alone appreciate all the harvest of restored doctrines along with their spiritual food value and implications for our spiritual nurturance.

For example, how long have Christian doctrines actually been taught and ordinances administered? Ever since Adam! In that sense, not only was he the "first man" (1 Corinthians 15:45) but also the first Christian:

"And thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost.

"And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the Gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof; and thus it was. Amen" (Moses 5:58-59).

Dispensationalism thus confirms that Christianity began not in the Holy Land in the meridian of time but with Adam in the very beginning. Hence, instead of wondering why simi lar fragments and shards of truth appear in various and disparate cultures, some of these parallels actually result from original wholeness and subsequent shatterings and scatterings.

"Undoubtedly the knowledge of this law and of other rites and ceremonies was carried by the posterity of Adam into all lands, and continued with them, more or less pure, to the flood, and through Noah, who was a 'preacher of righteousness,' to those who succeeded him, spreading out in all nations and countries, Adam and Noah being the first of their dispensations to receive them from God. What wonder, then, that we should find relics of Christianity so to speak among the heathens, and nations who know not Christ, and whose histories date back beyond the days of Moses, and even beyond the flood, independent of and apart from the records of the Bible."9

Thus, the Restoration, through its revelations and translations, has brought back manynot just a few"plain and precious things," things once "taken away" or "kept back" (1 Nephi 13:28-29, 32, 34, 40). The truths, especially those underscoring the divinity of Jesus Christ, are happily "had again" (Moses 1:41).

People who have only "the lesser portion of the word" (Alma 12:10)often through no fault of their ownlack a fulness of understanding of Jesus. In our secular time, many deny spiritual things, forgetting that "to be learned is good" only if that learning does not diminish our hearkening to the "counsels of God" (2 Nephi 9:29). In such a spiritual vacuum, people naturally "preach up unto themselves their own wisdom and their own learning," featuring the "world and the wisdom thereof" (2 Nephi 26:20; 1 Nephi 11:35). In their pride and vain imaginations, they unfortunately and insistently "put down the power of God" (2 Nephi 26:20; see also 1 Nephi 12:18).

This lengthy period in human history of doctrinal deprivation because of a loss of many "plain and precious things" (1 Nephi 13:28) was foretold to Moses anciently:

"And now, Moses, my son, I will speak unto thee concerning this earth upon which thou standest; and thou shalt write the things which I shall speak.

"And in a day when the children of men shall esteem my words as naught and take many of them from the book which thou shalt write, behold, I will raise up another like unto thee; and they shall be had again among the children of menamong as many as shall believe" (Moses 1:40-41).

The things lost include the "plain and most precious" and the "most plain" (1 Nephi 13:26, 34). These thingswhether "taken away" or "kept back"do not appear fully in the precious Holy Bible (1 Nephi 13:26, 32). For such things to be "had again" through the Restoration "in word, and also in power" is truly a very special thing (Moses 1:41; 1 Nephi 14:1). When we encounter it, our emotions often exceed our understanding of it. Inspired poets can help.

Consider these poetic words from Henry Vaughan (1622-1695) which are germane to what Latter-day Saints call premortality, that vital doctrine laid out so helpfully in the Restoration.

THE RETREAT

Happy those early days, when I shined in my Angel-infancy! Before I understood this place Appointed for my second race, Or taught my soul to fancy aught But a white, celestial thought; When yet I had not walked above A mile or two from my first Love, And looking back, at that short space Could see a glimpse of His bright face; When on some gilded cloud or flower My gazing soul would dwell an hour, And in those weaker glories spy Some shadows of eternity.10

Why should we be surprised when, yearning and believing, others approximate what for us has come as revealed knowledge? Indeed, "God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth" (Alma 26:37).

Alexander Pope spoke of the marvels of this universe of which man is a part. He described it as "a mighty maze! but not without a plan." He wrote of "worlds unnumber'd tho' the God be known" and how it is "ours to trace him only in our own." Pope likewise wrote of how "other planets circle other suns."11 All these bring to mind certain restoration scriptures about how all the worlds cannot be numbered unto man but are numbered unto God (Moses 1:37).

We do not worship a one-planet God! The Lord told Moses, "But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you" (Moses 1:35). Even so, the Lord has told us some soaring things: "That by [Christ] the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God" (D&C 76:24).

This earth was formed to be inhabited (Isaiah 45:18). Why? "For behold, this is my work and my gloryto bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Stephen Hawking, displaying that meekness which is found in great scientists, wrote: "Although science may solve the problem of how the universe began, it cannot answer the question: Why does the universe bother to exist? I don't know the answer to that."12

We are deservedly excited by the periodic space probes which can help us to know more about the what and the how. But the more we know about them, the more haunting the "why?" questions become. The answers to the "why" questions are actually obtainable only by the revelations given by our creating God.

The Lord has created "worlds without number" to achieve His announced purposes (Moses 1:33, 39). Unsurprisingly, the theology of the Restoration is not tied to any particular or developing theories of astrophysics, but its relevant revelations are expansive and give us a few inklings. Meanwhile, able scientists press forward.

For instance, some astronomers say they have discovered an "enormous wall . . . of galaxies . . . the largest structure yet observed in the universe."13 These scientists say of the recent discoveries, "We keep seeing something bigger as we go out farther."14 Latter-day Saints should not be surprised, however, because the Lord has said there is "no end to my works" (Moses 1:38).

There is pattern and order in the universe. Kolob, for example, "standeth above the earth" but "belong[eth] to the same order," Abraham was told, "as the [planet] upon which thou standest" (Abraham 3:5, 1). Scientists say these nonrandom "galaxies appear to be arranged in a network of strings, or filaments, surrounding large, relatively empty regions of space known as voids."15

Furthermore, our own "galaxy, the Milky Way, is located in one of the relatively empty spaces between the Great Walls."16 Significantly, the Lord told Abraham, "There is space there, . . . and we will make an earth" (Abraham 3:24).

One eminent scientist is quoted as saying, "As we look out into the Universe and identify the many accidents of physics and astronomy that have worked together to our benefit, it almost seems as if the Universe must in some sense have known that we were coming."17

The Lord's work, as revelations advise us, is thus very, very large! "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork" (Psalm 19:1). Amid this vastness, Enoch, as noted, affirmed of God, "Yet thou art there" (Moses 7:30). The multiplicity of God's creations interested Enoch less than the personalness and redemptiveness of God!

Occasionally, when Church members testify of and focus on the Restoration and its implications, doing so can make others uncomfortable and a few even resentful. Do we do it to be unfriendly? Of course not. Or, in order to seem to be "one up"? We certainly should not. In so testifying, it may appear to some that we are not sufficiently accommodating in achieving a larger peer harmony. Do we proceed anyway? Yesbut meekly.

Given the profound implications of the Restoration, we really have no choice. Even so, genuine love and meekness are crucial in sharing the good news, and bearers of such good tidings are sometimes poorly received. Yet, we are divinely directed to share the "good news" of the gospel with mankindthe message is, after all, not merely about a temporary bargain at a nearby supermarket! Consider the "good news": God and some of His angels have actually visited the earth! Revelations have come regarding the true identity of mortals and the purposes and meaning of human life! The same Restoration has brought forth additional holy scriptures to company with the precious Holy Bible! Likewise called anew are apostles and prophets, ancient callings so much needed in our time! Similarly, many holy temples are being brought forth on a sizable scale, each offering the ordinances necessary for mortals to go Home to our Father God!

A sense of proportion is therefore vital as to communicating with peers. In World War I, the British were deeply concerned with the consequences of savage submarine warfare. Urgently, an antisubmarine committee had been formed on which the eminent British physicist, Ernest Rutherford, served. Rutherford missed a meeting of experts advising the British government on antisubmarine warfare. When criticized, he replied: "I have been engaged in experiments which suggest that the atom can be artificially disintegrated. If it is true, it is of far greater importance than a war."18

Meek Church members will freely acknowledge that the circumstances of our taking the gospel to the world are ironical in some respects. We are still a small and obscure people, though chosen to serve in "a marvelous work and a wonder" (2 Nephi 25:17). Ancient Israel was reminded by the Lord, however, "The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of all people" (Deuteronomy 7:7).

The same comparative obscurity attaches to our planet Earth, which is really a speck of sand in the suburbs of the Milky Way galaxy, one of thousands of galaxies. Similarly, a tiny stretch of sand hosted Jesus' meridian ministry, so minuscule in terms of geography.

In view of the "good news," we certainly need to be meek. But can we really be silent? Others are clearly free to reject this good news, and we need to be ever courteous and sensitive in sharing. But we do not have the luxury of being mute concerning "a marvelous work and a wonder" by muffling the message of the Restoration.

Consider how President Gordon B. Hinckley has undertaken so many extra efforts to build bridges with others, counseling us to be more careful and thoughtful than we sometimes are with regard to others:

"We can all be a little kinder, a little more generous, a little more thoughtful of one another. We can be a little more tolerant and friendly to those not of our faith, going out of our way to show our respect for them. We cannot afford to be arrogant or self-righteous. It is our obligation to reach out in helpfulness not only to our own but to all others as well."19

Yet President Hinckley has also been boldly declarative, saying:

"We stand on the summit of the ages, awed by a great and solemn sense of history. This is the last and final dispensation toward which all in the past has pointed. I bear testimony and witness of the reality and truth of these things."20

Therefore, when others reject our efforts to share, their rejection or indifference should not limit our generosity, courtesy, or civility toward them.

Of course, if the work of the Restoration were merely the work of men, it would come to naught along with so many other causes marginal in their effects. Instead, we are dealing with the work of God and with His assurance that He can surely and certainly bring His purposes to pass. God's determinations, therefore, provide the vaulting reassurance that we all need as we proceed along the demanding path of discipleship, and His long-suffering provides balm for the footsore.

NOTES
