Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 3

DIVINE DETERMINATION

Given the times of commotion but being bolstered by the countervailing steadiness and nourishing richness of the Restoration, it becomes imperative for us to have faith in God and in His capacity to bring His purposes to passHe, in fact, has made "ample provision" to achieve that glorious outcome!1 Such a God with perfect capacities and sublime purposes does more than just exist. Even with faith in a personal, perfect, and proactive God, however, we will be tested. Moreover, on occasions, we have witnessed and will witness human suffering so poignant that we need to be reassured.

Some disciples do seem to face a simultaneous multiplicity of challenges. Some have tests that they must live with protractedly, while others are passing through an intense "small moment" (D&C 121:7). Those individuals in live-with situations would gladly give "more praise for relief," but it does not always come in this life.2 Their constellation of challenges seems unending as well as rending. To these enduring individuals, surely the prepositional phrase "to the end" has a special meaning; their so doing represents a very commendable and special achievement (Matthew 10:22; 1 Nephi 13:37; D&C 14:7; 121:8).

The rest of us are in admiration, even awe, of them. Understandably, in the midst of their enduring faithfulness, such meek individuals may at times ponder and puzzle over their own faith or worthiness. Yet if we examine these words, "Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith," we see how faith and patience can be tried and thereby deliberately developed (Mosiah 23:21). Faith and patience provide a special and combined powerwhether it is a live-with or pass-through circumstance or whether it is one thing or a demanding combination of things. One outcome of chastening of whatever form can be "to purify." Relief may come, but only after the trial of faith and patience (Ether 12:6).

Our own suffering seems small compared to what these noble individuals live with. As we all know, Jesus reminded a genuinely suffering Joseph Smith that he was "not yet as Job" (D&C 121:10). Only Jesus can compare crosses! (Alma 7:11-12). Nevertheless, we can admire, love, emulate, and pray for those who endure well, because special individuals are examples for us all.

When they cope successfully, we inwardly applaud them and gladly certify to their emerging character. Though admiring, however, the rest of us tremble at the tuition required for the shaping and polishing of such sterling character. Furthermore, we hope we would not falter should similar circumstances come to us!

When witnessing in others the relentlessness and the protractedness or the suffering in this personal process, one recalls the lengthy, stretching, and collective travails in Sinai before Israel finally entered the promised land. The land of eventual exit was clearly promised, but, meanwhile, there were all the disappointing daily destinations and desolate way stations which marked the discouraging zigzag pattern.

More frequently, of course, when we see others being polished, it is much less dramatic. It involves, instead, the smoothing sandpaper of daily circumstances, but the same determined, divine redemptiveness is at work amid the routine rubbings of life.

In either situation, the object is for our wills to be finally "swallowed up in the will of the Father" (Mosiah 15:7), eventually bringing to us the joys gladly given by the Father and constituting "all that He hath" (Genesis 24:36). In a very real sense, therefore, what we can take now foretells what He can give later! This reality should be kept firmly in mind as we understandably pray for relief from short-term stress or long-term trauma. We would, if we could, put periods, if not exclamation points, where God is content to put commas in the process.

Either way, the "process of time" is needed to facilitate our incremental improvement (Moses 7:21). Therein, individual increments of personal improvement are often scarcely discernable by themselves, yet the cumulative process moves us ever closer to Home.

Successfully traversed, the individual Sinais of stretching can facilitate our developing and better emulating Christ's attributes. Along with receiving His ordinances and keeping our covenants with Him, each of these attributes also certifies our eventual admissibility to the celestial kingdom.

Hence, the stretching trek requires deep faith in God's existence, deep faith in God's purposes, and also deep faith in His timing. The latter is sometimes most difficult to develop, yet "the cross comes before the crown."3

As a true and perfect Father, He desires that each of His children develop righteously and fully. Furthermore, He will not always and automatically intervene to block every stressful and needful experience. His withholding occurs because He loves us determinedly. In fact, we know enough about God's plan of salvation to realize that His perfect love and His desire for our happiness are truly inestimableso much so that He permits us to pass through certain experiences, even if these might momentarily stagger the soul. Think of Abraham and Isaac! (Genesis 22:1-14). Abraham's previous history was a preparatory one in which he "staggered not" at supernal promises (Romans 4:20). Think especially of divine determination displayed by both the Father and the Son at Gethsemane and Calvary!

Hard to bear, too, is the reality that the harsh consequences and human suffering arising from sin and iniquity are not confined to the causal evildoers themselves. The resulting human suffering brought by wars, famines, and awful genocides can tax our faith, too, as we see the ooze of suffering spread so widely from the point of initiation.

Yet God's commitment to mankind's moral agency is very deep. Moreover, man's choices do have consequences! Never mind that some mortals foolishly think they have both the freedom to choose and the freedom from any adverse consequences. So it is that family, neighbors, and friends so often suffer innocently from the toxic waste of another's sinsbe these a betraying husband and father, a mother enticed from the nest, rebellious offspring, or the lust for riches, power, and dominance.

Given the earnestness with which God pursues His divine tutoring, it is comforting to know that we worship a God who on occasion weepsand Enoch saw Him weep! (Moses 7:27-29). Yet we also worship a God who has made "ample provision" amid human wickedness to bring all His purposes to pass.4 Still, observing the process in its near extremes on occasion causes the soul to shiver.

Our faith in God must be strong, therefore, not only in behalf of ourselves and our own trials but also upon seeing those human conditions involving human wickedness which are truly wrenching but which are permitted because of God-given but mortally misused agency.

The havoc and debris of misused agency are at times appalling. The slums wrought by iniquity and the junkyards left by juvenescent behavior dot the landscape. Why does not God put a stop to it and clean them up? Because agency is so central to His plan of happiness! Our best and highest perorations and mortal expressions concerning the value of freedom and liberty must seem so callow, though sincere, compared to God's reasons for our having agency.

Even when we make some spiritual progress, we need further help in order to face yet another discomfiting reality: our appreciated blessings should not obscure the developmental distance yet to be traveled. The need for this added meekness was noted by C. S. Lewis:

"Little people like you and me, if our prayers are sometimes granted, beyond all hope and probability, had better not draw hasty conclusions to our own advantage. If we were stronger, we might be less tenderly treated. If we were braver, we might be sent, with far less help, to defend far more desperate posts in the great battle."5

Even so, the Master Mentor has comfortingly promised, "I will lead you along" (D&C 78:18). He has also said, "Ye cannot bear all things now" (D&C 78:18). Ponder, however, the implications of the word now. Precisely because He loves us, on occasion there may need to be a further ratcheting up in the degree of difficulty in our discipleship.

The following words, unarguably declarative, about divine determination are both reassuring and wintry: "There is nothing that the Lord thy God shall take in his heart to do but what he will do it" (Abraham 3:17). After all, the premortal declaration of divine intent concerning what lay ahead for God's spirit children was the sobering "[Let us] prove them herewith" (Abraham 3:25).

Even if and when we seem to have squeezed out the last full measure of our devotion, an omniscient and perfectly empathic God not only knows the difficulties through which we have passed and are passing but also knows if any residue of unused devotion still remains to further the process! (Alma 7:11-12).

He knows, too, what joy awaits us, if we are fully submissive. In fact, we are even counseled concerning our appreciative mortal exclamations over beauty: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him" (1 Corinthians 2:9). It is a caution which also invites anticipation. Meanwhile, we can become much better prepared for joy then by increasing our capacity now. Hence, some anticipatory tingling is permissible, but a sobering willingness to be stretched is also required. Much more than heightening our appreciation is involved. Besides, divine justice and mercy finally ensure that each of us will receive "according to [our] wills" and desires (Alma 29:4). How could any later complain?

Meanwhile, divine determination also insists that we will not experience a shortage of the needed clinical experiences (Abraham 3:25; Mosiah 23:21). For instance, when the Lord notes, in effect, "one thing thou lackest," we will not likely want for the clinical experiences necessary to remedy any such deficiency (Mark 10:21; Luke 18:22). No wonder it is so vital for us to understand both the character and the purposes of our God as mirrored in His divine determination.

"If a man learns nothing more than to eat, drink and sleep, and does not comprehend any of the designs of God, the beast comprehends the same things. It eats, drinks, sleeps, and knows nothing more about God; yet it knows as much as we, unless we are able to comprehend by the inspiration of Almighty God. If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves."6

Besides, there is nothing through which we will pass, including sicknesses, pain, and grief, that Jesus has not experienced personally (Alma 7:11-12). He knows our varying capacities. Just as important, He proffers grace and helpout of His matchless empathy (Ether 12:27).

Moreover, in even the deepest of our prayers, it is not as though we are telling God something about our sufferings or concerns that He does not already personally know (Matthew 6:32; Alma 7:11-12). More than once, through His prophets, He reminds us that He comprehends everything, though clearly we do not (Mosiah 4:9; 2 Nephi 2:24; 9:20; Alma 26:35; D&C 38:2).

Still, some finite mortals ironically insist on a more indulgent God with whom they are much more comfortable!

"For if God is a socially conscious political being whose views invariably correspond to our own prejudices on every essential point of doctrine, he demands of us no more than our politics require. Besides, if God is finite, progressive, and Pure Love, we may as well skip church next Sunday and go to the movies. For if we have nothing to fear from this all-loving, all-forbearing, all-forgiving God, how would our worship of him constitute more than self-congratulation for our own moral standards? As an atheist, I like this God. It is good to see him every morning while I am shaving."7

Actually, to deny the attributes of God, such as His determination and empathy, is to deny His Godhood, especially His love:

"Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, he numbereth his people, and his bowels of mercy are over all the earth. Now this is my joy, and my great thanksgiving; yea, and I will give thanks unto my God forever. Amen" (Alma 26:37).

Comparatively, we cannot even empathize fully withlet alone love perfectlyall in our own families or in our tiny neighborhoods! It is partly so because the needed developmental process will not really proceed until the natural man begins to be put off by us (Mosiah 3:19). The encrusted natural man simply stays on square one and does not even seek to comprehend. For this there is a fundamental cause:

"And now behold, my brethren, what natural man is there that knoweth these things? I say unto you, there is none that knoweth these things, save it be the penitent" (Alma 26:21).

Yes, the unfashionable virtue of penitence is a prelude to learning the things of God!

Being penitent, however, is not natural to the natural man. Therefore, our task of putting off the natural man is urgent in order to facilitate our continuing education! (Mosiah 3:19).

Thus, fatally flawed because he thinks so highly only of himself, the natural man has no room left in his narrow life to worship an all-loving and all-comprehending God or to serve his neighbor. In the earthly focus of his desires, the natural man refuses to pay the costs of exaltation; he is too comfortable playing in castled sand piles and living in second-class hotels. Mansions are beyond his ken.

At first, the declaration "the natural man is an enemy of God" may seem to be harsh. Let us remember, however, who declared and whose minions wage against God's plan of happiness (Mosiah 3:19).

Often unconscious of being mired in misery, the natural man insists on remaining as he is, undisturbed. Repeatedly, he refuses to consider what he has the power to become (Alma 26:4). Instead, the natural man manages to get his ticket punched at almost every stop on the temptation train; after all, it seems so natural. Being unpenitent, he regards the similar behavior of other passengers merely as confirmation of his own conclusion: "I am only human" (see Alma 26:21). Moreover, if he is sorry at all, it is not "godly sorrow" he feels (2 Corinthians 7:10); rather, he is sorry for the inconvenience of his being discovered or interrupted.

As Jesus said, some "justify [themselves] before men; for that which is . . . an abomination before God" (Luke 16:15). Instead of pursuing his repentance, the natural man's shoulder-shrugging self-indulgence demands our forgiveness (2 Corinthians 7:10). Sensuality thus has its own form of assertive self-pity!

Sending words his way may not help the natural man, because, as Jesus said, "Lusts . . . choke the word" (Mark 4:19). Effectively, the natural man is already "shut out from the presence of God" (Moses 6:49).

So the natural man insists on being the pseudo orphanhe either does not hear or refuses the loving calls to come to his real Home! Even if perchance he should hear the voice of God, it will be regarded only as brief and interrupting thunder in the distance (John 12:29). The distraction passes; hence, so he can hurry back to the sand piles!

Our mindsand with them, desireshave to be changed. Our minds, according to the Prophet Joseph Smith, represent such a special portion of us, something which is eternal:

"I take my ring from my finger and liken it unto the mind of man the immortal part, because it has no beginning. . . . So with the spirit of man."8

In fact, our minds can become much more like the "mind of Christ" (1 Corinthians 2:16). The same apostle worried, for instance, that we might "faint in [our] minds" or become "shaken in mind" (Hebrews 12:3; 2 Thessa lonians 2:2). One remedy is for us to be "renewed in the spirit of [our] mind[s]" (Ephesians 4:23). In this dispensation, too, the Lord has emphasized that we "not be weary in mind" (D&C 84:80).

A promise was given by God anciently to His covenant people that He would "put [His] laws into their mind" (Hebrews 8:10). Does this somehow account for the spiritual resonance we sometimes feel and see? Or, does this tell us why the words of the Lord have a "more powerful effect upon the minds of the people" than anything else? (Alma 31:5). A meek mind responds to the doctrines of the Lord, because "my sheep hear my voice" (John 10:27).

When the mind is not firm, however, a range of reactions is seen: an individual can either be insistently indifferent or may instead be wrought up "by the great tribulations of his mind" (Alma 15:3). This latter condition relates to the Prophet Joseph Smith's observations about the special trial that "suspense" can constitute, observing that "there is no pain so awful as the pain of suspense."9 The Prophet was using the word suspense in the context of how knowledge does away with darkness, suspense, and doubt. A lack of knowledge is one of the condemnations of the wicked, their hell being their unknowingness about such matters as their identities, destinies, and possibilities.

Since the Lord has told us that His ways are higher than man's ways, therefore, the process of repentance begins in our mind. It is a process which causes us to change our mind to reflect better the mind of Christ.10 If we are meek instead of bitter, our capacity for empathy, for example, is to a great extent rooted in our experiences and memories.

"[But trials] will only give us that knowledge to understand the minds of the Ancients. For my part I think I never could have felt as I now do if I had not suffered the wrongs that I have suffered. All things shall work together for good to them that love God."11

Thus, we are encouraged to have a "willing mind" (D&C 64:34). The ultimate submissiveness is when our "minds become single" and submissive to God by being "swallowed up in [His] will" (Mosiah 15:7; D&C 88:68). Clearly excluded is the adversary who "knew not the mind of God" (Moses 4:6).

Of necessity, since agency reigns, Paul and all the prophets want people to "be fully persuaded in [their] own mind[s]" (Romans 14:5). However enticing the shortcuts may seem, to persuade one against his will only requires more arduous backpacking and backtracking!

How vital that our minds feast upon the words of Christ and that we be firm and unshaken as we encounter the challenges of life! Thus, if meek, our minds understandably reach out with regard to God: Is He really there? Enoch was mightily reassured! (Moses 7:30). Does God know me? Perfectly! Does He love me? Perfectly! Does He really have particularized plans for me? Indeed! Such fundamental feelings and wonderments are responded to fully, as we come to know better the character, purposes, and the capacity of God.

To do His redemptive work daily thus requires understanding His doctrines and having them constantly refreshed and renewed, lest we "faint" in our minds or become "weary" in mind (Hebrews 12:3; D&C 84:80). Peter used the metaphor which urges us to "gird up the loins of your mind" (1 Peter 1:13). Therefore, a one-time, intellectual acceptance of doctrines to then be filed away is simply not enough. In discipleship there must be interactiveness of intellect and behavior.

There must likewise be a constancy in the nourishment of the mind by truth and by "having your loins girt about with truth" (Ephesians 6:14; D&C 27:16). The dictionary defines gird as to bind, to make fast, to surround, and to prepare for action, suggesting anything but isolation, intellectual flabbiness, or lassitude. Our own capacity to gird up must grow if we are to emulate divine determination on our own scale of discipleship. After all, is not discipleship grounded in discipline? Faltering as we sometimes are, we are blessed to worship a loving Father God who mercifully is perfect in His long-suffering.

NOTES
