Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 4

THE LONG-SUFFERING LORD

Our personal long-suffering, when expressed by mortals towards others, includes our experiencing and enduring the shortfalls caused by errant mortals. Because of our own and their repeated misuse of agency, there is certainly adequate clinical material available to practice our long-suffering on. Widespread misuse of human agency causes so much injury, trouble, distress, anxiety, and needless provocation in human relationships. Vital though long-suffering is, however, most of us are not yet very practiced in extending this important virtue toward othersor in reducing our own erroneous ways which require extending the virtue to us.

Contrastingly, divine long-suffering, of course, is perfect. Moreover, we all need it not only in our own behalf but also for providing us with a beckoning Model. Yet the Perfect Bestower of long-suffering is not without tears of His own (Moses 7).

Of the need for us to develop this quality, the Prophet Joseph said, "The nearer we get to our heavenly Father, the more we are disposed to look with compassion on perishing souls."1 The Prophet, who "learned by sad experience" (D&C 121:39), received many criticisms, some of which reflected sad shortfalls in the understanding of others toward him:

"'O, if I were Brother Joseph I would do this and that'; but if they were in Brother Joseph's shoes they would find that men or women could not be compelled into the kingdom of God, but must be dealt with in long-suffering."2

Happily, the Lord exemplifies for us perfect long-suffering. Paul wrote of how Jesus Christ shows "forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him" (1 Timothy 1:16). The Lord's long-suffering is perfect; He is full of love, mercy, and goodness, and His "charity suffereth long" (1 Corinthians 13:4; Exodus 34:6). As ever, it remains for us to be more emulative of Him.

In so many ways, not only do we rely upon the application of the divine qualities all the time but just knowing of their reality and the possibility of some attainment of these by us gives genuine hope. No wonder we are to let the long-suffering of the Lord "rest in [our] mind[s] forever" (Moroni 9:25).

Peter, for instance, described how, in a previous time of major social deterioration, the long-suffering of the Lord "waited in the days of Noah" (1 Peter 3:20). Like the Noachians, our society, aware or not, is very dependent upon the Lord's divine patience and long-suffering. Mercifully for us all, He is "not willing that any should perish," a divine posture absolutely essential for us in order to "work out [our] salvation" (2 Peter 3:9; Alma 34:37). In between the mortal misuse of our agency and the justice of God, the lubricant of His long-suffering is much needed. Not to be confused with mortal indulgence, His long-suffering recognizes and facilitates what can happen in us developmentally "in process of time" (Moses 7:21).

The acting out of our errant desires, however, ensures needless human suffering. Our lack of selfish impulse control so often ends up abusing others. Our short fuses are in such stark contrast to God's long-suffering!

Unsurprisingly, those who become aware of how they themselves are blessed beneficiaries of divine long-suffering are much more likely, in turn, to be benefactors of other mortals in need of long-suffering. Praise be to those who so proffer and persist in such patience! Hence, our long-suffering involves more than an intellectual awareness of what is amiss. The anxious father of the prodigal son was much more than a detached desk clerk waiting to see who would check in.

The scripturally prescribed pattern for acting with such redemptiveness of attitude includes both long-suffering and doctrine. Since our God is the God of truth, His doctrines, when understood, provide a firm and substantive basis for using "persuasion" and all "long-suffering," because there is something solid to be persuaded about (D&C 121:41). Knowledge of doctrines, therefore, can provide a vital focus for our otherwise diffused feelings (2 Corinthians 6:6). Interwoven with divine doctrines are knowable, divine standards designed to prevent us from drifting toward mere indulgence. Nothing is quite so sad as being sorry but without any real or redeeming standards. Yet we see it all the time.

For example, it is instructive and inspirational as to the Lord's long-suffering for us to know that the original Twelve, once gently chided by Jesus for being unable to wait a mere hour (Matthew 26:40), will nevertheless one day stand "at [Jesus'] right hand at the day of [His] coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as [He is], to judge the whole house of Israel" (D&C 29:12). Divine long-suffering gives genuine hope and can bring later specific blessings to all who now falter and fall short from time to time.

Yet God's mentoring accompanies his long-suffering. As the brother of Jared exemplified, painful reproof may precede generous praise (Ether 2:14; 3:9). Hence, God's long-suffering is not indulgence. Though He does not want any to perish, His redemptive process nevertheless requires that all should come unto repentance, a stern and specific process (Mosiah 28:3; D&C 18:44). Thereby, however, we may achieve genuine reconciliation with Him and submission to Him.

Families, leaders, friends, and neighbors can help this process, especially if we "preach the word; [are] instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine" (2 Timothy 4:2). We can also best assist if, first of all, we, ourselves "have come to a knowledge of the goodness of God, and his matchless power, and his wisdom, and his patience, and his long-suffering towards the children of men; and also, the atonement which has been prepared from the foundation of the world" (Mosiah 4:6).

The first verse in the Book of Mormon, best known for its praise of parents, also includes Nephi's testimony of his learning and knowing of the "goodness" of God (1 Nephi 1:1). More than we sometimes do, we, too, should testify to the reality of God but also to the blessed reality of His character, as did Nephi. Nurturing and coping parents can show the way, as did Lehi and Sariah.

The more we strive to express long-suffering toward others, the greater and deeper our adoration of the Lord will become, reflecting ever greater appreciation for this perfect quality in Him.

Given our moral agency, God's long-suffering becomes vitally necessary for God to tutor us in process of time, encouraging the further alignment of our own desires with His. Even if such aligning finally fails to happen fully, God's mercy and loving kindness and long-suffering will nevertheless have striven with us, and the record will be clear. God's many specific entreaties will have been rejected because of our rebelliousness. Even though His redemptive arm was "lengthened out all the day long" (2 Nephi 28:32), it is often unnoticed, or turned aside, by many who could have grasped it.

In addition to our mistaking God's long-suffering for indulgence, there is another error we can make. For example, we can wrongly conclude there is no real hurry for us to change. Contemporary society is awash in these two errors. Thereby, needed opportunities for our repentance pass unused, creating real casualties and victims. Thereby, too, estrangement from Jesus is further widened by the dulling of our capacity for genuine spiritual sensitivity or even redeeming shame. Shame is an emotion to which some moderns have become almost total strangers (Mosiah 5:13). No vertigo is as vicious as in those who try to "spin" their shame! Shame is so much more than a face made briefly warm and red. Real shame scalds the soul.

Thus, frail and imperfect as we may be now, the failure to develop the divine attributes, including long-suffering and justice, does create real victims in marriages, at work, among families, friends, and neighbors.

Consider, for instance, the awful perils of a political system which is significantly estranged from truthwhether in dialogue, in the public record, or in campaigns. Being politically offended but without spiritual standards is not the same thing as righteous indignation.

Likewise, ponder how the absence of graciousness in human relationships automatically exalts rudeness, bringing so much brittleness in human interactions and communications.

Vengeance is directly opposite to long-suffering. "Getting even" does not really balance the scales at all; it only distorts them even furtherwhether practiced between nations, tribes, or spouses!

Perhaps most sobering, when compared to genuine long-suffering of Him who is perfect in His love, is the impatient, mortal misuse of power, which carries such awful consequences. In Notes from the House of the Dead, Fyodor Dostoyevsky wrote of grossly misused power:

"Whoever has experienced the power, the complete ability to humiliate another human being . . . with the most extreme humiliation, willy-nilly loses power over his own sensations. Tyranny is a habit, it has a capacity for development, it develops finally into a disease. . . . The human being and the citizen die within the tyrant forever; return to humanity, to repentance, to regeneration becomes almost impossible."3

There are those more than a few who really do have an actual lust to govern or to boss others. One sees it in small businesses as well as in big governments. Historian Barbara Tuchman wrote insightfully:

"Chief among the forces affecting political folly is lust for power, named by Tacitus, as 'the most flagrant of all the passions.' Because it can only be satisfied by power over others, government is its favorite field of exercise."4

Our experiences with power can help us to appreciate better how God's power reflects His perfect love, accompanied by mercy and long-suffering. On a mortal scale, one learns of it in President George Washington: "In all history few men who possessed unassailable power have used that power so gently and self-effacingly for what their best instincts told them was the welfare of their neighbors and all mankind."5

Mortals have not yet invented a pride meter which would be the equivalent of the wristbands or other warning devices worn by workers in nuclear facilities. The latter can detect and show when the level of radioactivity has reached dangerous levels. We do not have a counterpart that warns us of the deadly surges of gross, prideful arrogance, which can take an even more devastating toll.

Our present capacity for meekness is doubtless reflective of how much we had already developed that quality in the premortal world. Its further development can be greatly enhanced by family life, discipleship, and so on. Further more, the disparities in meekness among mortals are too great to attribute solely to the mortal environment; we brought certain "luggage" with us.

As we strive to emulate Jesus, it is reassuring for us to know that the Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of how true disciples can eventually reach the point where they lose all desire for sinand this would include the desire to compel and dominate others. But, he observed realistically, "This is a station to which no man ever arrived in a moment."6 Developmental discipleship is thus incremental, another self-evident reason for us to rejoice in the long-suffering of the Lord and to ponder anew the need for that attribute and patience in ourselves.

The Lord's higher ways can become our ways (Isaiah 55:9). But if the disparity between ours and the Lord's ways is too great, too obvious, and too frequent, others may actually be turned away from His gospel and Church. Sadly, at one time the pride of Church members was greater than that of those who did not belong to the Church (Alma 4:9-10).

Therefore, may people experience us as genuinely striving to become more and more like the Lord we worship. After all, we are each other's clinical material. Given that reality, there is this sobering reminder from President Brigham Young about the need for patience:

"There are no two faces alike, no two persons tempered alike; . . . we are tried with each other, and large drafts are made upon our patience, forbearance, charity, and good will in short, upon all the higher and godlike qualities of our nature."7

Even given the foregoing descriptions of the need for long-suffering, are there moments when, out of love, we should "admonish . . . sharply" or reprove "with sharpness"? (D&C 112:12; 121:43). Of course! But as Paul cautions, we should do so in such a way that the reproved are not "swallowed up with overmuch sorrow" (2 Corinthians 2:7). Nor should we proceed further than the healing balm within us, as Brigham Young counseled the Saints:

"If you are ever called upon to chasten a person, never chasten beyond the balm you have within you to bind up. . . . I say again, Do not chasten beyond the balm you have within you. . . . When you have the chastening rod in your hands, ask God to give you wisdom to use it, that you may not use it to the destruction of an individual, but to his salvation."8

We especially need more long-suffering when "large drafts are made upon our patience." President Young spoke on the degrees of chastisement:

"True, there are degrees of feeling and degrees of chastisement, and you are led to chastise one man differently to what you do another. You may, figuratively speaking, pound one Elder over the head with a club, and he does not know but what you have handed him a straw dipped in molasses to suck. There are others, if you speak a word to them, or take up a straw and chasten them, whose hearts are broken; they are as tender in their feelings as an infant, and will melt like wax before the flame. You must not chasten them severely; you must chasten according to the spirit that is in the person. Some you may talk to all day long, and they do not know what you are talking about. There is a great variety. Treat people as they are."9

If Jesus can plead to a perfectly merciful Father, why should we not emulate Him by having greater long-suffering but also by genuinely pleading in behalf of others? (D&C 45:3-4). Then our souls can be further enlarged and "without hypocrisy" (D&C 121:42). Then, "without compulsory means," certain blessings will flow to us forever (D&C 121:46).

Again to be emphasized is that long-suffering can still be discerning (1 Chronicles 28:9; Alma 18:32). The prophet Mormon soon came to discern a crucial distinction in his contemporaries, as we may, too:

"When I, Mormon, saw their lamentation and their mourning and their sorrow before the Lord, my heart did begin to rejoice within me, knowing the mercies and the long-suffering of the Lord, therefore supposing that he would be merciful unto them that they would again become a righteous people.

"But behold this my joy was vain, for their sorrowing was not unto repentance, because of the goodness of God; but it was rather the sorrowing of the damned, because the Lord would not always suffer them to take happiness in sin" (Mormon 2:12-13).

Still, some may continue to think mistakenly that a long-suffering God is a soft touch. A soft touch, like the tutoring trail of tears in Sinai or in handcart country? A soft touch, given the determined tutoring described in "all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good"? (D&C 122:7). A soft touch, like the Father's silence in response to deserving Jesus' plea in Gethsemane that the cup be taken from him and the earlier "Father, save me from this hour"? (John 12:27; Matthew 26:39).

No wonder, therefore, the "word" may need to be sharp at times so "it cutteth them to the very center" (1 Nephi 16:2). A softening of hearts sometimes requires more than a soft touch.

If our wills are submissively tied to God's will, only then is His yoke really easier to bear (Matthew 11:29-30). Unless our inner desires are becoming more and more like His, His yoke will chafe and torture our shoulders. To boast "I can handle it," without any inner meekness, is to set up oneself for failure. The adversary doubtless notes any superficial boasts by women and men alike.

Because He was and is so perfectly meek and lowly, Jesus submitted His will to the Father's will. For us, truly doing likewise may seem so out of reach, partly because we ironically insist on attaching hindering conditions to our submission. There is so much hesitance and holding back.

For some, the process of time can help, as it did for the prodigal son, in order to come to themselves (Luke 15:17). Necessary, too, was the patience and long-suffering of the father of the prodigal. We are not told of his earlier and anguished waiting . . . and waiting. How oft did his anxious eyes scan the horizon?

If we exercise more long-suffering toward others, doing so reflects not only an increased love but a quality of love which refuses to give up. In effect, it is like saying to the errant one, "I'm still not willing to write you off. I know who you really are, even if you don't!"

Do caring long-sufferers in such circumstances sometimes experience a temporary loss of patience? Yes! But such can be followed by the resumption of the outstretched arms toward the resistors. These resistors may be rebellious teenagers, an errant spouse, a sister full of self-pity, a preoccupied careerist all heedless of their exclusionary effects on others. Nevertheless, the loving long-sufferer will not go away, even when the objects of his concern entreat him to leave. It seems that some stubbornly insist on touching the bottom before even a slight upward momentum occurs. Painfully watching the long procrastinating and needless descent can be so anguishing. President Spencer W. Kimball put it so well:

"Procrastination thou wretched thief of time and opportunity!

"When will men stand true to their one-time inspired yearnings?

"Let those take care who postpone the clearing of bad habits and of constructively doing what they ought. 'Some day I'll join the Church,' says one. 'I'll cease my drinking soon,' says another. 'One day I'll smoke no more,' others pledge. 'Some day we'll be ready for our temple sealings,' promise a delayed-action husband and wife. 'Some day, when they apologize, I'll forgive those who injured me,' small souls say. 'Some day I'll get my debts paid.' 'We'll get around soon to having our family prayers, and next week we'll start our home evenings.' 'We shall start paying tithing from our next pay check.' Tomorrow yes, tomorrow."10

It is the true long-sufferer who waits with patience at the foot of the self-constructed crosses of those who insist on crucifying themselves and their possibilities. Nevertheless, the long-sufferer maintains the quiet heroism of hope, even though receiving so little appreciation from his beneficiaries.

Vicariously bearing our sins whether bright or faded pink Jesus, in fact, descended below all things in order that He might personally comprehend all things (D&C 88:6). Yes, we worship Jesus because He is, but we also worship Him because of what He is like, including His perfect attribute of long-suffering (Exodus 34:6-7). We ponder His sobering invitation, "What manner of men [and women] ought ye to be? Verily I say unto you, even as I am" (3 Nephi 27:27).

But will God's long-suffering finally fail anyway? Will it merely be seen by some mortals as His having given it "a good try?" Emphatically, no! Actually, God will succeed in working with humanity until all have had every chance. Perfect mercy and perfect justice will have prevailedabout which none will later complain! Instead, on Judgment Day all will affirm that God is perfect in His justice (Mosiah 16:1; 27:31; 29:12).

This collective but individual confessing will be unforced and will be expressed with great gratitude, including by those who will inherit the telestial kingdom which, though lesser, will still have a glory which "surpasses all understanding" (D&C 76:89). All will receive according to their wills and desires, including life in that kingdom (Alma 29:4). Divine long-suffering ensures such ultimate justice!

It is no wonder that we reverently worship our long-suffering Lord while also admiring and respecting the emulative, mortal long-sufferers. Though we would sometimes salute the latterbut without distracting them, because we see how they are so "anxiously engaged" (D&C 58:27)their long-suffering nurtures those with short spans of spiritual attention. Those who so minister are patient even with those whose idealism has soured into cynicism and sarcasm. Besides, within that cynicism are tracings of what once was and what could be again. Their very sarcasm sometimes shows how much their hopes have shrunken. Moreover, the errant who reject or abuse long-suffering are making their repentance ever more difficult. Each layer of scar tissue makes fresh soul surgery more difficult.

Therefore, while the rebellious try the capacity of those who strive to be long-suffering towards themand limits do need to be set at times, with customized rebukesyet, though unappreciated, the frequently disappointed long-sufferers remain strangers to self-pity. They are so giving, they would not think of giving up. Yes, occasionally gross events may understandably cause them to take a startled step backwards. But even when the rebellious act out further their selfish psychodramas, the friends do not turn away. They are "firm" in the Spirit (Alma 27:27; Helaman 15:8; Moroni 7:30; Jacob 4:18).

Even when such friends reprove with sharpness, the sharpness has the unmistakable tang of love. Long-sufferers know that ultimatums rarely are desideratums. While they do not care to appear as heroes and heroines on the evening news, they meekly bear the good news of the gospel of deserved forgiveness.

Long-sufferers are really something because they think the errant and unrepentant are really something something worth saving. No wonder the long-sufferers will one day stand as meek saviors on Mount Zion, there to praise forever God's long-suffering and also to witness His perfect justice.

NOTES
