Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 6

"THESE THINGS"

When imprisoned in Liberty Jail, the suffering Prophet Joseph Smith was counseled not merely to survive but to endure well. There he received important and consoling revelations about the tutoring nature of this mortal experience, including these well-known words: "All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good" (D&C 122:7; 121:8).1 This wintry verse is instructive for us all, as we now focus briefly on two of its words: "these things."

First, many of life's afflictions and temptations are real but generalized, democratically built into the fabric and structure of mortality. These, wrote Paul, are "common to man" (1 Corinthians 10:13). One does not dismiss these challenges simply because they are widely shared, however.

Second, there are additional "things" which try us, too, and sometimes severely. These trials we actually bring on ourselves, though the suffering is just as real. For example, people can enclose themselves in self-constructed prisons of appetites and attitudes. In fact, we are imprisoned by whatever we are in bondage to, "for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage" (2 Peter 2:19). There are so many such prisons!

A third category of "these things" consists of added tutorial trials and customized challenges. These might consist of health or economic problems, or the continuing insensitivity of a marriage partner, or a lack of appreciation from one's children, etc. Embedded in the "tether and pang" of these "particular" situations may be some of life's most defining moments.2 If endured well, each of these experiences can contain the clinical material needed for tutoring, which can be especially for our good.

Such individualized opportunities may be deflected or rejected by us, of course. Or they may simply go unrecognized. Nevertheless, the moments were there, and they could have been seized "for [our] good" (D&C 122:7). Granted, such moments may be fleeting, but they can still be defining, depending upon our responses.

As in going from belief to faith and then on to knowledge, we can move onward incrementally in conquering "these things."

Though of themselves life's defining moments may seem minor, our wise responses can gradually increase our traction on the demanding path of discipleship. For instance, we can decide daily, or in an instant, in seemingly little things, whether we respond with a smile instead of a scowl, or whether we give warm praise instead of exhibiting icy indifference. Each response matters in its small moment. After all, moments are the molecules that make up eternity, affecting not only ourselves but others, because our conduct even in seemingly small things can be contagious.

"The current of life is made up of small springs, streams, and rivulets, or rather of little incidents which in the aggregate constitute the character of man here on earth. So small a thing as a kind word timely spoken to the sorrowful and afflicted often results in great good, and secures the esteem and gratitude of those to whom it may be addressed, while an ill word may do much harm."3

When we decide, for example, to be understanding instead of abrupt, the other party, in turn, may happily decide to hold on a little longer rather than give way to resentment. Whereas some contagious physical diseases are airborne, spiritual contagiousness can be attitude borne. Love, patience, and meekness can be just as infectious as rudeness.

So it is that we learn not only "precept upon precept" but also experience by experience (D&C 128:21). Experi ence actually remains the workhorse way of learning and also of further verifying the truth. Regardless, if we are meek, the Lord's "grace is sufficient" (Ether 12:26), thereby helping us in meeting these moments gracefully and productively. Good can come from them, difficult and stressful though they may be (D&C 122:7).

Later on, when we have better perspective, as President Brigham Young said, we will consider all of our mortal "losses, crosses, and disappointments, [and] the sorrows," in the context of eternity, and we will "exclaim, 'But what of all that? Those things were but for a moment.'"4 Right now, however, we are in the midst of our intense though "small moment" (D&C 122:4; 3 Nephi 22:7).

When Jesus says His grace is sufficient for us, His unique and specific capacity for grace and empathy reflects all that He personally endured, including our sins, sicknesses, pains, and so forth (Alma 7:11-12; Ether 12:30). He who suffered the insufferable thus knows specifically and personally how to extend His grace and how to succor us (Alma 7:11-12). How different from a limited deity who might want to help his subjects but does not really know their pain or, even worse, how to succor them.

We, of course, are at risk in facing all types of trials in life's small moments as well as in the large ones. Hence, this apostolic counsel applies: "Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall" (1 Corinthians 10:12). An automatic-pilot approach to daily life can thus be very risky.

We can, instead, be "added upon" drop by drop, until discipleship becomes "brim with joy" (Abraham 3:26; Alma 26:11). Yet doing so requires constant "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:15). Patience can polish us even when we may feel at a particular moment that we are really being burnished.

Resilience is part of repentance, showing we have faith to try againwhether in a task or in a relationship. Resilience is really an affirmation of our true identities as spirit sons and daughters of God. We need not be permanently put down, because we can be "lifted up" by applying Christ's atonement (Alma 36:3). The "infinite atonement" thus can apply to our finite failures (Alma 34:12).

Our lives contain sufficient samples to provide enough variety of "these things." Genuine discipleship also means that we are always on stage. Yes, there are some private moments, but moving along the straight and narrow path is scarcely a solitary or an unobserved thing. Therefore, genu ine meekness is required for enduring discipleship pursued on stage. Consider the candid anxiousness of the chariot-encircled young man saying in a defining moment to the prophet Elisha, "Alas, my master! how shall we do?"(2 Kings 6:15). Or, the believing and honest man who openly acknowledged to Jesus, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief" (Mark 9:24).

Therefore, "these things," though variously configured, feature a precious process, one in which we are doing and becoming simultaneously. Moreover, sufficient unto each discipleship are the opportunities thereof!

When we sometimes seek validation of our worth as individuals, how wonderful it would be if we would but consider what we are more than what we do. Doing certain things, of course, clearly can enhance what we are, yet our mortal tasks and opportunities are not evenly distributed. Nevertheless, we each can become, amid varied circumstances and roles, more like Christ, especially in our capacity to love, to be meek, to be patient, and to be submissive.

Since we do not remember ordering them from life's menu, so many defining moments are actually compliments of the chef!

Spiritual memories can facilitate our progress in coping with our present portion of "these things." Said one expert on memory, "The function of memory in your life is not only quite remarkable, it is vitally necessary to your survival as a human being."5

Mark Van Doren has observed: "Memory performs the impossible for man; holds together past and present, gives continuity and dignity to human life. This is the companion, this is the tutor, the poet, the library, with which you travel."6

We can be strandedpersonally and societallyby not letting the past play its rightful part, including by connecting the generations:

"The events for which one generation cares most are often those of which the next knows least: they are too old to be matters of personal recollection and they are too new to be subjects of study, they have passed out of memory and they have not got into the books."7

Hence, the in-between things can be lost unless wisely cultivated. It is not easy to describe what actually occurs when nostalgia stirs us productively and positively. We cannot fully account for what happens when our memories focus so intensely on a particular time or event which had seemingly slipped irrevocably away. Then, suddenly and briefly, we feel included and reminded again!

The mentoring of the Holy Ghost can bring to our remembrance spiritually significant things (John 14:26). Though the moments are brief, such infusions of feelings from the past revive us. There is a fresh and vivid sense of what was, stirring us as to what could yet be; the refreshing surf of recall has rolled over us, even if quickly. Furthermore, the scriptures can, as it were, enlarge our memories and incorporate such memories as if they were our own (Alma 37:8). Spiritual memories can thus give us a broader view of all "these things."

Perspective afforded by spiritual remembrance is a safeguard against a particularly vexing trend which adversely affects so many in this present and modern age. The seventh commandment, pertaining to chastity and fidelity, is so little valued. Memory lapses would be much fewer in this regard if some recalled their marriage covenantsmade not all that long ago. Immorality, however, is not considered all that serious by many. If people are otherwise honorable or contribute anything worthy to society, they are given a free pass, so to speak, as to honoring chastity and fidelity. Some violators actually demand forgiveness before repentance.

Henry Fairlie wrote: "Lust is not interested in its partners, but only in the gratification of its own craving, not in the satisfaction of our whole natures, but only in the appeasement of an appetite that we are unable to subdue. . . . Lust dies at the next dawn, and when it returns in the evening, to search where it may, it is with its own past erased."8

To violate the seventh commandment, especially repeatedly, is actually a sign of stubborn self-indulgence. However commendable one's other contributions might be, to trivialize the seventh commandment shows conceptual anemia or an expectation of chronic self-excusal. Lot could tell us about trying to live in an immoral milieu, one "vexed with . . . filthy conversation," and there are filthy expectations, too (2 Peter 2:7).

Gertrude Himmelfarb has indicated: "Today's moralists have that . . . far-away, fanatical glint in their eye'telescopic morality,' we might call it. Telescopic morality disdains the mundane values of everyday life as experienced by ordinary peoplethe 'bourgeois values' of family, fidelity, chastity, sobriety, personal responsibility. . . .

" . . . casual sexual intercourse is condoned, while a flirtatious remark may be grounds for legal action. It is a curious combination of prudery and promiscuity that is enshrined in the new moral code. An old Victorian would call it censorship without morality."9

Hence, attending the violation of the seventh commandment are shared cultural consequences, as Will Durant wrote:

"No one man, however brilliant or well informed can come in one lifetime to such fullness of understanding as to safely judge and dismiss the customs or institutions of his society, for these are the wisdom of generations after centuries of experiment in the laboratory of history. A youth boiling with hormones will wonder why he should not give full freedom to his sexual desires; and if he is unchecked by custom, morals, or laws, he may ruin his life before he matures sufficiently to understand that sex is a river of fire that must be banked and cooled by a hundred restraints if it is not to consume in chaos both the individual and the group."10

Some, if they believe at all in the coming reality and that "no unclean thing can enter into [His] kingdom," apparently expect eventual excusal, or, at worst, to be "beaten with [a] few stripes" (3 Nephi 27:19; Luke 12:48; see also 1 Nephi 15:34). Passing successfully through temptation-filled times and being righteous for the right reasons are those who really strive to follow Him, who had temptations of every kind and yet gave them "no heed" (D&C 20:22).

There is no way for us to be fully and spiritually submissive until our will is swallowed up in the will of the Father (Mosiah 15:7). Therefore, complying with the seventh commandment, which some regard as an inconvenience or an inconsequential requirement, becomes a major hurdle. Some almost insist on a right to engage in some unchastity and infidelity, justified because of their other contributions. They almost insist that both God and others overlook their unimportant peccadilloes. It is as if they demand a sensual surcharge for rendering service in any other respect.

Mark it down: If the seventh commandment really were that trivial, the adversary would not spend so much of his time encouraging its violation! Clearly, he recognizes his large and relatively easy harvest from its violation.

The fact is that although some demean the seventh commandment, its violation is actually a fundamental violation of the first and second great commandmentson which all the laws and commandments "hang," including the seventh (Matthew 22:40). Such transgression shows a fundamental disregard for God and for all the other individuals inevitably and adversely affected by unchastity and infidelity. Furthermore, if we are beckoned at all by the divine invitation to "become as little children . . . [in order to] enter into the kingdom of heaven," how can we excuse an indulgent, adults-only lifestyle? (Matthew 18:3; 18:4; Mosiah 3:19).

Historian John Lukacs perceptively warned years ago that sexual immorality was not merely a marginal development but, instead, was at the center of the moral crisis of our time.11

How can anyone lacking basic impulse control even presume to be submissive to God? Likewise, how greatly do such individuals esteem Christ's atonement, which graciously immortalizes them? Only by means of repentance can we eventually be "spotless" from sin (Alma 13:12). Or, perhaps a few spots do not matter? Adultery is okay, if one feeds the poor? Promiscuity is permissible, if one supports the arts?

Of course, it is through Jesus' merciful atonement that we may be forgiven at all, if we repent of our sins, including those of infidelity and unchastity. But for some to be cavalier about this commandment, as though keeping it were somehow beneath them, is a tragic mistake. Such a failure to bend to the Lord's will shows an unyielding posture of the soul. In fact, such an indulgent and stubborn lifestyle indicates a subtle state of rebellion, as if God can't really be serious when He asks us to practice self-denial and to checkrein our appetites! There is an arrogant contempt, however unconscious of itself, that pervades promiscuity. The tyranny of sexual immorality is truly oppressive, and it is not confined to perpetrators, thus requiring us to have added capacity to endure. Relativism can run riot:

"If there is nothing beyond death, then what is wrong with giving oneself wholly to pleasure in the short time one has left to live? The loss of faith in the 'other world' has saddled modern Western society with a fatal moral problem."12

So much depends on our capacity to confront our particular configuration of "these things" but also on how we use the time allotted to us in this mortal estate. Of necessity, the process of discipleship is carried out in the process of time. One can scarcely consider the former without the latter.

NOTES
