Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 7

IN PROCESS OF TIME

Within mortality's carefully fixed parameters is another of "these things" which are shared by all and which impinges on us constantly. We call it time. Because we are eternal beings, time is not our natural dimension. Hence, we cannot help but notice its constant presence; it is part of the brief and narrow mortal framework within which we are to overcome by faith, including faith in God's timing. Even so, we are greatly helped by revelations that tell us much about "things as they really are, and of things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13). Otherwise, time can so easily twist our take on things. Little things can loom so large!

Courageous but meek, John the Baptist said, as the time of his own special ministry neared its close, "[Jesus] must increase, but I must decrease" (John 3:30). Unconcerned with turf or the size of respective followings, John the Baptist spoke a truth about a less-appreciated dimension of dis cipleship. If we are truly meek, we will not worry over dominating a particular moment of time or turf. We will be more concerned with what we do and what we are! Jesus commended John, declaring a greater prophet had not been born of women (Luke 7:28). Yet John "did no miracle[s]" (John 10:41).

True, some sincerely intend to nourish the gospel seed in their next season of life, but those procrastinated springs come late, if at all. Of course, we genuinely rejoice in late bloomers, as we do in returning prodigals. Mercifully, too, those who come in the last hour receive the same wages (Matthew 20:1-16). Yet, there will be no special door prizes at the final judgment for those most reticent and last on their knees or whose tongues are the last to confess!

Meanwhile, it is amazing to see how some believers are lured so easily out of their appointed place, like an athlete being taken out of position not by the superior skill or strength of an opponent but only by a mere head-fake!

So much of the world's distracting behavior shouts, in effect, Notice me! Envy me!cries which are not really very far from Worship me! We hear it all the time from those who are superstars of this or of that. These self-centered emotions are a clear violation of the first and second commandments and are in sharp contrast to the ways of Him who said, "For I am meek and lowly" (Matthew 11:29).

In our time-conscious and ego-drenched world, such a lesson is worth savoring. Some treat time as if it somehow belonged outright to them and as if title to it were part of their turf. It is one thing to say "these are my days" (Helaman 7:9) in order to reflect determination to contribute righteously. It is quite another to feel that the Lord or others owe us a block of time and that we alone will call the cadence.

Unless we are meek and faithful, time, as experienced by mortals, can be viewed in such provincial ways. In the very same moment, for instance, some may be enjoying a long-awaited reunion, understandably desiring to prolong that precious moment and hold back the dawn. Still others, however, are longingly awaiting an impending reunion or with excruciating pain are awaiting death and, hence, would hasten the dawn. Understandably conscious of time and its seemingly slow passage are those tensely awaiting a crucial lab report and wishing the intervening hours to be over.

Life is so designed that we constantly feel time, for it encloses the cares and anxieties of the world. In fact, we must use much of our allotted mortal time to do the necessary and worthy work of the world. Furthermore, some of the cares of the world do require some caring about.

Nevertheless, such cares and chores can come to dominate life. We can easily find ourselves anxiously engaged in doing these lesser things, so that too little of ourselves and of our time are left over for the things of God. Our management of time tells us so much about the management of ourselves.

Inordinate attention to the cares and the work of the world causes the exclusion of the things of most worth, the latter being "omitted" and left "undone" (Matthew 23:23). Time's pressures can thus blur our focus, and we may find ourselves doing what time labels as urgent, even if it is not really important. We all try (usually in vain) to ignore the ringing telephone!

We really feel time and its prickly presence. Unlike birds at home in the air and fishes in the water, we in time are not in our natural dimension. No wonder the passage of time seems to go too slowly or too rapidly.

Life itself provides us a decisive experience with time and mortal momentariness, situated as the second estate is between a lengthy premortal and an everlasting postmortal existence. Compared to the first and third estates, the second estate is a mere afternoon. Yet, it is within temporal brevity that we now exercise our eternal agency to choose.

No wonder the mortal curriculum often seems so compressed! No wonder, too, given this short span, we should take up the tutoring cross daily, for we have "miles to go before [we] sleep."1 Occasional restful reveries are permitted, but they do not last for long. We often yearn for more of a chance to savor things:

I don't like a world of muchness, A world of push and fast and no; I like a world of swept-out bigness, Of let and think and slow.

One's mortal life, therefore, is brevity compared to eternity like being dropped off by a parent for a day at school but what a day!

Unsurprisingly, we ponder over how, with a later mere flick of the Divine wrist, "time is no longer" (D&C 84:100; 88:110).

Does "no longer" mean we will have passed through our own experience in the second estate, so that time will be over but only for us? Will time still be needed for all those yet to pass through the second estate? We do not know the details, but the perspectives will be vastly different from those of the present in ways yet to be understood and experienced. In any case, working out our salvation in this elusive dimension time is unavoidable. Besides, we cannot fully understand time while we are inside it.

As consumers of time, we seldom find its passage to be just right. For instance, the seven long years Jacob worked for Rachel seemed to him to be "but a few days" (Genesis 29:20; see also D&C 121:7). On other occasions, we speak of how time can hang so heavy, whether we are amid a vexing challenge or mere boredom.

The scriptures, without elaboration, say that time is measured only to man (Alma 40:8; D&C 84:100; 88:110). Indeed, we are constantly trying to measure time with clocks and calendars. Yet, as Sheldon Vanauken wrote so well, "We cannot love time. It spoils our loveliest moments."2 Life's seasons come and go so quickly. We can even remember when summer used to be three months long!

Even so, would we droop in performing our duties without the prickly, prodding presence of time? Would unending reveries cause us to become lost in lassitude instead of rigorously pursuing our journeys back to our eternal home?

The revelations tell us that in the presence of God "all things . . . past, present, and future, are continually before [Him]" (D&C 130:7)a condition which Joseph Smith called "one eternal 'now.'"3 The revelations thus permit us to access certain sovereign truths. We need not be solely confined to the mere facts of the day with their short shelf lives.

Blessed are those who in the midst of all "these things" not only endure well but also use time well, by discerning between things portable and eternal on the one hand and the self-extinguishing things of the mere moment on the other. Surely part of choosing consists of learning to look at things longitudinally through the lens of the gospel. The wise use of our time, guided by eternal truths, can spur this process and help to ensure that "all these things . . . shall be for [our] good" (D&C 122:7).

Malcolm Muggeridge wrote perceptively: "There is Time and there is Eternity. Because we are creatures of Time, what happens from moment to moment, from century to century, seems of crucial importance; because we are creatures of Eternity these happenings seem as unsubstantial as white clouds drifting across a summer sky. . . .

"Some balance or compromise has to be found between these two moods. If life is only unreal it is melancholy. Wonder at its unreality soon gives place to bitterness of spirit. . . . On the other hand, if buses and newspaper headlines and the man winding up clockwork pigs, all that happens, represent the whole significance of life, it is equally intolerable. For what does happen? I look backwards and see for individuals and societies a round as monotonous as the seasons of rising and falling hopes; I look forwards and see the same process continuing."4

Sensitivity to seeming repetitiveness, unless we understand the plan of salvation and God's character and purposes, can be described as monotonous as the seasons. Yet, God Himself has said, "[My] course is one eternal round" (D&C 35:1). His eternal round is filled with redemptiveness, mercy, and love. How we regard it all is what matters, along with how we fill our own days and years and whether or not we are submissive to the purposes of Him who oversees this eternal round (1 Nephi 10:19). His purposes and plan include the glorious resurrection, when body and spirit are inseparably connected, bringing a fulness of joy.

No wonder the Restoration and its truths give us what Peter prophesied would be the "times of refreshing"! (Acts 3:19). Through those truths, we can see things afresh with a plain and precious perspective, for the "limits of time [we step] o'er."5

The trials which come amid time include the anguishing deaths of loved ones, underscoring aching emptiness. These, too, can enhance our spiritual perspectives amid "these things." The spiritual space loved ones have vacated can bring its own form of inventorying. Time helps us to count even more accurately what we once had. Mercifully, we can have it again! Meanwhile, however, could our later reunions really be fully appreciated without the preceding experiences of separation? Again, we see the relevance of God's plan in process of time.

We see each other in process of time, which means we see each other in process of discipleship. This process includes the faltering, the stumbles, the triumphs, the enduring well, and so many other commendable things. Still, given the significance of discipleship, efforts to measure it are difficult, because so many important things are unmeasurable to us.

With regard to our physical health, there are some vital signs, such as pulse, blood pressure, respiration, and temperature. Measuring these may seem routine but can be a valuable diagnostic tool and provide crucial indicators. So far as our spiritual health is concerned, there are some vital signs which, over the years, have proved to be significant indicators. Do we engage in personal prayer, search the scriptures regularly, and pay tithing, all the while becoming more like Jesus? Yet some resent the simplicity!

As to the latter, the Holy Ghost testifies of the Father and the Son and glorifies Christ (John 16:14). Using whatever gifts and talents we have, we should do likewise!

Christ has told us a major way of glorifying and magnifying Him: "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15). Implicitly, if we love Him but falter in keeping His commandments, we are to love Him enough to repent! Hence, repenting and improving are actually ways in which we truly glorify Christ!

Christ's atonement, being the central act of human history, benefits super sinners, sinners, and all of us as the makers of mistakes. Taking up the cross daily (Luke 9:23), rather than quarterly or semiannually, helps us in the isometrics of discipleship: the new man labors and struggles to put off the old, or natural, man, who will not go quietly, easily, or suddenly (Mosiah 3:19). Therefore, taking up the cross daily develops within us the extra strength we need to put him off with finality.

Actions that lie at the very center of Christ's atonement give us immense clues in terms of our own daily discipleship. Jesus was at His perfect best during the Atonement when things were at their very worst. Yet, when He entered Gethsemane, He "fell on his face" (Matthew 26:39). Further, we are told, He "poured out his soul unto death" (Isaiah 53:12; Mosiah 14:12). Moreover, He let his own will be "swallowed up in the will of the Father" (Mosiah 15:7). The imagery is staggering, made the more so by His own words after the Atonement, when He said He had felt "the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:107).

The Atonement would not have been valid, however, if Jesus, standing in for us, had merely been sorry in our behalf. His atonement required infinite suffering in order to be an infinite atonement: vicarious and superficial sorrow would not have been enough! He revealed His awareness of the agony which lay ahead of Him when He said, "Would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink" (D&C 19:18). For Him to have recoiled, pulled back, or failed to go through with the Atonement would, of course, have stranded all of us.

Pondering Christ's deep, deep devotion gives us crucial insights for our own discipleship. What are a few of the common mistakes we make in failing to apply the Atonement to our discipleship? Interestingly, God leaves us free to make these mistakes, and all of these mistakes reflect the need on our part for greater submissiveness to the Lord (Mosiah 3:19).

Perhaps our first mistake is to think that we own ourselves and also blocks of time. Of course, we have our agency and an inner sovereignty, but disciples are to sacrifice themselves to do Jesus' bidding with enough faith in God's timing to say, in effect, "Thy timing be done."

One disadvantage of thinking we own ourselves and blocks of time is that we then have a tendency to feel put upon by undesired and unexpected events and circumstances, as if we designed life's curriculum rather than responding to it.

A second mistake is failing life's little quizzes, thinking somehow we can cram and pass the final exam. The little quizzes are absolutely essential for us to pass, and when we fail, we need to draw upon the Atonement. The tests will come at us whether we pass them or fail them. Happily, the infinite Atonement can cover our finite mistakes, too.

It is not enough to perform reasonably well in the crunch times, during the spikes of suffering and stress, if we are then overcome in the long stretches.

We also make the mistake of not realizing that faith and patience are to be in tandem. "Nevertheless the Lord seeth fit to chasten his people; yea, he trieth their patience and their faith" (Mosiah 23:21). To be tried really means to be developed, which will happen if we are meek, the trials being part of the spiritual isometrics mentioned earlier.

We certainly need to focus on faith, of course, but likewise on patience, which is so vital to succeed while living in process of time. Impatience does not honor what is implied in the words in process of time, when we foolishly would have certain moments and seasons over and done with. By wishing to skip these, somehow we are ignoring their inherent possibilities for service and growth. We resemble airline passengers flying from coast to coast while quietly resenting the in-between spaces. But there are souls down there, not just sagebrush! So it is with life's seemingly in-between and routine spaces.

We make a mistake, too, if we feel put upon by events and circumstances, when some of these actually constitute the customized curricula for our development. Yet, we would push them away. Of course, we should petition for relief, and when it comes, we should give "more praise for relief."6 But we should not be surprised if the relief sometimes fails to come.

Another mistake is failing to realize that so much of discipleship consists of the need for us to downsize our egos and diminish our selfishness. Genuine meekness is vital, a meekness which is not conscious of itself.

A further and common mistake is focusing on how we are free to choose, a fact in God's plan of salvation, while also assuming wrongly that we can choose to avoid the consequences of our choices. Jacques Bainville once said that we must want the consequences of what we want. There really are those among us who feel they can make certain choices and still not have to face the consequences of those choices.

Actually, no one honors our wills and desires more than God!

"A just God . . . granteth unto men according to their desire . . . ; yea, I know that he allotteth unto men, yea, decreeth unto them decrees which are unalterable, according to their wills, whether they be unto salvation or unto destruction" (Alma 29:4).

Many mortals also make the mistake of playing to the galleries. These may be peers, colleagues at work, being politically correct, or conforming to the praise and fashions of the world. Each of these galleries involves a mystic "they," played to so intensely and so regularly. But those galleries will be emptied on that judgment day when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ and all will acknowledge that God is God (D&C 88:104). Part of playing to such galleries includes the efforts by some who futilely insist on using some of their allotted time to try to conform the eternal truths of the gospel and the Church to the ways and thinking of the world.

It just won't work! Paul saw it clearly: "But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:14).

All of these mistakes are unworthy of Him and all that He did in Gethsemane and Calvary. These and other errors are rooted in our failures to understand what the Atonement cost and what it requires of us.

If by accessing the Atonement we glorify the perfect Christ, it will be done amid our imperfect but improving discipleships. No one would be more pleased to have it so than He!

The words of President Joseph F. Smith about the eternal virtues though these are viewed as unexciting and unglamorous by the world make such spiritual sense. The discipleship described brings abundant joy in a process that, when viewed from the outside, might seem routine:

"The opening of the heavens to you in marvelous manifestations will not establish you in the truth. We have abundant proof of that in the history of the Church. But the men and the women who are honest before God, who humbly plod along, doing their duty paying their tithing and exercising that pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father, which is to visit the fatherless and widows in their afflictions and to keep ones self unspotted from the world and who help look after the poor; and who honor the holy Priesthood, who do not run into excesses, who are prayerful in their families and who acknowledge the Lord in their hearts, they will build up a foundation that the gates of hell cannot prevail against; and if the floods come and the storms beat upon their house, it shall not fall, for it will be built upon the rock of eternal truth."7

Such are the high-yield, low-maintenance members of His Church, who use their time well. These dutiful disciples will not prevail, however, without having and using the gifts of the Holy Ghost, gifts which are not merely desirable but essential!

NOTES
