Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 8

THE GIFT OF THE HOLY GHOST

When President Martin Van Buren asked the Prophet Joseph Smith "wherein we differed in our religion from the other religions of the day, Brother Joseph said we differed in mode of baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. We considered that all other considerations were contained in the gift of the Holy Ghost."1 The Prophet's response is more significant than we may at first realize. Of all the brief summations which might have been given in responding to President Van Buren, this one was so appropriate, whether or not appreciated by the audience of one.

The gift of the Holy Ghost truly is one of the greatest blessings available to members of the Church. Actually, many gifts can come from the Holy Ghost. These are needed in every age and dispensation but certainly no less in the commotion-filled last days of the last dispensation. They are likewise needed at every stage and in every situation of life. After all, "The Holy Ghost . . . quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases, enlarges, expands, and purifies all the natural passions and affections, and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful use. It inspires, develops, cultivates and matures all the fine-toned sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings, and affections of our nature."2

No wonder we are instructed to "seek ye earnestly the best gifts"! (D&C 46:8). Everyone is given a gift, but we are not limited to just one (D&C 46:11). Moreover, Paul urges us, regarding that which lies latent, to "stir up the gift of God, which is in thee" (2 Timothy 1:6).

Yet, for different reasons, many of us live far below, or are unaware of, our privileges! "Because of their faith in me at the time of their conversion, [they] were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not" (3 Nephi 9:20).

If, as Nephi did, we liken to ourselves the scriptures pertaining to certain of those gifts, we can surely be further blessed (1 Nephi 19:23).

Let us begin with what is salvationally essential: baptisms by water and fire are both absolutely essential for our salvation.

"For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence" (Acts 1:5).

"And behold, whosoever believeth on my words, them will I visit with the manifestation of my Spirit; and they shall be born of me, even of water and of the Spirit" (D&C 5:16).

"Thou shalt declare repentance and faith on the Savior, and remission of sins by baptism, and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost" (D&C 19:31).

Likewise fundamental is the role of the Holy Ghost in the Godhead. He "witnesses of the Father and the Son," and He glorifies Christ (2 Nephi 31:18; John 16:14). Ever relevant, this glorification of our Savior is vital in the last days, when so many, as in meridian times, esteem Jesus as "naught" (1 Nephi 19:7).

This majestic meekness of the Holy Ghost in the midst of bestowing His mighty gifts also tells us something of His personality, for He gladly witnesses and glorifies. Therefore, at the center of the gifts of the Holy Ghost is His unique witnessing of Christ's atoning act, history's greatest emancipation:

"To some it is given by the Holy Ghost to know that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that he was crucified for the sins of the world" (D&C 46:13).

In today's world, too many admire Christ and His teachings but do not really know who He is and what He has really done. An illustration of the need for the witness of the Spirit about Jesus can exist close to home. Of Jesus and his family, we read, "For neither did his brethren believe him" (John 7:5).3 "Brethren" refers to family members, as in "his mother and his brethren" (Matthew 12:46). Of Jesus' four brothers, either James was not included in this reference or he later changed, because Paul speaks of "James the Lord's brother" as being one of the apostles (Galatians 1:19).

Jesus was not the only prophet to be without honor among some members of his family as well as in his own country (Matthew 13:57). One wonders in the absence of more divine data if the ordinariness and the day-to-day routineness kept certain loved ones from fully recognizing and believing Jesus? Clearly, some neighbors were not overly impressed: "Is not this the carpenter's son?" (Matthew 13:55). Perhaps even in less than messianic circumstances it takes special humility to recognize a prophetic or apostolic role within a family.

The specific roles of the Holy Ghost are matched by His specific capacities. For instance, only with divine deftness can He truly reach people in their varied cultural, attitudinal, and vocational niches, including those self-contented who are "rich, and increased with goods, [who] have need of nothing" (Revelation 3:17). He can, for example, reach the otherwise contented who are "friendly" one with another but who do not know about God (Mosiah 24:5). The Holy Ghost mentors still others who then become precious prospects "in a preparation to hear the word" (Alma 32:6).

The Holy Ghost will teach us, providing perspective about "things as they really are, and . . . things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13; D&C 39:6; 75:10). This sense of proportion is needed daily! Not only does He reach mortals in their many niches, but the Holy Spirit "searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God," and this must be so because the "things of the Spirit of God . . . are spiritually discerned" (1 Corinthians 2:10, 14). The Holy Spirit is thus ready, if we are, to take us well beyond being superficial so that we can learn the things of most worth.

The ways in which the Holy Ghost teaches are many. More than once President Marion G. Romney echoed the following: "I always know when I am speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost because I always learn something from what I've said."4

In such situations, the substance conveyed is significant, but so is our realization of what is happening!

The Holy Ghost will help us by transmitting our feelings, teachings, and testimonies to others even when, inadequate of ourselves, we cannot speak "the smallest part which [we] feel" (Alma 26:16). In so many of life's situations, do we not genuinely yearn to be able to connect, especially with those we love the most? Or with others who have played special roles in our lives?

Speaking at a conference, President Brigham Young noticed in the audience Brother Eleazer Miller, one largely lost to Church history. Of him, President Young declared:

"If all the talent, tact, wisdom and refinement of the world had been sent to me with the Book of Mormon, and had declared, in the most exalted of earthly eloquence, the truth of it, undertaking to prove it by learning, and worldly wisdom, they would have been to me like the smoke which arises only to vanish away. But when I saw a man without eloquence, or talents for public speaking, who could only say, 'I know, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that the Book of Mormon is true, that Joseph Smith is a prophet of the Lord,' the Holy Ghost proceeding from that individual illuminated my understanding, and light, glory, and immortality were before me. I was encircled by them, filled with them, and I knew for myself that the testimony of the man was true. There sits the man who baptized me, (brother Eleazer Miller)."5

This episode illustrates vividly this role of the Spirit: "Wherefore, he that preacheth and he that receiveth, understand one another, and both are edified and rejoice together" (D&C 50:22).

Thus, a future president of the Church was taught and touched, and he felt the Spirit like fire in his bones. Soon, Brother Young was sharing the fire. One week after his baptism, he gave his first sermon: "[After I was baptized] I wanted to thunder and roar out the Gospel to the nations. It burned in my bones like fire pent up, so I [commenced] to preach. . . . Nothing would satisfy me but to cry abroad in the world, what the Lord was doing in the latter days."6

Such supernal and personal moments are made possible by cultivating the Holy Ghost!

Another gift of the Holy Ghost, often less appreciated and less explored, is how He can bless us by guiding our very prayers. Have not all of us on occasion puzzled beforehand over how to frame our petitions? Hence, this candor and assurance:

"Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings [sighings] which cannot be uttered" (Romans 8:26).

How often we need this very help with our prayers, for although we know we should pray, we are not always certain as to that for which we should pray!

Additionally and expansively, the Holy Ghost will show us "all things what [we] should do," including both major and minor things (2 Nephi 32:5). This gift is so practical, for "we are of God. . . . Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error" (1 John 4:6). How often in life do we need help to detect the "spirit of error," which might otherwise carry the day, as well as to receive verification and direction? "And by the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things" (Moroni 10:5).

The Holy Ghost can give us such guidance: "The spirit of truth . . . will guide you in all truth" (John 16:13).

He can thus help us both in the defining moments as well as in what might be called life's gray zones of choices. Our decisions, after all, are not such contests as the choice between whether we will rob a bank or hold family home evening. At times we must choose among good options, "A1" and "A2." But we need help in order to attend to the "weightier matters" and do the things of "most worth" (Matthew 23:23; D&C 15:6; 16:4, 6; 2 Nephi 9:51).

The Holy Ghost will not only guide us as to the highest and best use of our time and talents but also help us to pace ourselves during the arduous journey of discipleship. King Benjamin gave us the "wisdom and order" test, and the Lord gave the "strength and means" test to Joseph and Oliver (Mosiah 4:27; D&C 10:4). We do need to know just how to pace and balance our discipleship in "wisdom and order."

The Holy Ghost will bring all things to our remembrance, especially the words of Jesus or about him (2 Nephi 32:3, 5; John 14:26; 15:26). This enhanced recall includes remembering to be true to our past, to our covenants, and to God, who has been proven "in days that are past"7 (John 14:26; 2 Peter 1:13; 3:1; 2 Thessalonians 2:5; Alma 5:6). These things past can give us the needed courage and heart for the present journey.

As we reflect on how the Holy Ghost preaches to us from the pulpit of memory, we consider Alma's case, wherein he remembered the words of his father about the Atonement: "My mind caught hold upon this thought" (Alma 36:18). Our minds, in order to grasp, thus require a residue of past counsel and shared thoughts upon which to catch hold!

Remembrance also includes stirring up the grateful memories of goodly parents:

"Behold, my sons, I desire that ye should remember to keep the commandments of God; and I would that ye should declare unto the people these words. Behold, I have given unto you the names of our first parents who came out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I have done that when you remember your names ye may remember them; and when ye remember them ye may remember their works; and when ye remember their works ye may know how that it is said, and also written, that they were good" (Helaman 5:6; 1 Nephi 1:1).

The bottom line, "that they were good," surpasses so many lesser compliments and conclusions about us from our posterity; these words about being remembered as "good" should spur us on. What we remember, as well as remembering itself, requires help.

The Holy Ghost is titled the Comforter, who "filleth with hope and perfect love" (Moroni 8:26). Consider how many mortals are living in deep despair, without knowing hope or real love.

Consider how many have sprouted and endured for a season and then stopped short. The Holy Ghost can be with us to the end. He will help us to endure, a precious gift yet to be appreciated by many of us (D&C 50:5).

How supernal this gift: "I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy" (D&C 11:13). How many, having become encrusted in routineness, are joyless? Truly, the gifts of the Holy Ghost are rich and relevant!

The Holy Ghost "persuadeth men to do good" (Ether 4:11). Diversion, exhaustion, and preoccupation cause so much goodness to go unexpressed by us, unfortunately at a time when so many "hands . . . hang down" (D&C 81:5). Is not such persuasion, when extra efforts by us are needed, one of the effective ways the Holy Ghost glorifies Christ? "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these . . . , ye have done it unto [Him]" (Matthew 25:40).

"God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power: who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him" (Acts 10:38). To accomplish so much of this good in the workaday world, the Holy Ghost's method is often to tell us in our minds and in our hearts (D&C 8:2). How careful we should be, therefore, that "[our] thoughts" are not far from Jesus (Alma 37:36).

President Boyd K. Packer has counseled us that often when we receive guidance from the Holy Ghost, we get directions without explanation. No wonder we are to strive to have the Holy Ghost as our "constant companion"! (D&C 121:46). When, because of our neglect, He leaves us, we are surely incomplete disciples because we then fail, for instance, to make decisions under the influence of the Spirit while at the same time growing by virtue of our own experience and with regard to our capacity to choose (D&C 122:7; 121:39; 105:10; Alma 5:14, 26; Romans 5:4; Genesis 30:27).

More than we do, we should realize how all worthy Church members can be guided in their various callings and roles. May we encourage others to seek that guidance. Once when President Brigham Young began to give counsel and instructions by letter concerning an urgent matter, he ceased, as it were, almost in mid-passage, and wrote instead:

"But after all, advice to you on the above points is probably useless, for you have the privilege of enjoying the same Spirit upon which we all depend for intelligence in the pres ent movements as in all other cases."8

Because the divine maxim is "nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself" (Moses 3:17), we are to learn to choose responsibly, yet in doing this we need help. We also need help regularly. The plan of salvation is designed to facilitate our learning to choose wisely when we opt for righteousness and eternal life instead of misery and death (2 Nephi 2:27).

In the early days of the Church, there were several petitions to the Lord to which He responded in a tutoring manner. On one occasion, the brethren needed a watercraft. The Lord responded that whether they made one or bought one, "it mattereth not to me" (D&C 61:22). It did matter to the Lord that some "take their journey speedily" (D&C 52:7).

In like manner, a question arose as to whether they should go by land or water. The Lord said they should do "according to their judgments" (D&C 61:22). A similar divine response was given to the question of whether some of the brethren should go in a group or two by two; they were told this was something for them to determine. On another occasion, as to the direction in which they should proceed, the Lord said whether it was east or west or north or south, it didn't matter; they could not go amiss, because so many opportunities awaited (D&C 80:3).

These incidents do not suggest any divine indifference whatsoever as to details. Rather, they illustrate how the mentoring of the Lord will surely guide us, but He expects us to use our own minds reliably and to develop them even further in our capacity to choose. Experience, therefore, can be a workhorse way of learning, as we develop our capacity to choose wisely under the influence of the Spirit.

"There are many things of much importance, on which you ask counsel, but which I think you will be perfectly able to decide upon, as you are more conversant with the peculiar circumstances than I am; and I feel great confidence in your united wisdom; therefore you will excuse me for not entering into detail. If I should see anything that is wrong, I would take the privilege of making known my mind to you, and pointing out the evil."9

Do we, therefore, need to worry about bothering the Lord? On the contrary, we are to pray over our flocks, crops, and fields (Alma 34:20, 24-25). We are to strive to have the Holy Ghost as our "constant companion" (D&C 121:46). Even so, given the timetable of the Lord, may we ask questions to which He will not yet respond? Yes! To a query concerning the time of the Second Coming, the Lord thus gave a partial answer and then said, "Let this suffice" (D&C 130:15). Martin Harris encountered a similar situation, from which we perceive a similar insight (D&C 5:29).

In addition to these scriptural examples, President Brigham Young spoke about the need to develop our "independency"not meaning, of course, to place any less reliance upon the Lord but to foster more simultaneous development of our divinely given gifts:

"Sometimes I think it quite strange that the children of men are so constituted as to need to be taught one lesson all the time, and again it is not so marvellous to me, when I reflect upon and understand their organization, and the designed effect thereupon of this state of probation. Men are organized to be independent in their sphere, are organized for an independent being, yet they have, as soldiers term it, to run the gauntlet all the time. They are organized to be just as independent as any being in eternity, but that independency, in order for them to occupy a position in the sphere of an independent being having control over all things, must be proved and tried while in this state of existence, must be operated upon by the good and the evil."10

The counsel of President Harold B. Lee is likewise relevant: we need to gain personal experience by walking to "the edge of the light."11

No wonder the scriptures include such words as "we have learned by sad experience" (D&C 121:39). Jacob's father-in-law said he had learned by good "experience" that he was wise if he hearkened to Jacob (Genesis 30:27). Hence, our experience can mentor us, especially if we are meek and under the direction of the Spirit. We can be persuaded, as were the Nephite stripling warriors by their experience of having strong and spiritual mothers on whose spiritual knowledge they had come to rely. A crisis produced the same reflex. These young warriors "[did] not doubt [their] mothers knew it," showing yet another way of drawing upon experience (Alma 56:48).

Righteous parents and families who are influenced by the Spirit can facilitate such mentoring. The general role families are to play is of considerable consequence. One observer wrote:

"We learn to cope with the people of this world because we learn to cope with the members of our family. Those who flee the family flee the world; bereft of the former's affection, tutelage, and challenges, they are unprepared for the latter's tests, judgments, and demands."12

When we think of nurturing families, understandably we usually think primarily of parents in whose homes the Spirit dwells. But children form a proactive part of the nurturing circle and are not merely the objects of the nurturing. One of their often unappreciated capacities is expressed in Alma:

"And now, he imparteth his word by angels unto men, yea, not only men but women also. Now this is not all; little children do have words given unto them many times, which confound the wise and the learned" (Alma 32:23).

An episode involving the resurrected Jesus with Nephite parents and their children illustrates this truth:

"And it came to pass that he did teach and minister unto the children of the multitude of whom hath been spoken, and he did loose their tongues, and they did speak unto their fathers great and marvelous things, even greater than he had revealed unto the people; and he loosed their tongues that they could utter" (3 Nephi 26:14).

Why should such an event surprise us, since we adults are to "become as little children" before we can "enter into the kingdom of heaven"? (Matthew 18:3).

If we are meek, then in order to guide us the Spirit can cut into what may seem on the surface a routine circumstance, one which we could normally handle ourselves. The Spirit could advise us that, perhaps unexpectedly, we need to be especially careful or to do this or to do that. When such a prompting happens, we should not be offended as to any implied lack in our own capacity but instead be grateful for the Holy Ghost's capacity.

After his martyrdom, the Prophet Joseph appeared to President Brigham Young and said of the Spirit:

"Tell the people to be humble and faithful, and be sure to keep the spirit of the Lord and it will lead them right. Be careful and not turn away the small still voice; it will teach you what to do and where to go; it will yield the fruits of the kingdom. Tell the brethren to keep their hearts open to conviction, so that when the Holy Ghost comes to them, their hearts will be ready to receive it. They can tell the Spirit of the Lord from all other spirits; it will whisper peace and joy to their souls; it will take malice, hatred, strife and all evil from their hearts; and their whole desire will be to do good, bring forth righteousness and build up the kingdom of God. Tell the brethren if they will follow the spirit of the Lord they will go right. Be sure to tell the people to keep the Spirit of the Lord; and if they will, they will find themselves just as they were organized by our Father in Heaven before they came into the world."13

How crucial, therefore, it is for us to cultivate the Spirit in our lives, including in preparation for our lives in the spirit world.

NOTES
