Neal A. Maxwell, The Promise of Discipleship (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2001)

CHAPTER 10

THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH

Having written and spoken extensively over the years, testifying to the remarkable ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith, I give this further testimony with a different emphasis, mixed with a few past reflections. These fresh words come in my sunset days as additional reflections have brought me an even deeper appreciation for Joseph. By their very nature, these are simple and summational observations without extensive elaboration.

First, often read but perhaps not considered sufficiently as to their implications for his ministry, are these words in Joseph Smith's report of the First Vision: "And many other things did [the Lord] say unto me, which I cannot write at this time" (Joseph Smith-History 1:20). Which, if any, of those "many other things" were shared later with the Church? We do not know with precision, for we have no specific, itemized inventory. It should be remembered, therefore, that whether it was in the sunrise, mid-day, or sunset of his ministry, the Prophet Joseph received more revelations than he shared fully. In Nauvoo, Joseph said confirmingly, "It is my meditation all the day, and more than my meat and drink, to know how I shall make the Saints of God comprehend the visions that roll like an overflowing surge before my mind."1 His concern for the Saints' comprehension was genuine even as the revelations were ongoing!

One can scarcely imagine facing such a unique challenge on top of everything else, especially given the huge harvest of the pangs and promises of discipleship during his ministry!

The Everest of ecclesiastical truth built from the translations and revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith speaks for itselfit towers above the mere foothills of mortal phi-losophy. At times, Joseph's phonetic spelling, characteristic of the time, may have left something to be desired, but he certainly provided us with the essential grammar of the gospel!

Joseph was open, generous, and anxious to share. Yet, he knew there were still some things he could not share. Or, if shared, they might be distorted, contributing perhaps in some situations to Joseph's being "marred" as prophesied (3 Nephi 21:10). Moreover, Joseph Smith Sr., in a father's blessing given in December 1834, told his prophet son that he would be marred "for a little season" but he would eventually triumph as "thousands and tens of thousands shall come to a knowledge of the truth through thy ministry, and Thou shalt rejoice with them in the Celestial Kingdom."2

To mar suggests trying to make the object less attractive, at least on the surface. Church members should not be surprised, therefore, if enemies seek to mar prophets and the Church itself, by attempting to render them less attractive and influential, thus causing some to discount the Lord's work and His servants. One of the early Twelve, Elder Orson Hyde, observed that the "shafts" intended for the Church "are always aimed at the head first."3

Being marred can be part of the experience of discipleship for many: "Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake" (Matthew 5:11). If we as members are likewise marred while doing the Lord's work, it will prove to be yet another dimension of sharing the fellowship of Christ's sufferings (Philippians 3:10).

Good but imperfect prophets are especially likely to be slandered. Nor are they immune from trials. In fact, of the responsibilities of priesthood leaders, the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "The higher the authority, the greater the difficulty of the station."4 President John Taylor further said, "God tries people according to the position they occupy."5

Near the end, the Prophet noted, "I never told you I was perfect; but there is no error in the revelations which I have taught."6 The Prophet Joseph, then and since, has been subjected to intense mortal scrutiny. Yet, as prophesied, many in the world ever continue to "inquire after [his] name" (D&C 122:1).

The Lord on occasion chastised the good but nevertheless imperfect prophet for falling short (D&C 5:21). The Lord was tutoringnot indulgentof Joseph, and Joseph recorded his own chastisement. He loved Joseph and called him, but God was also willing to correct him.

In the midst of his own allotted "these things," Joseph came only graduallyrather than instantly and fullyto appreciate all the intertwinings and all the implications of some of the deep doctrines which had come, almost surflike, through him, whether by translation or revelation (D&C 122:7). Why should anyone be surprised at the "precept by precept" process? (D&C 98:12).

How many times, for example, did Jesus tell the original apostles of the impending resurrection? (Mark 9:31-32; Luke 9:44-45; 18:33-34). Yet, only later, after experiences and events, did the doctrine dawn fully on the original Twelve:

"These things understood not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him" (John 12:16).

If, likewise, Jesus' parents did not fully comprehend at first what Jesus meant about his need to be about His Father's business (Luke 2:49-50), or the Twelve all of His declarations of His messiahship (John 8:25-27), or audiences His mention of "other sheep," the scattered fold (John 10:6)why should not Joseph be granted adequate time for the further unfolding of his own full understanding?

A second sunset reflection concerns a matter which merited more consideration by me and sooner. Joseph, though a "choice seer," was on stage, so to speak, all the time (2 Nephi 3:6-7, 11, 14; D&C 21:1). Any imperfections, real or seeming and however minor, were visible. Furthermore, the compressed time of his ministry, containing so many crises, often gave him little opportunity for adequate explanations of this or that. President Lorenzo Snow, meekly but instructively, said of the Prophet's imperfections:

"When I saw the weaknesses and imperfections in him I thanked God that He would put upon a man who had these imperfections the power and authority which he placed upon him . . . for I knew I myself had weakness and I thought there was a chance for me."7

Worldly critics, of course, apply secular screens. The natural man has his own frame of reference. Being nonspiritual, the natural man automatically attributes his own motives to others. Therefore, no allowance is made for things beyond the grasp of the natural mansomething, ironically, so natural!

Take, for instance, the classic and ancient intellectual position of many about how mortals cannot know the future and that which is to come. How, then, do such skeptics explain the remarkable 1832 prophecy by Joseph Smith concerning the impending civil war given years before it began? (D&C 87). Their response would likely be the same as that given by others in another time, that prophets had "guessed" correctly (Helaman 16:16).

Therefore, in judging someone like the Prophet Joseph Smith, the natural man will use his ready-made sociological and sensual explanations for everything. Or, even when some praise is meted out, it tends to acknowledge that Joseph was "charismatic" or that Brigham Young was "a great colonizer," and so on, which is in a way like being praised with faint damns. Thus, in judging the Restoration, for instance, no secular allowance is made for anything such as a "marvelous work and wonder" (2 Nephi 27:26).

Granted, those with spiritual frames of reference proceed in their own ways, too. Therefore, such different beginnings as between the natural man and the man of Christ result in sharply different conclusions. We should not be surprised that this is the case. Hence, it is nonsense for believers to try to squeeze and spin spiritual things to fit into or to appeal to the natural man, as if hoping somehow to appease, to please, or to accommodate the world. Paul saw the futility of doing this, noting that the "things of the Spirit of God . . . are foolishness" to the natural man (1 Corinthians 2:14).

Joseph Smith marched to a different and Divine Drummer!

Thus, those who try to drive wedges between the Prophet Joseph and his Lord, who called him, will only end up finally creating distance between themselves and the Lord! Those who revile Joseph Smith will not change Joseph's status with the Lordmerely their own! (2 Nephi 3:8).

A third reflection expresses further accumulated admir ation. Given all that he did in so few years, Joseph scarcely had time to savor all the revelations that came to him, let alone take time to set forth, dissertation-like, all their implications carefully prepared, in serial sermons and metered lectures. That would be left to his successors, who as seers and revelators would correlate and clarify. President Joseph F. Smith did such regarding the words of Peter, as we see in Doctrine and Covenants 138.

One example of the numberless truths we have received through the Prophet Joseph concerns Enoch and his city, about whom we would know precious little if it were not for the Restoration scriptures. The few verses and biographical lines in the Bible are about genealogy and longevity and provide very little spiritual substance and instruction.

Paul tells us that Enoch was translated (he walked with God, who took him; Genesis 5:24) and before that Enoch "had this testimony, that he pleased God" (Hebrews 11:5). These biblical contributions are appreciated! Nevertheless, they can scarcely be compared with the stretching and deep substance in Moses 6 and 7 and Doctrine and Covenants 107:48-57.8 Except for the Restoration, how would we know that not only was Enoch translated but so was the whole City of Enoch? This is the only known time in human history that a righteous people did not relapse.

Likewise, we learn through the Prophet Joseph Smith much more about the plurality of worlds"worlds without number"thereby advising us that Jesus is in effect the Lord of the Universe (Moses 1:33).

Among many others, either of these two examples (Enoch and the plurality of worlds) would have provided a sufficient field of specialized, spiritual scholarship to consume one for a whole lifetime. But the sheer abundance of such stunning truths in the Restoration by itself defied full delineation in the short time available to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Furthermore, my appreciation for the Prophet Joseph is added upon when I ponder how the God-given revelations and instructions given to the Church also applied to Joseph himself and to his discipleship. This is no small consideration. Joseph's mortal mix of all "these things" was such that while Joseph was befriended by heavenly notables, he was also betrayed by some of his earthly friends. His receiving keys and gifts was real, but for him and Emma so was the painful loss of six of their eleven children. Granted, Joseph had revealed to him glimpses of far horizonsthe first and the third estatesbut these periodic glories occurred amid his arduous daily life as he struggled in the second estate.

At the same time the Prophet Joseph Smith was growing himself, he was tutoring other Church leaders. The capacity of the Prophet to inspire other remarkable leadersstrong men, often older than he, men such as Brigham Young and John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, and so onis significant, especially when those men suffered because of their devotion to the work to which they were called by the Prophet Joseph Smith, to whom and to which they remained so devoted. The tuition they paid for their followership and later leadership was, indeed, very high! Yet, they paid it gladly and praised the Prophet evermore.

President John Taylor declared: "I testify before God, angels, and men, that he was a good, honorable, virtuous manthat his doctrines were good, scriptural, and wholesomethat his precepts were such as became a man of Godthat his private and public character was unimpeachableand that he lived and died as a man of God and a gentle man. This is my testimony."9

President Brigham Young bore witness: "Joseph Smith was not killed because he was deserving of it, nor because he was a wicked man; but because he was a virtuous man."10

President Young, for instance, also said, "I have been driven from my home five times; I have left my houses and lands and everything I had""and a good handsome property each time."11 Five times he built homes in which he scarcely lived before being forced to leave them. How many lesser followers would be too discouraged to carry on even after just one such episode? The costs of discipleship were real and relentless!

There are the special testimonies from those like Oliver Cowdery. Oliver was closely associated with the Prophet during so much of his ministry, including the translation of the Book of Mormon. Though disaffected for several years, Oliver Cowdery came back, as we know. On his deathbed, the following episode occurred:

"Just before he breathed his last he [Oliver] asked to be raised up in bed so he could talk to the family and friends and he told them to live according to the teachings in the Book of Mormon and they would meet him in heaven. Then he said lay me down and let me fall asleep in the arms of Jesus, and he fell asleep without a struggle."12

Amid a customized combination of deprivations, stresses, and strains came imprisoned Joseph's lamentation: "Oh God, . . . where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding place?" (D&C 121:1). It has a parallel in a persecuted and "in the stocks" Jeremiah (Jeremiah 20:2), who was deeply discouraged but nevertheless rallied:

"Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay" (Jeremiah 20:9).

These words also surely describe latter-day defectors who were once loyal to the Prophet Joseph. Hence, we should ever bear in mind that prophets do experience their own real challenges.

Paul experienced much "in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings" (2 Corinthians 6:5). Paul surely knew what it was to be beaten, to be "in perils by mine own country men . . . in the wilderness . . . among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness . . . in hunger . . . in cold" (2 Corinthians 11:24-28). During such times Paul, like Joseph Smith, had to attend to the overseership and "the care of all the churches" (2 Corinthians 11:28).

So it was that while Joseph received remarkable manifestations, along with these came constant vexations. True, there were periodic arrivals of heavenly messengers, but these were cruelly punctuated by the periodic arrivals of earthly mobs.

Joseph would have garnered many observations from his own experiences about human nature. No wonder, for instance, he spoke of how important it is for us to be long-suffering with each other.

Elder B. H. Roberts observed that a generous Prophet Joseph sometimes had "a too great tenacity in friendship for men he had once taken into his confidence after they had been proven unworthy of that friendship."13

Yet, no one was happier than Joseph when prodigals returned, voting with their feet by traveling on the road of repentance toward reconciliation.

This slowness to recognize betrayal may have occurred because Joseph was simply unaware or precisely because he was trying to practice the doctrine of long-suffering. In any case, these interpersonal considerations were pressing in on him simultaneously with pressing concerns about the need to build temples and to administer essential temple ordinances in behalf of our ancestorslest "the whole earth . . . be . . . wasted" (D&C 2:3; Malachi 4:6). But Joseph was also interested in doing what he could to ensure that an individual disciple's life was not "wasted." Such was the case of W. W. Phelps, whom the Prophet invited back into the Church so tenderly and lovingly:

"Dear Brother Phelps: . . . It is true, that we have suffered much in consequence of your behaviorthe cup of gall, already full enough for mortals to drink, was indeed filled to overflowing when you turned against us. One with whom we had oft taken sweet counsel together, and enjoyed many refreshing seasons from the Lord'had it been an enemy, we could have borne it' . . .

"However, the cup has been drunk, the will of our Father has been done, and we are yet alive, for which we thank the Lord. . . .

"Believing your confession to be real, and your repentance genuine, I shall be happy once again to give you the right hand of fellowship, and rejoice over the returning prodigal. . . .

"'Come on, dear brother, since the war is past,

"'For friends at first, are friends again at last.'

"Yours as ever, "Joseph Smith, Jun."14

Hence, the need for us, more than we do, to make allowance, as in the case of Brother Phelps, for all that was going on simultaneously (and almost all the time) in Joseph's life, including kingdom building, establishing settlements of gathering, and sending out missionaries. It was all so unrelenting, including giving needed encouragement to fellow disciples and dictating and translating and contemplating what could be shared from the many revelations. There were no sabbaticals for Joseph, and even the reveries were short-lived.

Joseph's unusual capacity to be of good cheer in the midst of all "these things" is all the more commendable! This quality was special in view of the Lord's warning and confirming imagery: "Thine enemies prowl around thee" (D&C 122:6). The "very jaws of hell" seemed to gape at him (D&C 122:7). Does hell have its own halitosis? Joseph could tell us!

Noteworthy is the counsel of the Lord given at one of Joseph's lowest points (D&C 122). There was, after all, what the Lord Himself experiencedand incomparably. Hence, the query, "Art thou greater than He?" (D&C 122:8).

And there also was Job!

Having pled, Joseph never complained again.

Joseph's unusual resilience and his being of good cheer permitted him a special perspective, one buoyant and full of faith: "And as for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life. . . . It has all become a second nature to me; . . . I shall triumph over all my enemies, for the Lord God hath spoken it" (D&C 127:2).

The Prophet Joseph's life was, therefore, anything but detached and monastic. He was both building a family and building a kingdom. He was growing himself while striving to help others do likewise, and, moreover, it was a portable process because of persecutions and drivings.

Amid considerations of personal safety, he was a father, husband, civic leader, translator, and Church leader of Zion's Camp and ensuing march. He was required to be a man of action and, at the same time, a man of contemplation. We can scarcely comprehend it!

No wonder he was wistful at times about how crowded his life was. Near the end of his eventful and revelation-filled ministry, Joseph seemed to realize how difficult it might be for others to understand him and his worth fully. "I don't blame any one for not believing my history. If I had not experienced what I have, I would not have believed it myself."15

Once the Prophet Joseph hoped aloud that he might so live amid his own heavy suffering that one day he could take his place among Abraham and the "ancients," hoping to "hold an even weight in the balances with them."16 Joseph so triumphed, which is why we rightly sing of his being "crowned in the midst of the prophets of old."17

At the same time, he was mentoring the Twelve and needed them so much at his side. Yet, Joseph made a strategic decision to send a majority of the Twelve to England. They were needed to begin the harvest there, one upon which, as it turned out, the Church depended so much and so soon.

With difficulties and afflictions ever close at his heels, including real efforts to steal the plates, Joseph always made it to the top of the next ridge in pursuit of the Lord's agenda for the restored Church!

We do not know the precise schedule of his translation of particular portions of the Book of Mormon, but during some of those early days, the "choice seer," using "the gift and power of God" (2 Nephi 3:6; Omni 1:20), was translating, unawares, ancient Hebraisms, especially in the forepart of the Book of Mormon, or King Benjamin's great sermon, or the marvelous addition to the doctrine of the Atonement found in Alma 7:11-12. He translated these transcending truths and portions of the Bible but in the midst of a staccato of circumstances, including betrayals, mobs, and mockery.

Likewise, Joseph would have noted the first signs of potential problems in such men as Sidney Rigdon, who "exalted himself in his heart" (D&C 63:55; 93:44). Yet, Joseph did not censure prematurely for what had yet to happen. Thus, the constant challenge he faced to achieve balance between administering and ministering.

The book of Moses, with the marvelous passages about Enoch and the City of Enoch, came in June 1830 to February 1831. In that intermittent but tremendous effort, Joseph was also being introduced to the plurality of worlds"millions of earths like this" (Moses 7:30). Also revealed to Joseph was Enoch's great, personalized acclamation to God, "Yet thou art there," as Enoch saw the God of heaven weep (Moses 7:28).

We can scarcely imagineat this historical distance and as comfortable consumers of those revelationsthe impact they would have had on Joseph as he received them in the midst of hurry and harassment.

To appreciate the Restoration even more fully, a fourth matter should be pondered: the context in which the Lord rolled it all forth, including its prophet.

It wouldn't have done much good to translate the Book of Mormon before there were printing presses and, more than that, before a printing capacity existed that extended to such locations as the Grandin Press in the obscure little town of Palmyra. How would the Book of Mormon have otherwise spread through the earth without such capacity now taken for granted? Computers and the Internet were a century and a half away!

The Restoration also very much required sufficient religious and political freedom in which the Lord's "strange act" could be brought forth (D&C 95:4). Obviously, the unique American Constitution was framed by those whom the Lord had "raised up" (D&C 101:80). Even in the American context, the Restoration was a close thing, with persecution, martyrdom, and the Saints being driven several times. But where else could the Restoration have occurred as safely, when, though in a favored nation, persecution and mobs would threaten to destroy or evict the restored Church? Hence, this promised land needed to be big enough in the face of mounting persecution to provide for escape and exodus. Such happened when the Saints moved to the western mountains and thereby became, as prophesied, "a mighty people"for Joseph had declared, as Anson Call remembered, "Some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains."18

The Saints' being driven regionally from time to time was grim enough, but it would have been even more so to have them hopelessly and finally cornered elsewhere! Hence, the importance of America's rugged but nevertheless accommodating western frontier.

Furthermore, given the earlier hemisphere history of the people who produced sacred plates, translated, and buried them, clearly, the Western Hemisphere needed to be the place of finding.

Think, too, of how the language of reformed Egyptian required a rich receiving language such as English, with its variety and nuances. What was on the golden plates flowed best into a golden language! Feasting on the gospel is greatly facilitated by its "enough and to spare" abundance (D&C 104:17).

Likewise, because the gospel in the last dispensation would be spread from this place to all the world, a nation with sufficient opportunities and economic strength was needed to host such a restored kingdom. In the rhythm of the Restoration, the gospel was to go first to the rich and then to the poor, and the Lord would finally "hasten" his work in its time (D&C 88:73). America, with all its imperfections, has served and now serves well as that stable host nation.

The few foregoing examples remind us that not only does the Lord see the end from the beginning but He also sees the middle. The emerging of His kingdom required certain conditions required for that restoration to succeed. Indeed, the Lord had prepared a place, a time, and a season. He also prepared the Prophet, through whom all the "marvelous work and a wonder" would unfoldeven amid so many challenges and difficulties (2 Nephi 25:17).

Viewed from my sunset days, the foothills of lesser things which were part of the Restoration merge into the vaulting doctrinal peaks. The colors and hues actually seem to sharpen. The composite silhouette stands out in bold relief, giving the latter-day disciple a striking but subduing sense of the breathtaking range of the glorious Restoration. Even more spectacular in my sunset days, that range has evoked the testimony of Christ that I hope resonates throughout the foregoing pages.

NOTES
