“On this wonderful Easter morning, as the servants of the Almighty, as prophets and apostles in His great cause, we lift our voices in witness and testimony of our immortal Savior,” said President Gordon B. Hinckley at the Sunday morning session of general conference as he bore testimony of the life, ministry, and Atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ.

“He came to earth as the Son of the Everlasting Father. … He is our triumphant Lord. He is our Redeemer, who atoned for our sins. Through His redeeming sacrifice all men shall rise from the grave. He has opened the way whereby we may gain not only immortality but also eternal life.

“As an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, I bear witness and testimony of these things this Easter day. I speak in solemnity and reverence and gratitude.”

At the opening of the conference, President Hinckley greeted Church members: “We gather together again as a great family, more than 10 million strong. … We are a happy and blessed people, working to build the cause and kingdom of God on earth. Regardless of race or nationality, whether we be poor or rich, old or young, we meet to share our common testimony of the Lord, in whose name we worship.

“I am pleased to report that the Church is in good condition,” said President Hinckley, who reported that “we now have approximately 60,000 missionaries” and that in July “there will be 333 missions. … Additionally, there are 137,629 volunteers and missionaries in nonproselyting activities.”

President Hinckley also said: “Our family history work goes forward with increasing momentum”; “we are constructing temples on a scale never before dreamed of”; “we are constructing chapels in large numbers to accommodate the needs of our people”; and “in many areas of the Church, sacrament meeting attendance is up and the level of activity is increasing.”

At the close of the Sunday afternoon session, President Hinckley gave a joyous announcement: “I feel impressed to announce that among all of the temples we are constructing, we plan to rebuild the Nauvoo Temple. … It will be a while before it happens, but the architects have begun their work. … The new building will stand as a memorial to those who built the first such structure there on the banks of the Mississippi.”

Conducting the two days of conference sessions were President Hinckley, with President Thomas S. Monson and President James E. Faust, respectively First and Second Counselors in the First Presidency.

The sustaining of six new members to the Second Quorum of the Seventy and three new Area Authority Seventies was part of Saturday afternoon’s general session (see page 23 and page 125).

Church units that are not able to receive conference via televised transmission may request videocassettes of general conference through local stakes and districts.—The Editors
