President Gordon B. Hinckley: [The priesthood] is the authority of God in the earth. It comes from Him as a divine bestowal. It carries with it the power and the authority to govern in the affairs of the Church. It carries with it the power and the authority to bless in the name of the Lord, to lay hands upon the sick and call down the powers of heaven. It is sacred and holy.

President Thomas S. Monson, First Counselor in the First Presidency: If you want to give a light to others, you have to glow yourself. … May our light so shine that we glorify our Heavenly Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, whose name is the only name under heaven whereby we might be saved.

President James E. Faust, Second Counselor in the First Presidency: Obedience brings peace in decision making. If we have firmly made up our minds to follow the commandments, we will not have to redecide which path to take when temptation comes our way.

Elder Dallin H. Oaks of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: The scriptures state that “in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established” (2 Corinthians 13:1; D&C 6:28; see also Deuteronomy 19:15). The most important ordinances of salvation—baptism, marriage, and other ordinances of the temple—are required to have witnesses (see D&C 127:6; 128:3).

Elder M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: A word to you children: Never be disrespectful to your parents. You must also learn to listen, especially to the counsel of your mom and dad and to the promptings of the Spirit.

Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: The Savior, who set the pattern for us, is pleased with those who “remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted” (D&C 52:40). He is pleased with those who … “succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees” (D&C 81:5).

Elder Henry B. Eyring of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles: The word of God is the doctrine taught by Jesus Christ and by His prophets. Alma knew that words of doctrine had great power. They can open the minds of people to see spiritual things not visible to the natural eye. And they can open the heart to feelings of the love of God and a love for truth.

Elder Cree-L Kofford of the Seventy: What I need you to do, young people, is this. If you hear anyone in your family start to say something bad about someone else, will you please just … say in a loud voice, “If you can’t say somethin’ nice, don’t say nothin’ at all.” … Everyone will understand exactly what you mean.

Elder Stephen A. West of the Seventy: [While on earth] the Savior gave a touch here, a kind word there, food (both real and spiritual) to the hungry, advice and counsel to those in need. He gave prayers with the frightened, kindness to the passed-over, respect and affection for the children, loving care for those who are burdened. “And thus we see that by small means the Lord can bring about great things” (1 Nephi 16:29). “Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great” (D&C 64:33).

Elder Robert J. Whetten of the Seventy: The Savior wants us to love others as He loves them—more unconditionally, more purely, more perfectly.

Sheri L. Dew, Second Counselor in the Relief Society General Presidency: Is it possible to be happy when life is hard? … Yes. The answer is yes because of Jesus Christ, whose Atonement ensures that we need not bear the burdens of mortality alone.

Carol B. Thomas, First Counselor in the Young Women General Presidency: My first memory of temples was when I was a little girl. I knew the temple must be a pretty wonderful place because my parents faithfully attended, and they always came home together in such a good mood. I understood the sacred nature of the temple clothing by the way my mother spoke about it with love and respect.
