Thus far into the bowels of the land Have we marched on without impediment.

—Shakespeare.

When the Mormons came from Nauvoo to Salt Lake they brought with them to this wilderness in the Rocky Mountains, the love of the drama, and as a consequence it was not long, only a few years from 1847 to 1850, before they began to long for something in the way of a theatre.

The pleasant recollections of the drama as interpreted at Nauvoo by Mr. Lyne and his supporting cast, were still fresh in their memories, and almost before many of them had comfortable houses to live in they began to yearn for some dramatic amusement. As a result of this strong inclination for the play and a still more universal desire for dancing, it was but a short time before their wishes materialized.

As early as the fall of 1850 they had formed a club called the Musical and Dramatic Association. The name was a comprehensive one, intentionally so, for the organization included the celebrated "Nauvoo Brass Band," a number of whose members also figured in the dramatic company. Indeed it was from this musical organization that the dramatic company really sprang.

The members of this original dramatic company were John Kay, Hyrum B. Clawson, Philip Margetts, Horace K. Whitney, Robert Campbell, R. T. Burton, George B. Grant, Edmond Ellsworth, Henry Margetts, Edward Martin, William Cutler, William Clayton, Miss Drum, Miss Margaret Judd, and Miss Mary Badlam. Miss Badlam, in addition to playing parts, was very popular as a dancer and gave her dancing specialties between the acts, making something like our up-to-date continuous performance.

The first public dramatic performances were given in the "Bowery" (a very reminiscent name for a New York theatre goer of that day). "The Bowery" in this case was a summer place of worship which stood on the Temple Block near where the big Tabernacle now stands. In this place of worship as early as the year 1850, with the aid of a little home-made scenery and a little crude furniture, were the first plays presented to a Salt Lake audience.

The first bill consisted of the old serio-comic drama, "Robert Macaire, or the Two Murderers," dancing by Miss Badlam, and the farce of the "Dead Shot."

Judging by their titles, these plays were rather a gruesome selection to play in a church. As it is a matter of historic interest the cast so far as procurable is appended of "Robert Macaire:"

Robert Macaire …………………………… John Kay Jacque Stropp ……………………….. H. B. Clawson Pierre ……………………………. Philip Margetts Waiter ……………………………. Robert Campbell Clementina ………………………….. Margaret Judd Celeste ………………………………… Miss Orum

Several other plays were given during this first dramatic season and were creditably performed, affording pleasure both to the audiences and actors; the only remuneration the actors received, by the way, for it must be remarked that these first dramatic efforts were entirely voluntary on the part of the company.

The orchestra which played in connection with this first dramatic company deserves to be made a matter of record quite as much as the company itself, for it was also drawn from the ranks of the historic "Nauvoo Brass Band."

William Pitt, the captain of the band, was the leader of the orchestra. He could "play the fiddle like an angel," handling the bow with his left hand at that. The associate players of Captain Pitt were William Clayton, James Smithers, Jacob Hutchinson, David Smith, and George Warde. The Musical and Dramatic Association played in the Bowery occasionally from 1850 to 1852.

The first amusement hall built in Salt Lake, which was used chiefly for dancing, was erected at the Warm Springs in the year 1850. It was a good sized adobe building and served as a social hall until 1852, when the Social Hall proper was completed. It was built at this out of the way place so as to combine the use of the Warm Springs for bathing with the social meetings held there. But it proved to be too difficult to get to, when the nights were dark and the roads were bad, so Brigham Young had the Social Hall built which was quite central and the Warm Springs music hall was converted into a roadside tavern and was run by Jesse C. Little for a time.

The first string band to furnish music for dances played at this hall and was composed of Hopkins C. (familiarly known as "Hop") Fender, Jesse Earl and Jake Hutchinson. These gentlemen deserve to be remembered in the musical history of Salt Lake City as the first to furnish the inspiring strains to which the worthy pioneers danced.

In the fall of 1852, the Musical and Dramatic Association was reorganized and renamed the "Deseret Dramatic Association." In this year the historic Social Hall was erected, and with a view to opening it with becoming brilliancy the original company was greatly added to, for the drama had become a popular amusement with the Saints, and many of the chiefs of the church, including President Young, held honorary membership in the "D. D. A."

The Social Hall, which is still standing and in well preserved condition, is one of the old landmarks that are fast disappearing. It is a comparatively small structure about 40x80 feet. It was considered in its time a fine amusement hall but has long since become dwarfed by the greater buildings which have gone up around it. It has a stage twenty feet deep, two dressing rooms under the stage, an ample basement under the hall for banqueting purposes. This auditorium is about 40x60 feet with a level floor for dancing for the amusement of the play and dancing were fairly and considerately alternated by the managers of the D. D. A.

In the early winter of 1852 this hall was opened with a dance to which the elect were invited, and it was a great crush. The first social gathering in the new hall formed a sort of punctuation mark in the social caste among the Saints.

Of course, the hall being small, the invitations had to be limited and many there were who felt slighted because they were not among the invited. Envy on the one hand and a supercilious superiority on the other gave birth to a feeling of caste which was altogether in bad taste among professing Saints.

The great event of this season in the amusement line was the dramatic opening. Local artists had been employed for some time and had stocked the stage with excellent scenery. Bulwer's classic play "The Lady of Lyons" was selected for the opening bill. The company had been so strengthened that the members could cast any of the great plays. To the original company had been added besides a long list of honorary members, the following named active male members: James Ferguson, Bernard Snow, David Candland (stage manager), John T. Caine, David McKenzie, Joseph Simons and Henry Maiben; to the female contingent had been added Mrs. Cyrus Wheelock, Mrs. Henry Tuckett, Mrs. Joseph Bull, Mrs. John Hyde, Mrs. Sarah Cook. It will be observed that they were all married women. This is a very noticeable feature, as it is so unusual in a dramatic company nowadays, either amateur or professional. The explanation of it, however, is simple enough. At that time there were few if any unmarried women in Utah that had arrived at the marriageable age. The only three women whose names appear in the original company were unmarried, Miss Judd, Miss Orum and Miss Badlam, which seems exceptional and they now seem to have all disappeared, or they are overshadowed by the married women, or perhaps they appear in the reorganized company under a new name with Mrs. attached.

The Social Hall theatrical opening was an event in the history of Utah. It may be truly said that it marked an epoch in the development of civilization in the Rocky Mountain region and the growth of the drama in the far West. Even San Francisco had not up to this time made any such ambitious attempt in the dramatic line.

I have not been able to procure a program of this opening performance but the cast of the principal characters was as follows:

Claud Melnotte ……………………… James Ferguson Monsieur Beauseant ………………….. David Candland Monsieur Glavis ……………………… John T. Caine Col. Damas …………………… John D. T. McAllister Mons. Deschapples ………………… Horace K. Whitney Landlord ………………………….. Philip Margetts Pauline Deschapples ………………….. Mrs. Wheelock Madame Deschapples ………………. Mrs. M. G. Clawson Widow Melnotte …………………….. Mrs. Sarah Cook

The play was a pronounced success and the players covered themselves with glory. A number of plays were now put on in rapid succession, for the D. D. A. had caught the true dramatic fire, and the people were hungry for the play. In the great plays, a number of which were essayed, the characters were strongly filled.

Bernard Snow, who had played with the elder Booth in California, which gave him a brief professional experience, was easily in the lead of all the Mormon actors. He played an Othello that would have done credit to Shakespeare anywhere, while Ferguson as Iago was scarcely less convincing. In "Damon and Pythias" also these players shone with more than ordinary brilliancy. Snow's Damon was pronounced a work of art, while Ferguson looked and acted Pythias to the admiration of all who witnessed it. Mrs. Wheelock as Calanthe and Mrs. Tuckett as Hermion made up a quartet of players that would have graced any stage in the country.

"Virginius" was also played here with Snow in the title role, a favorite with him. When Lyne came ten years later and played these same characters in the Salt Lake Theatre, many of the old frequenters of the Social Hall ranked Bernard Snow as Lyne's equal and they had to be brought to play together in the Salt Lake Theatre to gratify the many admirers of both.

"Pizarro" was the play chosen for this event and it served to pack the theatre. Lyne appeared as Pizarro for the occasion although Rolla was his favorite part. This gave Snow the advantage as Rolla is the star part. It proved a great hit both financially and artistically.

The Social Hall orchestra was a feature at all the dramatic performances, and came in for its due share of praise and admiration. It was under the direction of Domenico Ballo, who had formerly been a band master at West Point. He was a fine composer and arranger, and one of the best clarinet players ever heard. Professor Ballo was a graduate of the Conservatory of Music at Milan. He served several years as band master at West Point. He drifted into Utah at an early day and cast his lot with the Mormons. He organized a fine brass band here and built a fine dance hall which was known as "Ballo's Music Hall."

Salt Lake City has from a very early period in its history enjoyed an enviable reputation in a musical way. Its first musical organization as already mentioned was the Nauvoo Brass Band, organized originally in Nauvoo in connection with the Mormon militia known as the "Nauvoo Legion," of which Joseph Smith held the distinguished office of Lieutenant General. The exodus from Nauvoo and the formation soon afterwards of the "Mormon Battalion" demoralized to a great degree both the legion and the band. Both organizations, however, were reconstructed soon after the settlement of Utah, and each played a conspicuous part in its early history.

At the laying of the corner stone of the Salt Lake Temple as early as 1853, the Nauvoo Brass Band and Ballo's Brass Band were consolidated for this occasion and increased to sixty-five players under the leadership of Professor Ballo, who gave the people of Salt Lake a musical treat that would have been a credit to any metropolitan city. Ballo was a thorough and accomplished musician and his masterly work at such an early period had much to do with developing Salt Lake's musical talent.

From 1852 to 1857 the Social Hall continued to be the principal place of amusement for the people of Salt Lake City, as well as those who came in from various parts of the Territory. Those living at a distance and visiting the city either on business or pleasure (which were generally combined) deemed themselves extremely fortunate if there chanced to be a play "on the boards" during their brief sojourn in the city.

The fame of the Social Hall and its talented company of players, dramatic and musical, had spread abroad in the land and many of the smaller towns began to emulate Salt Lake City and organized dramatic clubs.

In the year 1857 amusements as well as business of all kinds received a sudden and severe shock from which it took a year or more to recover. In this year a rupture occurred between the Mormon chiefs and the United States Judges, which resulted in President Buchanan sending Albert Sidney Johnson to Utah with an army to crush the incipient rebellion. The heroes of the Social Hall stage now were cast to play more serious parts. The stage was now to be the tented field, their music, the roll of the drum and the ear-piercing fife.

"Jim" Ferguson, one of the leading actors, was Adjutant General of the "Nauvoo Legion," as the Territorial militia was called, and all the other stage heroes were enrolled under its banners. The "Legion" was sent out into the mountains to check the advance of the invading army. Not only did all amusement and business generally come to a sudden stop, but so serious was the situation that a general exodus of the people to the south was ordered by the church authorities and Salt Lake City was abandoned.

Meeting houses, theatre, stores and nearly all the dwellings in the city were vacated, and the intention was to burn the city rather than this "hell born" army should occupy and pollute it.

No occasion for carrying into effect this insane resolution transpired, for which the people have ever since been thankful. Soon after its adoption a better understanding was reached between the refractory Saints and Uncle Sam's government, and the people gradually came back to their homes in the city, glad indeed that the sacrificial torch had not been applied to them.

"The invading army" had passed peacefully through the city and made its encampment forty miles away. Things began to resume their normal condition, but the winter of 1857-8 was a blank in the Mormon amusement field.
