The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the September 2008 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Heavenly Father, Are You Really There?” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Prior to sharing time, make wordstrips of the different words that children use to say thank-you that are found in “Children All Over the World” (Children’s Songbook, 16–17). Be familiar with the song, and be prepared to use it throughout sharing time to teach about prayer.

    Show Gospel Art Picture Kit 600 (The World). Sing this phrase to the children, and let them guess the missing word: “All over the world at the end of day, Heav’nly Father’s children kneel down and ______.” Write the word pray on the chalkboard.

    Show wordstrips of the different ways children say thank-you all over the world. Repeat the words a few times. Sing that section of the song several times so the children are familiar with the words. Write the phrase We thank Thee on the chalkboard.

    Sing the song beginning with the phrase “Our Heavenly Father hears them.” Ask the children to listen for what Heavenly Father does (hears, understands, knows, loves). Write the words describing what He does on the chalkboard.

    Place these pictures on the chalkboard with the scripture references written under each picture: Gospel Art Picture Kit 107 (Moses and the Burning Bush)—Exodus 3:4; Gospel Art Picture Kit 120 (Enoch and His People Are Taken Up to God)—Moses 6:27; Gospel Art Picture Kit 111 (Boy Samuel Called by the Lord)—1 Samuel 3:10; Gospel Art Picture Kit 303 (Nephi Subdues His Rebellious Brothers)—1 Nephi 2:19; Gospel Art Picture Kit 403 (The First Vision)—Joseph Smith—History 1:17; Primary 5 picture packet, 5-38—D&C 11:23. Ask for volunteers to read each scripture. Teach the children that Heavenly Father knows each of His children by name.

    For each child, provide a copy of the activity found on page F4. Allow time for the children to color the picture.

    From “Children All Over the World,” sing the phrase “Saying thank you, thank you in his own special way.” Read the scripture from Alma found on page F4, and talk about saying thank-you for all the blessings we receive. Sing the entire song, and bear testimony that Heavenly Father answers prayers with blessings that we need.

2.  Write on the chalkboard President Boyd K. Packer’s quote from Primary 7, lesson 11, enrichment activity 4. Explain to the children that if they listen carefully during sharing time, they will be able to fill in the missing words.

    Prepare three learning stations where the children are taught that prayers are answered through the Holy Ghost, the scriptures, and other inspired ways (see “Stations,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 179). Use music to signal when it is time to move to a new station. Some suggested songs are “Listen, Listen” (Children’s Songbook, 107), “Search, Ponder, and Pray” (Children’s Songbook, 109), “Love Is Spoken Here” (Children’s Songbook, 190–91), “Follow the Prophet” (Children’s Songbook, 110–11), and “Scripture Power” (2006 Outline for Sharing Time and the Children’s Sacrament Meeting Presentation).

    At the conclusion of the learning stations, gather the children and complete the missing-word activity on the chalkboard. Bear testimony that prayers are answered through the Holy Ghost, the scriptures, and other inspired ways.
