In an Instagram post, Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles shared some of the impressions he had while at a leadership conference at the newly acquired Kirtland Temple. He posted:

“I testify that we can rely on Jesus Christ. He is faithful. The Lord also relies on each of us in our daily efforts to strengthen and build the kingdom of God. …

“Heavenly Father is always there for us, and His influence and help are always available. Jesus Christ, the Savior, is on our side. He invites us to come unto Him. As He did with the Saints in Kirtland, He will help us to live a joyful life even under challenging circumstances today.”

At a Brigham Young University–Idaho devotional, Elder Gerrit W. Gong of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles applied the lyrics of “Consider the Lilies” to our lives in a cluttered world. He taught the importance of trusting the Lord in times of uncertainty and how we can trust the plan that our Heavenly Father has for us.

He said: “No one knows everything, but trust the Lord and what you do know. If there is something you don’t know, stay anchored in Jesus Christ, the scriptures, the teachings of the prophets and apostles. The Holy Ghost will help you, as I know He has in the past.”

In a podcast with the Church News, President Camille N. Johnson, Relief Society General President, taught that as we serve others, we come to know our Savior in a uniquely personal way. “As I seek to exemplify Him,” she said, “I feel the love of my Savior and my Heavenly Father.”

She said the role of Relief Society is, “since 1842, to bring the relief of Jesus Christ, both temporal and spiritual, to our sisters and brothers around the world. … It’s not just about filling bellies; it’s about filling hearts and people feeling the love of our Savior.”

This was the theme of the worldwide Relief Society devotional held on Sunday, March 17. Messages were given by President Russell M. Nelson and the Relief Society General Presidency. To watch the broadcast, visit ChurchofJesusChrist.org/broadcasts.

In a Facebook post, Sister Tracy Y. Browning, Second Counselor in the Primary General Presidency, shared 3 Nephi 18:24, in which the Savior teaches: “Hold up your light that it may shine unto the world. Behold I am the light which ye shall hold up—that which ye have seen me do.”

Sister Browning explained that the people in our lives need the light we can share. She wrote: “Your covenant-keeping life builds reservoirs of light within you that is perceptible to others as they interact with you and come to know about your relationship with Jesus Christ. Sharing your light is effectively shining a light on the Savior of the world.”
