Being part of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has been one of the major blessings of my life, if not the principal one.

I was born in to the church and, as a kid, it has always been normal for me to be faithful to the commandments of the Lord and the teachings of the prophets. However, when a kid starts growing up, he realises that everything is not as great and beautiful as he thought. Some of his friends and family members start making bad choices in their lives, deciding not to follow the church principles anymore, and this fact can be shocking for him. This is something that happens very often, and it is hard for a kid to stay firm to their beliefs and not get carried away from the example of these people.

I was once that kid and even though it was hard for me to understand why these close people were leaving the church, I learned that the purpose of coming to earth was none other than to be proved so that we can get back to the presence of God after this life. I understood this better when I read in the scriptures where it says that “the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself” since there is “opposition in all things”, the good and the bad (2 Nephi 2:11, 16).

This Chapter not only made me reflect and understand why hard things were happening, but it also encouraged me to become closer to God. By reading verses 28-30, I understood that Heavenly Father does not want to restrict us with His commandments, but He wants to protect us. I know that He always wants the best for us, and He is always there with what we need if we seek Him.

I have been blessed many times in different ways (financially, with my studies, health, and so forth) by being a true disciple of Christ and not following the people who try to take me away from the Church. I know that everyone can be blessed just as I have, and I know that He will continue blessing me if I keep being faithful to Him.

I want to testify of the love that the Lord has for us, and that if we are willing to obey what He asks us to do, we will receive so much more back.
