Alfred Edersheim, Old Testament Bible History ( 1887)

CHAPTER 6

The Reproof and Prophecy of Jehu—Resumption of the Reformation in Judah—Institution of Judges and of a Supreme Court in Jerusalem—Incursion of the Moabites and their Confederates—National Fast and the Prayer of the King—Prophecy of Victory—The March to Tekoa—Destruction of the Enemy—The Valley of Berakhah—Return to Jerusalem and to the Temple (2 Chron. 19; 20:1-34)

BEFORE CONTINUING THE HISTORY OF ISRAEL, WE TURN ASIDE TO COMPLETE THAT OF Jehoshaphat, king of Judah. It will be remembered [^1] that he had succeeded his father Asa in the fourth year of King Ahab's reign. At that time Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old; and as his reign lasted for twenty-five years (1 Kings 22:42; 2 Chron. 20:31), it follows that he died at the age of sixty, which, when we consider the annals of the royal houses of Judah and Israel, must be considered a protracted life. A few other particulars are given us connected with Jehoshaphat's accession. Thus we learn that his mother's name was Azubhan, [^2] the daughter of Shilchi. Again, we gather how energetically he took in hand at the beginning of his reign the religious reformation commenced by his father Asa. [^3] But the want of true sympathy on the part of his subjects prevented the full success of his measures. The idol-groves and heights, dedicated to Baal and Astarte, were indeed destroyed (2 Chron. 17:6), but it was found impossible to abolish the corrupt worship of Jehovah celebrated on "the high places" (1 Kings 22:43; 2 Chron. 20:33). Beyond these brief notices, the narrative in the Book of Kings only indicates that at that period there was no king in Edom, but that the country was ruled by a governor. This is manifestly stated in order to explain how the maritime expedition to Ophir could have been undertaken without provoking resistance on the part of Edom, in whose territory Ezion-Geber was situated. But the sacred text affords no information to account for this state of matters in Edom. [^4]

The scanty details about the reign of Jehoshaphat furnished in the Book of Kings—which deals mainly with the history of the northern kingdom—are supplemented in the Book of Chronicles. The compilers of the latter had evidently before them, amongst other sources of information, a prophetic history of that reign: "The Chronicles [or, the words] of Jehu, the son of Hanani, which are inserted in the book of the Kings of Israel" [^5] (2 Chron. 20:34, comp. 1 Kings 22:45). It was this Jehu, who, on the return of Jehoshaphat from the expedition against Ramoth-Gilead, announced to the king the Divine displeasure. Better than any other would he be acquainted with the spiritual declension in the northern kingdom, since it was he who had been sent to pronounce on Baasha, king of Israel, the judgment that should overtake him and his people for their apostacy (1 Kings 16:1, etc.). And who so fit to speak fearlessly to Jehoshaphat as the son of him who had formerly suffered imprisonment at the hands of Asa, the father of Jehoshaphat, for faithfully delivering his commission from God (2 Chron. 16:7-10)? The message which he now brought was intended to point out the incongruity of Jehoshaphat's alliance with Ahab. The punishment which the prophet announced as its sequence, came when the king experienced the effects of that other unholy alliance, in which Ammon and Moab combined against Judah (2 Chron. 20). Again had Jehoshaphat to learn in the destruction of his fleet at Ezion-Geber (2 Chron. 20:37) that undertakings, however well-planned and apparently unattended by outward danger, can only end in disappointment and failure, when they who are the children of God combine with those who walk in the ways of sin.

But in Jehoshaphat the warning of the prophet wrought that godly repentance which has not to be repented of. Jehu had declared how God, in His condescension, acknowledged that "nevertheless there are good things found in thee"—and this, not merely as regarded his public acts in the abolition of open idolatry in his country, but also that personal piety which showed itself in preparing his own heart to seek after God. And now the sense of his late inconsistency led him all the more earnestly to show that he did not regard the religious condition of his late allies as a light matter. Once again he took in hand the religious reformation begun at the commencement of his reign. [^6] The account of the present movement is the more interesting that it furnishes proof of the existence of the Book of Deuteronomy at that time, long before the memoirs were written on which the Books of Chronicles are based. For, as we shall presently see, there are here constant references to the legislation in the Book of Deuteronomy, and that not pointedly and with a show of emphasis—such as we would have expected if Deuteronomy had been only invented or introduced—but in a manner which indicates a long admitted authority, so that its legislation had permeated the people, and its principles required only to be alluded to as something universally acknowledged,—not vindicated as something recently introduced. This line of argument, bringing out the undesigned evidences of the antiquity of the Mosaic legislation, seems to us to possess far more convincing force than much of the specious reasoning on the other side, which has of late been so confidently advanced. And while on this ground the reader should be warned against hastily adopting conclusions inconsistent with the assured truth of the Divine Word, he should also be encouraged to mark, in careful study, the many passages containing undesigned references, which are only intelligible on the supposition, not only of the existence, but of the long and generally acknowledged authority of the Mosaic legislation.

The reformation initiated by Jehoshaphat was carried out by him personally. For this purpose he traversed the country from its southern boundary (Beer-sheba) to its northern (Mount Ephraim). His main object was to "bring back" the people "to Jehovah, the God of their fathers." Partly in attainment of this, and partly to render the reformation permanent, he revised the judicial arrangements of the country, in strict accordance with the Deuteronomic Law. For, according to the Divine appointment, the judges in Israel were not only intended to pronounce sentences and to decide cases, but to guide and direct the people on all questions, civil and religious, and so to prevent the commission of sin or crime. The account given of the work of Jehoshaphat embraces these three points: the appointment of Judges; the principle underlying their authority; and the rule for its exercise.

As regards the first of these, we remember that the appointment of judges had been first proposed by Jethro (Exod. 18:21, 22), and then carried out by Moses (Deut. 1:13, etc.). [^7] Such judges were now appointed for every "fenced city." This, not only because these places were the most important in the land, but in order to protect the administration of justice, [^8] and in accordance with the fundamental law in Deut. 16:18. As regards the principle on which their authority rested, the judges were to bear in mind that they were the representatives of the Great Judge, Whose aid was accordingly promised them (2 Chron. 19:6)—and this also in accordance with the Deuteronomic statement: "for the judgment is God's" (Deut. 1:17). From this it follows, as the practical rule, that in the administration of justice they were to be influenced by the fear of Jehovah, and not by fear of, nor favour for, man. And here we mark once more the implied reference to Deuteronomy 1:16, 17; 16:18-20. [^9]

Besides these provincial judges, Jehoshaphat appointed in Jerusalem a tribunal of appeal consisting of priests, Levites, and the chiefs of clans. With this mixed tribunal rested the final decision in all matters concerning religion and worship (2 Chron. 19:8: "for the judgment of Jehovah;" and ver. 11: "in all matters of Jehovah"), as well as in civil and criminal cases (ver. 8: "in strifes;" ver. 11: "all the king's matters"). Moreover, it was their duty to warn, [^10] advise, and instruct in all doubtful cases, whether criminal, civil, or ecclesiastical, in which they were applied to either by the inferior judges or the people. As president of this mixed commission, Amariah, the highpriest, [^11] was appointed for ecclesiastical, and Zebadiah, the chief of the tribe of Judah, for civil cases.

And now that came to pass which had been predicted by the prophet in punishment of the alliance with Ahab. Happily, it found the people prepared by the religious revival which had passed over the land. As we infer from the tenor of the whole narrative, the Moabites, the Ammonites, and "with them certain of the Meunites," [^12] made an unexpected raid "from beyond the Sea"—that is, the Dead Sea—"from Edom." [^13] They could come swooping round the southern end of the Dead Sea, or passing over by the southern ford, just opposite Engedi, the ancient Hazazon-tamar—probably the oldest city in the world. The name Engedi, "the spring of the goat," is derived from the manner in which its fertilising spring seems to leap in its descent. The older name, Hazazon-tamar—either "rows of palms," or "the cutting of the palm-trees"—originated from the palms which once grew there in great luxuriance. But the site is now desolate, and where once palms flourished, and the most precious wine of Judaea was grown, only naked terraces shelve up the mountain-side. The plain or rather slope is described [^14] as extending about a mile and a half from north to south, being bounded on either side by a Wady with perennial water. Engedi touches the outrunners of the mountains of Judah. Several hundred feet up the slope, about a mile and a half from the shore of the Dead Sea, the little streamlet which has given the place its name, dashes down in thin but high cataracts. Below these falls, and in the centre of the plain, are the ruins which mark the site of the ancient city.

As in the time of Abraham the Assyrian hordes (Gen. 14), so now these marauding invaders, had swarmed across—scarcely an army, rather a multitude of wild nomads. Along the plain, up the slope to the crest of the mountain, through the wadys, they crowded. It seemed a countless host, as their wild war-shouts resounded from hill-top and valley, or their dark forms covered the heights, whence they gazed across the wilderness towards the rich and coveted cities of Judah. So it seemed to the terrified fugitives, who brought exaggerated tidings of their numbers to Jehoshaphat. And only a distance of fifteen hours separated these plundering tribes from Jerusalem. Not a moment was to be lost. The first measure was to invoke the aid of the Lord. A fast was proclaimed throughout Judah—a day of humiliation for national sins and of prayer in the time of their great need (comp. Judg. 20:26; 1 Sam. 7:6; Joel 2:15). Jehoshaphat himself took his place in the most prominent part of the temple, "before the new court"—either one newly constructed, or else renovated, and probably intermediate between "the great" or outer cout, and "the court of the priests" (comp. 2 Chron. 4:9). If so, it probably represented what at a later period was known as "the court of the women," and Jehoshaphat stood on the height afterwards covered by the steps leading up to the court of the priests, where the Levites who conducted the musical part of the temple-services were stationed. There, within sight and hearing of all, like Solomon of old, and as a true king, he represented and guided his people in their act of national humiliation and prayer. Ordinarily prayer did not form part of the symbolical temple-services. The latter could only be performed by the God-appointed priesthood. This, even on the lower ground [^15] that had others been allowed to intrude into these services. it would soon have led to the introduction of heathen rites. And of this there were only too many instances in the history of Israel. Never, except on such solemn occasions, was the voice of public prayer heard in the Temple, and the king did not intrude, but acted right kingly, when he now spake in name and on behalf of his people.

There could not have been a prayer of more earnest or realising faith than that of Jehoshaphat. It began by the acknowledgment of Jehovah as the true and living God (v. 6), and as the Covenant-God, Who in fulfilment of His promises had given them the land (v. 7). In virtue of this twofold fact, Israel had reared the sanctuary (v. 8), and consecrated alike the Temple and themselves by solemnly placing themselves in the keeping of God, to the disowning of all other help or deliverance (v. 9). To this invocation at the dedication of the Temple (2 Chron. 6:28-30) a visible response had been made when the fire came from heaven to consume the sacrifice, and the glory of Jehovah filled the house (2 Chron. 7:1). On this threefold ground the prayer of Jehoshaphat now proceeded. A season of sore strait had now come, and they made their solemn appeal to God. Israel was in the right as against their enemies, who had neither pretext in the past for their attack, nor yet justification for it in the present. Nay, they had come against the possession of God which He had given to His people. It was His cause; they had no might of their own, but their eyes were upon the Lord (vers. 10-12).

When the Church, or individual members of it, can so believe and so pray, deliverance is at hand. But yet another act of faith was necessary. Theirs had been the faith of expectancy and of worship; it must now be that of work. As Israel stood in prayer before Jehovah, His Spirit came upon one of the ministering Levites, Jahaziel, a descendant of Mattaniah, perhaps the same as Nethaniah, a son of Asaph (1 Chron. 25:2, 12). The message which he delivered from the Lord corresponded to every part of the prayer which had been offered. It bade them dismiss all fears—not because there was not real danger, but because the battle was Jehovah's. On the morrow were they to go forth to meet the enemy. But "it is not for you [it is not yours—ye need not] to fight in this [battle]: place yourselves, stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah with you." (vers. 15-17). And humbly, reverently, did king and people bend before the Lord in the worship of praise and believing expectancy.

Early next morning they prepared to obey the Divine direction. It was to be a battle such as had never been witnessed since Jericho had fallen at the blast of the trumpets of the Lord when His Ark compassed its walls. And they prepared for it in such manner as host going to battle had never done. In the morning, as Judah marched out of the gate of Jerusalem, the king addressed to his people only this one command: to have faith—faith in their God, and in the word sent by his prophets. Thus should they be established. Then "he advised the people," [^16] and with one accord they appointed for their avant-guard the sacred Temple-singers, [^17] robed in their "holy array," [^18] who were to chant, as if marching in triumphal procession, the well-known words of worship: "Praise Jehovah, for his mercy endureth for ever" (comp. 2 Chron. 7:3, 6).

If never before an army had so marched to battle, never, even in the marvellous history of Israel, had such results been experienced. Above Engedi the chalk cliffs rise 2000 feet above the Dead Sea, although even that height is still 2000 feet below the watershed. We have now reached the barren and desolate wilderness, known as that of Judah, which stretches southward to the mountains of Hebron, and northward to Tekoa. Innumerable wadys and broad valleys stretch between mountain crests, often of fantastic shape. It is a pathless wilderness, seamed by rocky clefts and caves. There, just past the cave where David had been in hiding from Saul, up the cliff Hazziz—perhaps the modern El Husasah—had the foe swarmed, and then deployed through the broad wady which leads towards Tekoa. Here, "at the end of the gully," [^19] would Israel descry them, see their defeat, yet not have to do battle for the victory. And as on that bright day the host of Israel looked towards the ascent from Engedi, they caught sight of the enemy. At that moment as by a preconcerted signal they began to sing and to praise the Lord. Then a strange scene ensued. It were an entire misunderstanding of what Scripture designates as the agency of God, to apply to angelic combatants the words: "Jehovah set liers in wait [ambushments] against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir." For God Himself does that which happens in His all-overruling Providence, even though it come to pass in the orderly succession of natural events. There was no need of summoning angel-hosts. It is not only quite conceivable, but best explains the after-event, that a tribe of Edomites, kindred but hostile to that which had joined Ammon and Moab in their raid, should have lain in ambush in one of the wadys, waiting till the main body of the combatants had passed, to fall on the rear-guard, or probably on the camp followers, the women and children, and the baggage. They would calculate that long before the men in advance could turn upon them in those narrow defiles, they would have escaped beyond the reach of pursuit. And it is equally conceivable that when the attack was made the main body of the Ammonites and Moabites may have regarded it as a piece of treachery preconcerted between the clan of Edomites who were with them, and the kindred clan that lay in ambush. All this is quite in accordance with what might still take place among the Bedouins of those regions. But, in such circumstances, the Ammonites and Moabites would naturally turn to attack their treacherous allies, and thus the first scene in the strange drama of this internecine battle would be enacted. Mutual distrust once awakened, and passions kindled, we can easily understand how "every one helped to destroy another"—the havoc being probably increased by the peculiar character of the country, which here abounds in steep precipices and sudden rocky heights and descents.

While this strange battle was proceeding, Judah had advanced, to the sound of hymns of praise, beyond Tekoa, far as the last watch-tower, where usually an outlook was kept over the wilderness, so that timely tidings might be brought of any sudden raid by the wild tribes of the East. As "they looked unto the multitude," which they had erst descried in the dim distance, there was "not an escaping," no hasty flight, as in such circumstances might have been expected, and it seemed as if only dead bodies were left strewing the ground. Possibly the Judaeans had, on reaching the height of Tekoa, caught sight of the host, and then lost it again when descending into the wady. [^20] When, on ascending once more, they stood at the watch-tower, they would see what formerly had been "a multitude," now only dead bodies, nor could they, from the conformation of the district, discern any fugitives. It now only remained for Judah to seize the spoil [^21] of the battle in which Jehovah had gained the victory. For three days the removal of the spoil continued. On the fourth, the host of Judah gathered in a valley, to the north-west of Tekoa, which from the solemn thanksgiving there made received the name of "Berakhah," "blessing," in the sense of praise and thanksgiving. It is deeply interesting to find that after the lapse of so many centuries this memorial of Jehovah's deliverance and of Jehoshaphat's and Judah's solemn thanksgiving still continues. Many masters have since held possession of the land: Assyrian, Roman, Moslem, Christian, and Turk: but the old name of the valley of blessing remains in the modern name BereikÃ»an

And from "the valley of blessing" Jehoshaphat and his people returned, as in procession, to the Temple, there again to praise the Lord, Who had, as ever, been faithful to His promise. And this gratitude of a believing people is one of the most true and beautiful results of the religious revival which Judah had experienced. It almost sounds like heaven's antiphon to Jerusalem's praise, when we read that "the terror of Elohim" was upon all the kingdoms of the lauds round about Judah, and that "his God" gave Jehoshaphat "rest round about." [^22]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Tarshish is, no doubt, the ancient Tartessus on the western coast of Spain, between the two mouths of the Guadalquivir. Its situation is indicated in Gen. 10:4, comp. Psa. 72:10; its commerce in Ezek. 38:13; its export of silver, iron, tin, and lead in Jer. 10:9; Ezek. 27:12, 25. The Palestinian harbour for Tarshish was Joppa (Jon. 1:3; 4:2). All this shows that the expedition from Ezion-Geber could not have been to Tarshish. But it was in "Tarshish ships,"—a name which also otherwise occurs for a class of large merchantmen (like our "East Indiaman," or "ocean liner"), see Isa. 2:16; 23:1, 14; 60:9. We can only suggest that the origin of the name "Tarshish ships" for these large vessels may have been that the first expedition to Ophir—indeed, the first maritime expedition of the Jews—was undertaken under the direction of Hiram, king of Tyre. But we know both from Scripture (comp. also Isa. 23:1, 6, 10) and from classical writers that the trade to Tarshish was wholly in the hands of Tyre. Hiram would probably construct for the expedition to Ophir the same class of ships as those that traded to Tarshish—"Tarshish ships;"—and from and after that solitary expedition in the time of Solomon, all large merchant vessels may have borne in Judaea that name. The writer of the Book of Chronicles—or else some copyist—evidently knew nothing of a Jewish or Phoenician trade to Ophir, but very much of that to Tarshish, and so finding in the source from which he drew a reference to Tarshish ships and to Ophir, he omitted the latter, and spoke of ships going to Tarshish
[^2] The other sites suggested are a port in India, or else one on the eastern coast of Africa
[^3] A candid examination of 2 Chron. 20:35-37 and of 1 Kings 22:49 conveys to my mind this conclusion. The two passages are supplementary, and not contradictory of each other
[^4] This was first done in the (Greek) rendering of the LXX. (there 3 and 4 Kings)
[^5] The Jewish interpreters think of a grating in the floor by which light was admitted into the apartments beneath, or else of a winding stair which he had fallen down (see Mikraoth gedol. on the passage)
[^6] Hence the names Hanniba'l, "the favour of Baal," Esdruba'l, "the help of Baal," and others
[^7] The reader who wishes to study the history of Ekron is directed to the following passages, which refer either to its geographical situation, its history, or its future: Josh. 13:3; 15:11, 45, 46; 19:43; Judg. 1:18; 1 Sam. 5:10; 6:1-18; 7:14; 17:52; Jer. 25:20; Amos 1:8; Zeph. 2:4; but especially Zech. 9:5, 7. For its later history see 1 Macc. 10:89
[^8] See the description in Robinson's Palestine, vol. 1, pp. 227, 228
[^9] It is a mistake to identify Baal-zebub with the Beel-zebul (for this is the correct reading) of Matt. 10:25. For the explanation of that term see Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah
[^10] The same deity was worshipped by the Greeks as Zeus apomyios, and in Rome as Myiagros
[^11] The word "messenger" in Hebrew is the same as that for "angel."
[^12] Thou sendest to inquire" (ver. 6), instead of Elijah's "ye go to inquire" (ver. 3)
[^13] Literally "the judgment." If I mistake not, there is in our northern dialect also such an expression as "the right" of a man—in the sense of not only his bearing, but that which is behind it
[^14] The original has here some noteworthy peculiarities. First: the captain addresses Elijah as "man of the Elohim" (with the definite article)—that is, of the national Deity of Israel—not Jehovah. Secondly: Elijah in taking up the challenge does not use the term Jehovah—which would have been unfitting in this connection, but in repeating the words of the captain he omits the definite article before Elohim: "And if man of Elohim I."
[^15] According to ancient arrangement the host was divided into companies of 1000, of 100, and of 50, each with its leader (comp. Numb. 31:14, 48; I Sam. 8:12)
[^16] It is surely a foolish as well as an idle question, how the king had learned the destruction of these companies. Is it supposed that Elijah was quite alone on Mount Carmel, without any disciples or followers—or that such expeditions would no attract sufficient notice to lead any one to inquire into the fate of those who went to Carmel, but never returned?
[^17] Canon Rawlinson remarks on the words, "fell on his kness:" "Not as a worshipper, but as a suppliant." (Speaker's Commentary, ad. loc.)
[^18] Canon Rawlinson (u.s.) aptly remarks that the phrase: "Let my life ... be precious," "is exactly the converse of our common expression, 'to hold life cheap."'
[^19] The reference here seems to the captain, not to King Ahaziah
[^20] The expression (1:17): "in the second year of Jehoram" marks some corruption in the text, which we have not now the means of clearing up. The same corruption—or rather probably the attempt of the copyist to remove it—appears in the chronological notice of 1 Kings 22:51, as compared with 2 Kings 8:16. It has been sought to remove the difficulty by assuming a coregency of either five or two years of Jehoram, king of Judah, with his father Jehoshaphat, and this suggestion has been indicated in the chronological table appended to Book 5 above. But there really is no evidence of such coregency, and much against the assumption of it—while it would still leave some difficulties unremoved. Under these circumstances it is critically more honest and better to regard these notices as the outcome and sequence of some corruption in the text
[^21] Their history may be the more briefly treated in this volume, as a special book on "Elisha the prophet," by the present writer, has been published by the Religious Tract Society
[^22] Probably it was in the beginning of the reign of Joram. We repeat that we prefer calling him so for distinction from the contemporary king of Judah of the same name. The two names Joram and Jehoram are interchangeably used. In 2 Kings 1:17, and 2 Chron. 22:6, alike the kings of Israel and of Judah are called Jehoram; in 2 Kings 9:15, 17, 21-24 (in the Hebrew text), the king of Israel is called Jehoram; in 2 Kings 8:21, 23, 24 the king of Judah is called Joram; while on comparing 2 Kings 8:16 with 29 we find that the two names are inverted
