Alfred Edersheim, Old Testament Bible History ( 1887)

CHAPTER 5

Accession of Azariah or Uzziah—Reign of Jeroboam II.—Restoration of Israelitish Territory—Political Causes and Divine Agency in these Successes—Corruption of the People—Scattered Historical Notices—New Phase in Prophecy—Its Characteristics—The two Prophets on the Boundary-line—Prophets of that Period: Joel, Amos, Hosea, Jonah (2 Kings 14:21-29)

IT WOULD SEEM THAT A PECULIAR MEANING ATTACHES TO THE NOTICE THAT "ALL THE people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king instead of his father, Amaziah" (2 Kings 14:21). With the exception of the name, this statement is literally repeated in 2 Chron. 26:1, indicating that the writers of the two books had copied it from the same historical record. But considering the youth of the new king on the death of his father, Amaziah, at the age of fifty-four (2 Kings 14:2), he could scarcely have been his eldest son. Probably there was, therefore, a special reason for his selection by the people. Possibly there may be some connection between it and the twofold name which he bears in holy Scripture. In 2 Chronicles—written, as we may say, from the priestly point of view—the new king is always called Uzziah, [^1] while in the Book of Kings he is designated during the first part of his reign as Azariah, while in the notices of the latter part of that period he appears as Uzziah (2 Kings 15:13, 30, 32, 34). The usual explanations either of a clerical error through the confusion of similar letters, [^2] or that he bore two names, [^3] seem equally unsatisfactory. Nor is the meaning of the two names precisely the same—Azariah being "Jehovah helps;" Uzziah, "My strength is Jehovah." May it not be that Azariah was his real name, [^4] and that when after his daring intrusion into the sanctuary (2 Chron. 26:16-20), he was smitten with lifelong leprosy, his name was significantly altered into the cognate Uzziah—"My strength is Jehovah"—in order to mark that the "help" which he had received had been dependent on his relation to the Lord. This would accord with the persistent use of the latter name in 2 Chronicles—considering the view-point of the writer—and with its occurrence in the prophetic writings (Hos. 1:1; Amos 1:1; Isa. 1:1; 6:1; 7:1) And the explanation just suggested seems confirmed by the circumstance that although this king is always called Uzziah in 2 Chron., yet the Hebrew word for "help," which forms the first part of the name Azariah, recurs with marked emphasis in the account of the Divine help accorded in his expeditions (2 Chron. 26:7, 13, 15).

At the accession of Uzziah (as we shall prefer to call him) the throne of Israel had been already occupied for fourteen years by Jeroboam II., the son and successor of that Jehoash who had inflicted such defeat on Amaziah of Judah (2 Kings 14:23). His exceptionally long reign extended over fifty-one years, [^5] being the longest of that of any Israelitish king." [^6] Holy Scripture gives only the briefest sketch of outward events during that half-century in Israel. Religiously, it was marked by a continuance of the wrongful institutions of the founder of the Israelitish monarchy (Jeroboam I.). Politically, it was distinguished by the complete defeat of Syria, and the recovery of all the territory which had, in the most flourishing times of united Judah, [^7] been conquered by David or occupied by Solomon: in the language of the sacred text, "from the entering of Hamath unto the sea of the plain" (2 Kings 14:25). Indeed, the conquests of Jeroboam seem to have extended even beyond this, and to the boundary of Moab (see Amos 6:14, where for "river of the wilderness," read "of the Arabah"). The Dead Sea unquestionably marked on that side the southern boundary originally of united Palestine, and afterwards of the trans-Jordanic kingdom of Israel, while the "entering in of Hamath" equally indicates the northern limits of the realm (Numb. 13:21; 34:8; Josh. 13:5; 1 Kings 8:65; 2 Chron. 7:8; Amos 6:14). The precise locality designated as the "entering of Hamath," has not yet been accurately ascertained. But it must be sought in that broad rich plain, flanked towards the west by the Lebanon, and watered by the Orontes, which ascends for a distance of about eight hours from Homs to Hamah, the ancient Hamath the Great (Amos 6:2). [^8] In all likelihood it is in this general sense that we are to understand what seems the parallel notice of these conquests (2 Kings 14:28): "Damascus and Hamath." The expression seems to refer to the whole of the broad plain just described—the words bearing the same general meaning as when David is stated to have put garrisons in Syria of Damascus (2 Sam. 8:5, 6), and Solomon to have occupied Hamath (2 Chron. 8:3, 4). [^9] Here again welcome light comes to us from the monuments of Assyria. Thence we learn, on the one hand, that the kingdom of Israel was tributary to the king of Assyria, and, on the other, that that monarch conquered Damascus, took prisoner its king, who, having embraced his knees in submission, had to pay a ransom of 2,300 talents of silver, 20 of gold, 3,000 of copper, 5,000 of iron, together with garments of wool and linen, a couch and an umbrella of ivory, and other spoil numberless. [^10] The disastrous war of Syria with Assyria, and the tributary alliance of Israel with the latter, would sufficiently account for the conquests of Jeroboam II.

And yet here also there is a higher meaning. If, on the suggestion just made, the instrumentality used to bring about the victories of Jeroboam II. was not the direct help of Jehovah, but the prowess of Assyria, we ought to bear in mind that direct interposition on the part of the Lord in behalf of such a king could not have been expected. And yet, as noted in the sacred text (2 Kings 14:25), the promise of the Lord given through the prophet Jonah, the son of Amittai, was literally fulfilled—only in the natural course of political events. And the more clearly to mark the agency of God in what might seem the natural course of events, the connection between these successes and the original promise in 2 Kings 13:4, 5, is indicated in 2 Kings 14:26, as well as the higher meaning of all (in ver. 27).

It still remains to point out the strict accuracy of the Biblical account, alike as regards the prosperous internal condition of the land at that period (2 Kings 13:5), and the moral and religious decay of the people (2 Kings 13:6). If the victories of Jeroboam had, as on grounds of contemporary history seems likely been gained in the early part of his reign, the rest of that long period was one of almost unprecedented wealth and prosperity, but also of deepest moral corruption. To both facts the contemporary prophets, Amos and Hosea, bear frequent witness—to the prosperity in such passages as Hos. 2:8; 12:9 [A. V. ver. 8]; Amos 3:15; 6:4-6; to the corruption, in many passages and in varied particulars. [^11] A more terrible picture of religious degeneracy and public and private wickedness could scarcely be imagined than that painted by the prophets in this the most prosperous period of Israelitish history. Thus the goodness of God, misunderstood by an apostate people, which attributed all to its own prowess (see Amos 6:13), was only abused to further sin (Hos. 13:6). A people which could not be humbled by judgments, and to which every mercy became only the occasion for deeper guilt, was ripe for that final doom which the prophets predicted.

On some other points of interest scattered notices may here be put together. Firstly, Jeroboam II. was certainly the most warlike king and the most successful administrator of all who occupied the throne of Israel. Of this even the new registration in the re-conquered trans-Jordanic provinces affords evidence (1 Chron. 6:11-17). Secondly, this history is another proof of how little real success could attend such a re-action against the foreign rites of the house of Ahab as that which had been initiated by Jehu. The worship of the golden calves speedily led to that on high places, and even to the restoration of the service of Baal (Hos. 2:13, 17; Amos 2:8; 4:4; 5:5; 8:14). Nay, Jeroboam and his priest at Bethel proceeded to actual persecution of the prophets of the Lord (Amos 7:10-17). Lastly, we may derive from a study of the prophetic writings much insight into the political relations of Israel and Judah at the time, more especially as regards Syria and Assyria. [^12]

But there is one subject which claims special attention. Even a superficial study must convince that from a religious point of view, and particularly as regards Israel's future and the great hope of the world entrusted to their keeping, we have now reached a new period. We are not now thinking of the general religious and moral decay, nor of the national judgment which was so soon to follow, but the other and wider aspect of it all. God's great judgments, when viewed from another point, are always seen to be attended with wider manifestations of mercy. It is never judgment only, but judgment and mercy—and every movement is a movement forward, even though in making it there should be a crushing down and a breaking down. Even here, so early in the history of the kingdom of God, the casting away of Israel was to be the life of the world. For with this period a new stage in prophecy begins. Hitherto the prophets had been chiefly God-sent teachers and messengers to their contemporaries—reproving, warning, guiding, encouraging. Henceforth the prophetic horizon enlarges. Beyond their contemporaries who were hardened beyond hope of recovery, their outlook is henceforth on the great hope of the Messianic kingdom. They have despaired of the present: but their thought is of the future. They have despaired of the kingdom of Israel and of Judah; but the Divine thought of preparation that underlay it comes increasingly into prominence and clearer vision. The promises of old acquire a new and deeper meaning; they assume shape and outlines which become ever more definite as the daylight grows. It is the future, with Israel's Messiah-King to rule a people restored and converted, and an endless, boundless kingdom of righteousness and peace which in its wide embrace includes, reconciles, and unites a ransomed world, obedient to the Lord, which is now the great burden of their message, and the joyous assured hope of their thoughts. For doomed apostate Israel after the flesh, we have Israel after the spirit, and on the ruins of the old rises the new: a Jerusalem, a temple, a kingdom, and a King fulfilling the ideal of which the earthly had been the type.

It is not meant that these prophets had not their message for the present also: to Israel and Judah, and to their kings, as well as regarding events either contemporary or in the near future. Had it been otherwise, they would not have been prophets to, nor yet understood by, their fellow-countrymen. Besides, God's dealings and discipline with Israel still continued, and would of necessity continue—primarily to the coming of the Christ, and then beyond it to the final fulfilment of His purposes of mercy. Hence their ministry was also of the present, though chiefly in warning and announcement of judgment. But by the side of this despair of the present, and because of it, the ideal destiny of Israel came into clearer minds, the meaning of the Davidic kingdom, and its final spiritual realization in a happy future; and along with denunciations of impending judgment came the comfort of prophetic promises of the future. [^13]

Two points here specially present themselves to our minds. The first is, that with this period commences the era of written prophecy. Before this time the prophets had spoken; now they wrote, or—to speak more precisely—gathered their prophetic utterances and visions into permanent records. And, as connected with this new phase of prophetism, we mark that it is rather by vision and prediction than by signs and miracles that the prophets now manifested their activity. But the importance of written records of prophecy is self-evident. Without them, alike the manifestation and establishment of the Messianic kingdom in Israel and its spread into the Gentile world would, humanly speaking, have been impossible. Christianity could not have appealed to Messianic prediction as its spring, nor yet could the prophetic word of God have travelled to the Gentiles. With this yet a second fact of utmost interest seems intimately connected. On the boundaryline of the two stages of prophetism stand two figures in Jewish history: one looking backwards, Elijah; the other looking forwards, Jonah, the son of Amittai (2 Kings 14:25). Both are distinguished by their ministry to the Gentiles: Elijah, by his stay and ministry at Sarepta, to which might, perhaps, be added the ministry of Elisha to Naaman; Jonah, by that call to repentance in Nineveh [^14] which forms the burden of the prophetic book connected with his name—while, on the other hand, his contemporary message to Jeroboam is apparently not recorded. [^15] Thus the great unfolding of prophecy in its outlook on the inbringing of the Gentiles was marked by symbolic events.

Without attempting any detailed account, the prophets of that period, and the contents of their writings, may here be briefly referred to. The earliest [^16] of them was probably Joel, "Jehovah is God"—a Judaean whose sphere of labour was also in his native country. His "prophecy" consists of two utterances (1:2-2:18; 2:19-3:21), couched in language as pure and beautiful as the sentiments are elevated. From the allusions to contemporary events (3:4-8, 19), as well as from the absence of any mention of Assyria, we infer that his ministry was in the time of Joash, king of Judah, and of the high-priest Jehoiada,—with which agree his temple-references, which indicate a time of religious revival. But here also we mark the wider Messianic references in chapters 2 and 3. The prophecies of Joel seem already referred to by Amos, "the burden-bearer" (comp. Amos 1:2; 9:13 with Joel 3:16, 18, 20). Amos himself was also a Judaean, originally a "herdsman of Tekoa" (Amos 1:1; 7:14). But his ministry was in Israel, and during the latter part of Jeroboam's reign, after the accession of Uzziah (Amos 1:1). There in Bethel, where the false worship of Israel was combined with the greatest luxury and dissipation, the prophet was confronted by Amaziah, its chief priest. Although apparently unsuccessful in his accusations of political conspiracy against the prophet, Amos was obliged to withdraw into Judah (Amos 7:10-13). Here he wrote down his prophetic utterances, prefacing them by an announcement of coming judgment (Amos 1:11) through a nation, evidently that very Assyria on which the confidence of Jeroboam had rested (comp. Amos 5:27; 6:14). Yet, amidst all his denunciations, Amos also looked forward to, and prophesied of the glorious Messianic kingdom (Amos 9:11-15). A third prophet of that period was Hosea, "help"—the Jeremiah of the northern kingdom, as he has been aptly designated. From certain allusions in his book we infer that he had been a native of the northern kingdom (Hos. 1:3; 6:10; comp. 7:8). His ministry was probably towards the end of the reign of Jeroboam, and extended to the rising of Shallum and of Menahem (comp. Hos. 6:8; 7:7). His prophecies give special insight into the political relations and dangers of the northern kingdom, and into the utter corruption of all classes. Frequent, too, are his references to Judah. Yet here also we mark the persistence of the outlook on the better Davidic kingdom (Hos. 3), with much concerning it scattered throughout his prophecies. Lastly, as yet another prophet of that period, we have again to refer to Jonah, the son of Amittai, [^17] a native of Gath-hepher, in the tribal possession of Zebulun, [^18] and therefore in the northern part of Israel. Without entering on the critical questions connected with the story which forms the burden of the Book of Jonah, or discussing the precise date of its publication in its present form, [^19] a deep significance surely attaches to its association with the prophet contemporary of Jeroboam II. It is not only that it points to a preaching of repentance to the Gentiles also, and to their ingathering with believing Israel into the family of God, but the circumstances of the time give it a special meaning. From apostate, morally sunken Israel, such as we have learned to know it from the descriptions of the prophets, Jonah, the very messenger who had announced coming deliverance to Jeroboam, turns by Divine commission to the Gentiles: to that great world-empire which was representative of them. And from this comes to us a fresh and deeper meaning in regard to the application of this history by our Lord (Matt. 13:39-41; 16:4; Luke 11:29-32). It had been "a wicked and adulterous generation" of old that had heard the prophecy of Jonah, and understood not the sign; nor was other sign to be given to it. So would it be to those who heard and saw the Christ, yet craved after other "sign" suited to their unbelief. None other than the sign of Jonah would be theirs—yet even this, "a sign" sufficient in itself (Matt. 12:40), a sign also not only of judgment, but of wider mercy (Matt. 12:41).

Footnotes

There can be little doubt that Jeroboam II. retained the hold over Judah which his father Jehoash had gained; and this, not only during the fifteen years after his accession, in which Amaziah of Judah still occupied the throne, but even in the beginning of the reign of Uzziah. For "breaches" such as those that had been made are not speedily repaired, and Uzziah was, at his accession, a youth of only sixteen years (2 Kings 15:2). We therefore incline to the view that the otherwise unintelligible notice (2 Kings 15:2), that Uzziah acceded "in the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam" bears reference to the time when he had shaken off the suzerainty of Jeroboam, and "began to reign" in the real sense of the term. This would make the period of Judah's liberation the twenty-seventy after Jeroboam's accession, and the twelfth after the elevation of Uzziah to the throne, when that monarch was twenty-eight years of age. [^20] Important though the reign of Uzziah was—chiefly from a political, but also from a religious point of view—the writer of the Book of Kings gives only a few and these the briefest notices of it. In fact, he may be said only to single out the leading characteristics of that period. As regards political events, he marks the beginning of the recovery of Judah's power in the occupation of the important harbour of Elath, and the rebuilding of that town (2 Kings 14:22). This, as we shall show reason for believing, probably in the early years of the accession of Uzziah. [^21] As always, he records the age of the new king and the duration of his reign, as well as the name of his mother (2 Kings 15:2). If the suggestion previously made is correct, he also notices the exact time of the recovery of Judaean independence from Israel (2 Kings 15:1). Again, the religious character of this reign is described; while, lastly, the unhappy fate and end of the king are recorded, although without mention of what led to it. Manifestly the point of view in the Book of Kings is simply "prophetic"—not, as in Chronicles, priestly—and the writer hurries over events alike of a political and a personal character, to indicate what seems to him of main importance: the theocratic relation of the people to Jehovah. [^22]

The brief outline in the Book of Kings is amply filled up in that of Chronicles (2 Chron. 26). Here, also, the first event recorded is the taking of Elath. This important harbour, from which, as from the neighbouring Ezion-Geber, Solomon had sent his fleet of traders to Ophir (1 Kings 9:26-28; 2 Chron. 8:17, 18), lay on the north-eastern end of the Gulf of Akabah, and at present bears the same name. Of its ancient greatness only a tower remains for protection of the pilgrims to Mecca. [^23] Around it are ruins and wretched hovels; but abundance of date-palms still betokens the former fertility. For half-an-hour beyond the town stretch, along the blue gulf, sands covered with beautiful shells; the view being finally shut off by granite and sandstone mountains. Such is the present aspect of "Eloth" (or Elath) "the strong trees." There can be little doubt that when in the days of Joram of Judah "Edom revolted" (2 Kings 8:20-22), Elath recovered its independence. The conquest of Edom by Amaziah had apparently only extended as far as Petra, about half-way between the Dead Sea and Elath. In occupying it again and rebuilding it, Uzziah therefore completed the subjection of the country by his father. Such an expedition could not, in the state of Edom, have offered any real difficulty, however much its success must, after the late disasters, have raised the courage of Judah and inspired the people with confidence. These circumstances, as well as the place which the narrative occupies in the sacred text, lead us to infer that this was the first military undertaking of Uzziah. And, in view of his ultimate purpose as regarded Israel, the king would naturally begin with what was not only certain of success, but would also secure his rear in any future expedition. Nor was this all. A wide-reaching plan of national restoration would embrace the revival of commerce. And what prominence the new Tarshish mercantile marine held in public thought, and how it affected life in Judah in the days of Jotham, the successor of Uzziah, appears from the allusion in Isa. 2:16.

As regards the religious condition of the country it is significant that, as the reign of former kings, so the present was characterised by a combination of doing "the right in the sight of Jehovah," with a continuance of "the high places," and their sacrifices and worship. It seems to indicate that this strange mixture in religion marked the highest point attained by the people. But even this qualified adherence to the worship of the Lord was only temporary, as the text explains: "in the days of Zechariah, who instructed him in the fear of God" [^24] (2 Chron. 26:5). This prepares us alike for the later history of the king, and for what we shall learn of the condition of the people.

But the first or religious period of the reign of Uzziah was one of continuous and progressive prosperity. Although it is not possible to determine the precise chronological succession of events, it seems likely that the expedition against the Philistines soon followed that to the Red Sea. The object of it was finally to break up the great anti-Judaean confederacy which, in the days of King Jehoram, had wrought such havoc in Judah, after the successful revolt of Edom (2 Chron. 21:8-10). [^25] The defeat of Edom must have rendered this expedition also one of comparative ease. One by one the great Philistine cities fell; Gath, which, in the reign of Joash, had been wrested by Hazael of Syria, and made the starting-point of his incursion into Judah (2 Kings 12:17); Jabneh (Josh. 15:11), afterwards Jamnia, and about nine miles to the north-east of it, and three miles from the sea, Ashdod. It was probably owing to the importance of this strong town, which commanded the road from Egypt, that the sacred text specially mentions this district as one in which the king "built cities" (2 Chron. 26:6). The general policy seems wisely to have been not to destroy nor depopulate the Philistine cities, but to render them harmless by breaking down their fortifications, and founding by their side throughout the Philistine territory, cities, inhabited no doubt by Judaean colonists. And from Philistia the expedition naturally extended to, and reduced to submission, the Arab tribe to the south "in Gur-baal" and "the Meunim" (or Meunites). [^26]

We have now probably reached the period when either luxury and corruption had so demoralised Israel as to render it incapable of resisting the extending power of Judah, or else the government of Jeroboam II. had become paralysed. For although the subdual of the Philistines and the other tribes to the south and south-east explains the statement that "the name"—here, presumably, the authority—of Uzziah "went to be going down into Egypt," more is implied in the notice that "the Ammonites gave gifts." This tribute imposed on Ammon evidently presupposes the occupation of Uzziah of the intervening trans-Jordanic territory belonging to Israel. [^27] And its possession seems implied in the further notice (2 Chron. 26:10), that the herds of Uzziah pastured "in the low country," that is, on the rich Philistine downs by the Mediterranean (1 Chron. 27:28), and "in the plain," that is, on the wide grazing lands east of Jordan, in the ancient possession of Reuben (Deut. 3:10; 4:43; and Josh. 13).

But by far the most important undertaking of the reign of Uzziah was the restoration and the fortification of the northern wall of Jerusalem, which had been broken down in the time of Amaziah (2 Chron. 25:23). Drawing an almost straight line along the north of the ancient city, Uzziah built three towers: "at the lower gate," in the north-western corner of the city, whence the wall slopes slightly southwards, and towards the west; at "the valley-gate," the present Jaffa gate; and lastly, at the opposite extremity of the northern wall (and again slightly south), to protect the so-called "horse gate" (Neh. 3:19, 20, 24, 25). Thus, as the "upper city" had, besides that just mentioned, not any other gate towards the west, nor yet any to the south, the entrance into the city was defended on the north, west, south, and at its north-eastern angle. Moreover, these forts were armed with new and powerful engines for projecting arrows and great stones upon any besieging host (2 Chron. 26:15). Lastly, in accordance with all this, we read of a re-organisation of the army, "according to the number of their enrolment (mustering) by the hand of Jeiel, the scribe, and Maaseiah, the officer (superintendent?), under the hand (direction) of Hananiah one of the king's captains" (2 Chron. 26:11). The levy was again made in accordance with earliest national custom—although in even more systematic manner than before. Under two thousand six hundred "heads" or "chiefs of houses," "mighty men of valour," an army of not less than 307,500 men was gathered, and completely equipped by the king—the heavy infantry being furnished with shields, cuirasses, and helmets, the light infantry with bows and "stones for slings." [^28] This specially indicates the completeness of the armament, which, this time, was not only furnished by the central authority, but with such care that even the slings and the stones generally picked up by the men were served out to the troops. [^29]

In these circumstances we do not wonder that the warlike fame of the king "went forth unto far," although we specially note how carefully the sacred text throughout emphasises the Divine help extended to Uzziah in each part of his undertakings. Nor was the internal prosperity of the realm less marked. We have already seen how the re-occupation of Elath led to a revival of shipping and commerce which must have brought wealth to the country. Similarly, the king took a deep interest in agriculture. In the mountains of Judah the ancient terraces were repaired for the culture of the vine; in the more flat portions, as in the district of Carmel (1 Sam. 15:12; 25:2, 5), agriculture was carried on; whilst, alike in "the wilderness' of Judah, in "the low country" of the Philistine downs, and in the rich "plain" across the Jordan, numerous flocks and herds browsed—provision and security for the operations of "husbandry" being afforded by hewing out many cisterns and building watch-towers (2 Chron. 26:10).

It has previously been stated that this was the flourishing period of prophetism in Israel. This perhaps the more, because now the last warning voices were raised among a people sunk in idolatry and corruption, and nigh to judgment. From the prophetic allusions the state of matters in Judah seems, at least during the first period of this reign, to have been somewhat better. But here also, alike owing to increasing prosperity and to success, "pride" and its resultant vices, soon became apparent (Amos 2:4; Hos. 5:5, 14; comp. also Isa. 2:5, etc.; 3:12, 15; 7:10-13; 28:7-10). This chiefly on the part of the king himself. [^30] In the expressive language of Holy Scripture, "when he was strong his heart was lifted up unto destruction"—that is, until he did that which was wrongful and destructive. Intolerant of any power in the land but his own, he sought to combine the chief functions of the priesthood with those of royalty. [^31] The holiest service of the Temple was when the incense was offered on the golden altar within the Holy Place. It symbolised the offering of Israel's worship by the great high Priest. Regardless of the express Divine ordinance (Exod. 30:7, 27; Numb. 18:1-7), Uzziah penetrated into the Holy Place to arrogate to himself this holy function. In vain Azariah, "the chief priest" (2 Chron. 26:17, 18), and with him eighty other brave men, no doubt priests of "the course" then on service, sought to arrest the king. Their remonstrance, really their warning, that the issue would be other than his pride had anticipated, only served to incite the wrath of the king. Such utter misunderstanding and perversion alike of the priestly functions in their deepest meaning, and of the royal office in its higher object—and that from motives of pride—must bring instant and signal judgment. While yet the censer with its burning coals was in his hand, and looks and words of wrath on his face and on his lips, in sight of the priesthood, he was smitten with what was regarded as pre-eminently and directly the stroke of God's own Hand (comp. Numb. 12:9, 10; 2 Kings 5:27). There, "beside the altar of incense," the plague-spot of leprosy appeared on his forehead. Hastily the assembled priests thrust him, whom God had so visibly smitten, from the Holy Place, lest the presence of the leper should defile the sanctuary. Nay himself, terror-stricken, hastened thence. So the king, whose heart had been lifted up to the utter forgetfulness of the help hitherto given him by Jehovah until he dared the uttermost sacrilege, descended living into the grave in the very moment of his greatest pride. Till death released him he was a leper, dwelling outside the city, separated—"in a house of sickness"—or, as others have rendered the expression, with perhaps greater probability, in "a house of separation" (comp. Lev. 13:46; Numb. 5:2; 2 Kings 7:3). Cut off from access to the house of the Lord, where he had impiously sought to command, and debarred from all intercourse with men, the kingdom was administered by Jotham, his son—for how long a period before the death of Uzziah it is impossible to determine. His punishment followed him even into the grave. For, although he was "buried with his fathers," it was "in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings," probably the burying ground of the members of the royal family; he was not laid in the sepulchre where the kings of Judah rested; "for they said, He is a leper." [^32]

Of the record of his deeds by Isaiah, to which the sacred text refers (2 Chron. 26:22), no portion has been preserved. Although the activity of the prophet began during the reign of Uzziah (Isa. 1:1; 6:1), yet, considering that it extended into that of Hezekiah, Isaiah must have been still young, [^33] when the leprous king died. Jewish legend has fabled much about the stroke that descended on the sacrilegious king. In his clumsy manner of attempting to account for the directly Divine by natural causes, Josephus [^34] connects the sudden leprosy of the king with that earthquake (Amos 1:1) of which the terrible memory so lingered in the popular memory as almost to form an era in their history (Zech. 14:4, 5). In that earthquake, which Josephus describes, he tells us: "a rent was made in the Temple, and the bright rays of the sun shone through it, and fell upon the king's face, insomuch that the leprosy seized upon him immediately." Other Jewish writers strangely identify the death of Uzziah referred to in Isa. 6:1, with the living death of his leprosy, and the earthquake with the solemn scene there pictured. Yet this application of theirs is certainly true when they rank Uzziah with those "who attained not what they sought, and from whom was taken that which they had" (Ber. R. 20).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] We are writing on the supposition of the correctness of the numbers in the Biblical text.
[^2] Josephus (Ant. 9.11, 1) describes him as "a friend" of the king.
[^3] "before the (?) people"—in public view. The LXX., apparently unable to understand the Hebrew words, have left them untranslated, and made Keblaam the name either of the place where Zachariah was killed, or else, according to Ewald, of his murderer.
[^4] Ant. u. s.
[^5] According to Josephus, with his army, and gave battle to Shallum.
[^6] For a description of Tirzah see Book 5, p. 645.
[^7] It seems doubtful whether this was the Tiphsah of Solomon (1 Kings 4:24), which lay on the banks of the Euphrates. The name, which means "a ford," is so general that it may have attached to other places. At the same time it should be remembered that about that period Assyria had fallen into a state of great weakness.
[^8] Such horrors were not unheard of on the part of Israel, though only too common in heathen warfare (2 Kings 8:12; Hos. 13:16; Amos 1:13).
[^9] The identity of the Biblical Pul with Tiglath-pileser II. has, we believe, been lately proved beyond the possibility of doubt. On the subject generally, comp. Sayce, Fresh Light from the Ancient Monuments, pp. 125-132; Schrader, u. s., and the article by the same writer in Riehm's Hand-W. p. 1664, etc.
[^10] About three hours north of Aleppo. Its possession did not, however, become permanent till the time of Sennacherib.
[^11] The account which we have given is confirmed by the reference to "the burden" or tribute of "the king of princes" the king of Assyria, Hos. 8:10. Some writers have regarded this event as forming the subject of the prophecy in Amos 7:1-3.
[^12] According to Josephus he "followed the barbarity of his father" (Ant. 9.11, 1).
[^13] Some critics have supposed that his low birth is indicated by his designation as simply "the son of Remaliah" in Isa. 7:4, 5, 9; 8:6.
[^14] The Biblical text has 20, , which seems to be a transcriber's error for , 30. The latter number seems required by a comparison of 2 Kings 15:32, 33; 17:1. The only alternative seems to interpose an interregnum of ten years between Pekah and Hoshea, of which, however, the Biblical text does not give any indication.
[^15] Riehm, in the elaborate Art. Zeitrechnung (in his Hand-W.) maintains that the sixteen years of Jotham's reign consisted of twelve years of co-regency with Uzziah, and only four years of sole rule. If there had been four years of sole rule a confusion of this number with the sixteen years of his reign may have led a transcriber to the erroneous notice about the "twentieth year of Jotham" (2 Kings 15:30).
[^16] Comp. 2 Chron. 33:14; Neh. 3:26, 27; Jos. Jew War. 5.6, 1-3. From Ophel the "water-gate" opened into Gihon and the Valley of the Kidron. Comp. here the prophecy Isa. 32:14, where for "the forts" (in the A. V.) translate "Ophel."
[^17] There were four gates opening from the outer, or bounding, wall of the Temple: north, south, east, and west, (comp. the watchposts of the Levites, 1 Chron. 26:14-18. But Bishop Haneberg (Relig. Alterth. p. 226, 4) infers that there were six gates—that is, two (not one) respectively in the south and west. In the Temple of Ezekiel (Ez. 40:6-16, 20-22, 24-27) only three gates are mentioned: North, East, and South.
[^18] For this wall see 1 Kings 6:36; 7:12. Comp. Josephus, Ant. 8:3, 9.
[^19] The Kor (more anciently designated Homer or rather Chomer)—ten Ephah—thirty Seah—100 Omer or Issaron ("tenth," viz. of an Ephah)—180 Qabh (). According to the Rabbis the Qabh held—twenty-four egg shells. Roughly speaking, the Kor would be less than "a quarter."
[^20] I am following the calculations of Schrader (Keilinschr. u. d. A. Test. pp. 142-144, and in the Article in Riehm's Hand-W. According to Herzfeld (Handelsgesch, p. 172), the sum would amount to Â£ 18,800, but his computation is based on a misconception.
[^21] Some writers have supposed that there was such during the first period after the revolution headed by Pekah.
[^22] One year contemporarily with Uzziah; sixteen years contemporarily with Jotham; twelve years contemporarily with Ahaz—twenty-nine, or, allowing for the mode of reckoning years: thirty years.
[^23] So, in 2 Chron. 28:1, according to the reading of some Codices, supported by the LXX. and the Syr. The correctness of this reading appears from a comparison with 2 Chron. 29:1. For if Ahaz had, after sixteen years' reign, died at the age of thirty-six, and his son succeeded him at the age of twenty-five, Ahaz must have been wedded when only ten years old. Similarly, we have to correct in 2 Kings 16:2 the numeral 20 into 25.
[^24] Comp. Euseb. Praepar. Evang. 1.10, 44.
[^25] This is the probable meaning of "Hinnom," although the name seems originally to have been that of a person.
[^26] In 2 Kings 16:3 only one son is mentioned as passed through the fire. This seems the more likely (comp. 2 Kings 3:27; 21:6), and the plural in Chronicles is probably on a generalisation. When in 2 Kings we read that he "made his son pass through the fire," this may be either a technical expression, or it may refer to one of the original ideas or purposes of these sacrifices: that of lustration by fire. And possibly the practice may not always have been the same, and hence the original expression retained. But from the parallel passage in Chronicles there cannot be a doubt that, in this instance, as in those afterwards recorded, the unhappy victim was literally burnt. That those "passed through the fire" were really burnt, appears from a comparison of Jer. 32:35 with 7:31, and of Ezek. 16:21 with 23:37. On the question whether the children were only passed through the fire or burnt in it the Rabbis have expressed different opinions. In Yalkut on Jer. 7:31, (2, p. 61 col. d.) we have a realistic description of the brass figure of Moloch, hollow and filled with fire, with an ox's head and human arms into which the children were laid. This seems to agree with the account of the Carthagenian rite (Diodor. Sic. 20.14). Into the large literature on the subject this is not the place to enter. To the present writer it has often seemed more learned than clear. For our purpose it is more important to notice that, according to Psa. 106:37, Ezek. 16:20, the victims seem to have been first slain and then burnt. It would thus be a terrible counterpart of the Old Testament burnt sacrifices. Josephus (Ant. 9.12, 1) also states that Ahaz had actually burnt his son.
[^27] The "high places" were those on which there was a sanctuary or chapel ()—"the hills," those on which only an altar was reared.
[^28] It does not, however, necessarily follow that Ahaz himself offered the sacrifices in the sense of discharging priestly functions, although 2 Kings 16:13 seems rather to lead up to this.
[^29] : "he brought near" (2 Kings 16:14, A. V. "he brought"), i.e., he brought the one near to the other.
[^30] The old altar of burnt offering, so called in contradistinction to the "golden altar" of incense in the Holy Place.
[^31] In the mention of the daily morning-sacrifice, the meat-offering is omitted; in that of the evening sacrifice, the burnt offering. But in both cases special mention was not required, since every burnt sacrifice had its meat-offering (Numb. 7:87; 15:2-12); while the evening sacrifice smoked all night on the altar (Lev. 6:12, 13), so that its consummation could not be witnessed by the worshippers.
[^32] The best rendering of the difficult expression in 2 Kings 16:15: "the brazen altar shall be for me to inquire by" (A. V. and R. V.) is: "shall be for me to consider." Comp. Prov. 20:25 and Nowack ad loc.
[^33] So, as the LXX. rightly render it, and not "pavement" as in the A. V. and R. V.
[^34] It has been surmised that this Aliyah had been constructed by Ahaz on one of the buildings in the Temple court (for the latter comp. Jer. 35:4). But may it not have been on the Aliyah over the Holy and Most Holy Places (1 Kings 6:17—20), and may there not be some connection between this also and the change in the king's Sabbath-stand, and in his entry to it?
