The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the August 2008 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “The Kingdom Up on High,” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Ask the children to listen as you hum or play “The Holy Ghost” (Children’s Songbook, 105; Tambuli, May 1991, F7). The song will give them a clue about the important person you are going to talk about. Invite the children to share what they know about the Holy Ghost, and include in the discussion the four statements found in Primary 3, lesson 12, p. 57.

    Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 601 (Baptism) and 602 (The Gift of the Holy Ghost). Review the ordinances of baptism, confirmation, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. Provide each child with a copy of the baptism and confirmation circle found on page F4. Allow them time to complete the activity. Emphasize that these ordinances are linked together and that the circle will help them remember the importance of both experiences.

    Invite the children to share experiences when they were prompted by the Holy Ghost to make good choices. After each experience is shared, sing the last two phrases of the second verse of “The Holy Ghost,” beginning with “Oh, may I always listen to that still small voice.” Bear your testimony of the blessing of having the gift of the Holy Ghost and how He has helped you make righteous choices.

2.  Gather and prepare the materials to play “Keeping Our Baptismal Covenant” (Liahona, Oct. 2006, F8). Begin by telling the story “Clean Again” (Liahona, Oct. 2006, F10). On the chalkboard write the steps of repentance, and review them with the children (see Primary 3, lesson 10, p. 46).

    Play “Keeping Our Baptismal Covenant.” During the game, whenever a child lands on a square that requires him or her to move back, discuss the steps of repentance and invite the children to suggest what he or she could do to repent. Conclude by singing a song or hymn about repentance. Bear testimony of repentance.

3.  Song presentation: “When Jesus Christ Was Baptized” (Children’s Songbook, 102; Liahona, Sept. 1997, F5). Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 208 (John the Baptist Baptizing Jesus), and invite the children to share what they know about this event. Read Matthew 3:13–17. As you teach the first verse of “When Jesus Christ Was Baptized,” invite the children to raise their hands when the song reminds them of events that occurred in the scripture account.

    As you teach the song, direct the children’s listening by asking questions such as “What is the name of the river where Jesus was baptized?” “Who was there when Jesus was baptized?” “What do I follow when I am baptized?” “How am I baptized?” “What power is used to baptize?” “Whose kingdom will I be a member of when I am baptized?” “What will guide me every hour?” This song provides a wonderful opportunity to teach important doctrine to the children through song. Bear testimony of these important truths as you teach.

    The melody of this song is gentle and soothing. Invite the children to sing it reverently. It may be helpful to teach it at a slower tempo than is suggested. Then when the children are familiar with the words, increase the tempo to what the composer recommends. To add interest as you review this song, sing the first two lines softly, and then increase the volume when the melody goes up on the third line. Help the children recognize that the melody on the last line goes down in pitch, which invites them to sing the last line softly.
