Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

Introduction

The Achievement of Lowell Bennion

What does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? (Micah 6:8.)

A unique figure and voice enlivens—and haunts—late twentieth-century Mormonism. The figure is stooped slightly forward, dressed in work clothes or inexpensive, sometimes mismatched, pants and jacket, with blunt farmer's hands protruding, a browned face and pate, and only a fringe of sandy, graying hair. That figure has been seen driving to teach religion at the Salt Lake Institute of Religion or sociology at the University of Utah, or delivering donated food to a Salt Lake widow, all in a battered and ancient Ford truck. He has been seen, looking a bit awkward in academic robes, delivering the baccalaureate address at the university and, more comfortable in grubby Levis, boots, and straw hat, teaching city boys how to ride a horse and to build a pole barn in the Teton Valley in eastern Idaho. He has been seen giving a Brigham Young University devotional address, instructing a conference of Sunday School teachers, conducting sacrament service as bishop of a Salt Lake City ward, and, now with the hint of a shuffle added to his unhurried, bent-forward gait, moving from session to session at the Sunstone Theological Symposium.

Lowell Bennion's voice has not been elegant, but rather rough and homey, quite informal and unself-conscious, even when delivering an eloquent talk to an LDS general conference on preparing for a happy marriage. He is completely fearless, almost old-fashioned, outspoken against unchastity, drugs, intellectual pride, materialism, and prejudice—and willing to be heard and published anywhere. Until authors were no longer identified in the 1970s, his name appeared more often than any other in LDS Church lesson manuals, which he wrote for all the auxiliaries. He has spoken in more essays and books, over a greater variety of subjects, than perhaps any other contemporary Mormon. He is the only one to have written for nearly every independent and official Mormon periodical of the twentieth century.

Why do that voice and figure haunt, as well as enliven, us? Brother Bennion is among the gentlest and meekest of men, constantly conciliatory and nonconfrontive. However, in a time when our quick growth in numbers and material blessings tempts us Mormons to forget some important things, his teaching and writing—and especially his life—provide us with clear, challenging reminders of the central message of the Hebrew prophets and of Christ, reaffirmed by the prophets of the Restoration: that true religion is based in social morality. His voice has spoken, for some sixty years, with a simplicity and clarity like water in a dry land, in favor of positive, integrated religion, in support of a unified philosophy of life, grounded in affirmative and universal principles. His faith is based in Joseph Smith's revelation of the truth that all humans are co-eternal with God—the same kind of beings and thus co-creators with him. Their basic natures are fulfilled and moved to progression through receiving unconditional love and being given opportunities to love and to serve creatively the needs of all such God-like beings, including God, their neighbors, and themselves.

We are haunted by this unique voice because we know that at times we have discriminated against others because of race or sex. We know that sometimes we value programs over people and sometimes break hearts rather than break rules—or sometimes prefer "right doctrine" to simple justice and mercy. We know that with all our growth and great buildings and high activity, we sometimes forget the fatherless and widows, the naked and those in prison, even the ones right among us, as well as strangers and foreigners. We know how hard it is, with busy schedules and a favorable image to preserve and the cumbering responsibilities of a worldwide church, to remember "the least of these."

Brother Bennion is one who has not forgotten. Without patronizing or condemning, he has taught and written to remind us. And he has set a constant, humble example for us. At the same time (and this, I believe, is the reason his ideas and example will continue to haunt us, the reason he will long be a gentle but piercing reminder) he has provided one of the most unified pictures we have of our theology, including a clear explication of its central and most challenging doctrines concerning Christ's atonement and the way of salvation.

One of Lowell Bennion's students, who entered the University of Utah in 1950, remembers attending his small LDS institute classes, where there was no indoctrination but members were led to express their developing thoughts and feelings. "That thrilled me," the former student says. "It confirmed my soul. For the first time in my religious learning I felt the teacher was genuinely interested in the questions he was asking, not simply looking for a set answer, and that he was interested in me and my response. We were soon sitting on the edge of our seats trying to help him—and that was the best help for us!"

I went to the U. from 1951 to 1958, interrupted by a mission to Samoa. I took classes from Brother B., as we called him, and his colleagues. I participated in the LDS fraternity/sorority, Lambda Delta Sigma, which they had created to provide social, service, and spiritual experiences to balance their students' intellectual studies. And I attended the Friday noon devotionals at the institute, where faith and reason were joined in sermons that were both intellectually stimulating and spiritually and emotionally moving—sermons often given by the faculty itself. The faculty during that time—Brother Bennion, T. Edgar Lyon, George Boyd, and Elder Marion D. Hanks (who continued teaching there after being called as a General Authority in 1952)—were all brilliant thinkers and teachers and also devoted Latter-day Saints. And because they were deeply involved, and were known by their students and others to be deeply involved, in serving the poor and deprived throughout the Salt Lake Valley, they spoke with the unique authority of practicing Christians.

Almost every Saturday Brother B. would accompany a Lambda Delta Sigma chapter or two as they cleaned the yard and painted the house of a widow or elderly couple in the valley. We students saw him delivering food in his truck. We knew from personal experience that Elder Hanks often spent a stormy winter evening driving around helping people stalled in the snow, and we had heard that when all the hotels refused rooms to black athletes participating in the NCAA track tournament in Salt Lake City, his family took them in. When that faculty told us the gospel was true and that it called us to a life of selfless service, we believed them. When they told us the Church was true, despite our human failings, we trusted them.

Dr. Bennion's approach to teaching, which greatly influenced the rest of his faculty and gradually his many students, was based partly on the example of his father, who was known as one of the finest Socratic teachers in the Church. But Brother B. added a unique perspective of his own, which he articulated early in his missionary journal and has preached consistently as well as demonstrated for sixty years: that any religious principle must be consistent within its whole context, particularly the great and repeated fundamentals (chief of which are Christ's teachings), and that its reliability is greatly strengthened by verification through a variety of ways of knowing: reason and experience as well as authority and the witness of the Spirit. He has demonstrated that the form of teaching used by Christ, whom he calls "the Master Teacher," and by the great teacher-prophets of the scriptures insists on consistency, openly invites skepticism of itself, and offers a variety of proofs, even asking us to conduct "an experiment" upon his words. (Alma 32:27.) It is aimed at providing foundation principles for dynamic development and a variety of insights with which to respond to life's dynamic variety, not static "answers."

I remember a class at the institute in about 1953 on the nature of God. A student asked why, if God is no respecter of persons, as the scriptures and common sense clearly indicate, a difference existed in God's church between blacks and all others. I immediately answered, as I had been taught all my life, "Well, God is also a God of justice, and since blacks were not valiant in the preexistence, they are cursed with the just consequences." In the discussion following my remark, Brother Bennion—who in my experience never mentioned this issue except when directly questioned—pronounced no answers, quoted no dogma. He simply asked me how I knew blacks had not been valiant. When I had no answer but tradition, he gently suggested that the God revealed in Christ would surely let blacks know what they had done wrong and how they could repent, rather than merely punishing them—and since God had done no such thing, it seemed better to believe that blacks had been, and were, no different spiritually from the rest of us. As I thought about this, my way of thinking about the gospel was changed, and not merely concerning this issue. I came to realize with stunning clarity that many of my beliefs, ones that profoundly affected my relationships to others, were based on flimsy and unexamined evidence and were directly contradictory to great gospel principles like the impartial Fatherhood of God, the universal brotherhood of humankind, and the unconditional atonement, which offered sufficient power to all to repent and be both saved and exalted.

That crucial change in me was not imposed from outside by authority. It was educated, educed, led out of me by Brother B. I was able to watch how he did it not long after I left the U. I was sent by the Air Force to study to be a weather officer at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Boston, and the Bennions visited our Cambridge Branch on their way to New York to meet their son returning from a mission in West Germany. The Sunday School lesson, on ward teaching, was being taught in the usual manner (the teacher simply asking "What word am I thinking of?" questions about the purpose and structure of ward teaching); and the class, as usual, was giving the correct answers but was bored. Knowing how much this pained him, I waited for Brother B. to rise in prophetic fury and denounce the teacher, the lesson manual, or the class. After a while (he was waiting, I realized later, for me or someone else to take the lead), he did raise his hand. But then he simply asked, with what we all recognized as genuine, uncondemning interest, why, since ward teaching was obviously such a wonderful program, true to fundamental gospel principles and human needs, we had such a hard time doing it. He didn't say another word, but we had the best, most honest, helpful, and mutually supportive discussion I remember in that branch. I learned what I should have had sense to see he was teaching us earlier at the U.—that any member of a class or group, even of a large audience, can make the learning situation more successful by asking (either aloud or silently) genuine questions that lovingly and sincerely point toward integrated basics: fundamentals rooted in the eternal, universal human needs as revealed by Christ.

Lowell Bennion is the best teacher I have known. I believe he is also one of the finest practical philosophers The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has produced in the twentieth century. He is both a fine thinker about the great theoretical principles on which our practical, living religion is based and a fine practitioner of those principles. He is good evidence for his own favorite scripture, quoted at the beginning of this introduction, in which the Hebrew prophet Micah tells us that, instead of programs and performance, even instead of sacrifice, what the Lord wants of us is justice and mercy and humble love of him and what he stands for—what Christ called "the weightier matters." All over the world there are former students and colleagues, in business offices and classrooms and kitchens and slums, who go about doing good to "the least of these," Christ's brothers and sisters, because of the teaching and example of Lowell Bennion. This book is intended to help that tribe increase, by extending Brother B. to new minds and hearts.

There are now two Bennion memorials at the University of Utah, the new Lowell L. Bennion Center for Community Service and the education building, named after Lowell's father, Milton Bennion. He was Dean of the College of Education and Professor of Philosophy at the U. and later head of the LDS Sunday Schools, and his Moral Teachings of the New Testament and many essays and reviews in Church and professional journals remain a significant contribution to religious education. He was, of course, a major influence on Lowell. Others of great influence were Arthur Beeley, who taught him sociology and involved him in a study of the social habits of young men in Salt Lake Valley before his mission, and Elder John A. Widtsoe, LDS apostle and head of Church Education, who was so impressed when he met Lowell while Lowell was studying in Vienna in 1932 that he hired him two years later, as a mere twenty-six-year-old, to head the new Salt Lake Institute of Religion.

These men influenced Brother Bennion strongly toward rational religion and toward an attempt to integrate all human scholarship and experience with the gospel. Both of these emphases fit naturally with his interest in the great German philosopher and developer of the sociology of religion, Max Weber, who had died in 1922. But before he did his dissertation on Weber, Lowell got married and then served a mission in Germany and Switzerland, and his wife, Merle, joined him in Europe for his graduate work. His diary effectively reveals his intense interest in individuals and relationships. His published writings are all modest, even shy, using personal experiences as Christ used parables, only to teach or illustrate principles, not to reveal or examine himself. Therefore, the diary, from which I have quoted excerpts, is unique in exposing the range and depth of his personality and in detailing his spiritual experiences and humble service. Those certainly helped produce the ethical idealism and personal piety that have characterized his work as much as its rational brilliance and coherence.

Lowell had graduated from the U. in 1928 at age nineteen, because he had skipped two grades. He was married on September 18 and left for his mission one month later. He was extremely lonely without Merle and wrote his diary, full of longings and passionate endearments, essentially as letters to her. He yearned for the time when he could share his experiences and spiritual growth and the culture of Europe with her directly, and a plan to make that possible slowly formed and was realized when his father, who must have sensed his potential, offered to pay his way while he stayed on to do a doctorate at a European university. He studied at Erlangen in Germany and the University of Vienna, but when Hitler came to power, he went to Strasbourg, France, where he wrote Max Weber's Methodology, the first full-length study of Weber in English, publishing it in Paris in 1933.

Lowell compares Weber to Karl Marx, tracing the similar origins of their work in an effort to understand humans in the context of the modern capitalistic order and analyzing their very different conclusions. He shows how Weber's passion to base his work in objective, "value-free" methodologies keeps him from the propagandistic and dogmatic tendencies of Marxism. To demonstrate the continuing influence of Weber on Lowell, as well as Lowell's insight into Weber's achievement, I have included an informal speech from 1982, in which he reviews his own life as a sociologist and Weber's main ideas.

The Bennions returned to Salt Lake City on New Year's Day, 1934, penniless and jobless at the bottom of the Depression. They were still sorrowing over their first child, Laurel, born in France, who had died of an infection at six months. Lowell got work as an education director for the Civilian Conservation Corps (Federal public works) in Salina and then Soapstone, Utah, where he and Merle lived in an abandoned sheep camp. In the fall he was asked to head the new Salt Lake Institute of Religion, where he remained until 1962, interrupted only by a two-year term as the first director of the Tucson (Arizona) Institute. He managed to find time in the early part of 1934 to write his first Church manual, What About Religion?, a practical study of how religious feelings develop and affect our everyday lives, very much influenced by his knowledge of Weber's studies of world religions and religious forces. By 1937 his reputation had grown to the point he was invited by President Hugh B. Brown of the British Mission to write five articles for the Millennial Star. They show his growing confidence, first expressed in his mission diary when he was studying a variety of great religious and philosophical texts, that a life lived accepting the possibility of God's existence is not only intellectually defensible but also exciting, challenging, and much less wasteful than the alternative. He was increasingly convinced—and able to convincingly express—that life is purposeful insofar as it is meaningful, that is, as it is based on clearly conceived principles related to universal human needs. By 1939 his experience in developing a curriculum and in teaching and counseling college students provided the basis for a book review and a long essay on teaching for the new periodical of the Church Education System, Week-day Religious Education; for another MIA manual, Youth and Its Religion; and for the first version of probably his most important book: The Religion of the Latter-day Saints. That book became the standard theology text for the LDS institutes for many years and in 1955 was revised into An Introduction to the Gospel, which became a standard Sunday School manual for fifteen years and is still one of the best systematic versions of Mormon theology. It reflects Brother Bennion's characteristic struggle against the tendency to "pulverize" the gospel, to analyze and defend and explain it in small chunks that may have no logical connection and may, in fact, contradict each other. It powerfully demonstrates the coherent moral and spiritual force available in Mormon thought.

During the 1940s Lowell studied the intellectual contributions of Joseph Smith in restoring the gospel and gave radio talks in Salt Lake and the annual Joseph Smith Memorial Lecture at the Logan (Utah) Institute of Religion on the creative mind and generous spirit of the founder of Mormonism. He developed his orthodox, commonsense views of courtship and marriage, based on an analysis of three kinds of love—unconditional or Christ-like, friendship, and romance. He taught the need to build a relationship firmly on the first and second before the third can play its powerful, important role. And he continued to express his ideas in a variety of forums: Primary, Sunday School, and MIA manuals, Relief Society lessons, institute curriculum materials, and his first essay for the Church's official magazine, the Improvement Era, "The Fruits of Religious Living in This Life."

In the 1950s and '60s Brother Bennion developed into an amazingly prolific as well as effective writer, producing many excellent lesson manuals, three major books, and scores of fine articles for the Improvement Era and the Instructor. There were periods in the early '60s when he had an article in every issue of both periodicals and his manuals were being used by two or three different classes in both the Sunday School and the MIA, in English and also in a number of foreign languages. During the '50s he was invited by BYU President Ernest Wilkinson to give devotionals at various times and by University of Utah President Ray Olpin to give the baccalaureate address at the 1956 commencement. President David O. McKay asked him to speak at general conference in 1958 (and again in 1968, one of the few lay Church members so honored). He was asked to keynote a "Religion in Life Week" at the University of Colorado and to speak at the Deseret Sunday School Union Conference in 1962, and he addressed an "Inter-faith Dialogue" of Salt Lake religious leaders on aspects of Mormonism in 1963 and 1964.

During this time of intense intellectual effort, Brother Bennion was continuing his commitment to practical religion, not only through Lambda Delta Sigma but also by developing a boys' ranch in Teton Valley, near Driggs, Idaho. Since his sociological study of Salt Lake boys in 1927, he had felt the need to provide urban youth with the opportunities for outdoor work and recreation that had blessed him as a boy. A former student offered financing, and Brother Bennion searched all over Mormon country until he found the right ranch. Then, aided by boys themselves (two sessions of forty each summer), he built the dormitories, lodge, and barns. He continued this unique service, at less than cost, helped by young counselors and providing reduced or no fees for the needy, for over twenty years, from 1962 to 1984, when his health would no longer permit. Now former students and counselors are planning to reopen the ranch. I know many—friends, children of friends, and other youths—who remember with enormous pleasure and gratitude the work and responsibility and cooperation, the faith-building discussions and counseling, at the ranch. They were blessed both by a utopian vision and by the ability of Brother B. to make his vision into a reality.

In 1962 Lowell Bennion left the Salt Lake Institute to become Assistant (and later Associate) Dean of Students and Professor of Sociology at the University of Utah. He had been courted for a full professorship by various departments of the U. throughout the '50s but had loved what he later called "the most complete relationship I have ever had with students" at the institute of religion too much to leave voluntarily. When he was released by the Church Department of Education from his work as institute director and teacher and invited to write courses of study at BYU, he decided instead to leave the system. He continued his output of manuals and articles for Church magazines for a while and continued to serve on the YMMIA general board and the Church's youth correlation committee (which met weekly to approve and coordinate all Church materials for youth). In 1968 he was asked to speak for the second time in general conference. But his role as a speaker and writer in Church forums was gradually diminished.

In the 1970s and '80s Brother Bennion's voice continued to be heard mainly through a series of short and quite popular books, published by Bookcraft and Deseret Book, and in various independent Mormon journals and forums. The books show his remarkable variety of expertise: a partial listing ranges from Husband and Wife and On Being a College Student (1972), to The Things That Matter Most (1978) and Jesus the Master Teacher (1980), to The Book of Mormon, A Guide to Christian Living (1985) and in 1988 The Unknown Testament, a book on the Old Testament. His essays and talks have become fewer but more powerful. "By Grace Are Ye Saved," a Christmas sermon published in 1966 in Dialogue, a new independent journal of Mormon thought for which he was an advisory editor, is a confession of his own neglect of the central gospel principle of grace and a moving call to all works-oriented Mormons to see and include that central principle of our faith. "The Things That Matter Most," a lecture given at the invitation of leaders of the Boston Massachusetts Stake for their Education Week in 1977, is a beautifully personal testimony of his coherent philosophy of life. And his address to the Washington Sunstone Theological Symposium in June 1987, "What It Means To Be a Christian" (published in the July 1987 issue of Sunstone), gives a challenging and mature estimate of the essentials of the Christian life.

Lowell Bennion speaks with the highest authority about the Christian life because of the way he passionately but unostentatiously lives it. In 1972, as he puts it, he "left the halls of ivy for the real world." At age sixty-four, so much valued at the University of Utah that he could have stayed on there after retirement, he was asked to serve on a selection committee for a new executive director of the Community Services Council—and then accepted a draft to take the position himself. This private service agency, funded by United Way, had been mainly engaged in studying service needs and resources in the Salt Lake Valley. Brother Bennion led the council into direct service, which now includes a food bank that collects contributions (often through Brother Bennion himself in his truck) and stocks centers that provide food for thousands of needy households. As director, he also coordinates hundreds of volunteers doing chore services (painting and fixing up houses again as in the institute days, providing mail service and meals, and so forth) for the elderly and handicapped; an independent living center for paraplegics; a program to provide dentures and eyeglasses for indigent senior citizens at greatly reduced cost; and functional fashions to make manageable clothing for the handicapped. As Brother Bennion says, with admitted oversimplification, "I used to teach religion; now I practice it."

During these sixteen years of full-time community service, extending far past normal retirement as he has just passed his eightieth year, Lowell Bennion has also continued to serve his church faithfully and quietly—remaining on the correlation committee until 1972, serving on various high councils, being called as a bishop in 1979, and becoming a gospel doctrine teacher after his term as bishop.

The honors have come mainly from outside the official church and, despite Lowell's obvious embarrassment, have begun to crescendo in the 1980s: The Phi Kappa Phi Honorary Address at BYU, 1973.

The invited address at the Boston Massachusetts Stake, 1977. The 1981 Distinguished Service to Humanity Award from the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychologists. An honorary degree from the University of Utah, 1982. Laudatory articles about him in the Deseret News (1984), Sunstone (1985), and Utah's Peace News (1987). The Good Samaritan Award from Utahns Against Hunger (1985).

An Evening for Lowell Bennion, in October 1986, where he was praised by a poet and student, Emma Lou Thayne; a colleague at Community Services, Elaine Smart; a scholar and friend, Sterling W. McMurrin; and a General Authority and co-teacher, Marion D. Hanks. (He also received a station wagon—more comfortable for aging legs but still useful for delivering groceries—to replace the latest battered truck.)

Election to Utah's honorary society, the Beehive Hall of Fame (1987).

Recipient of the Richard D. Bass award for Distinguished Service by a Utahn in the Humanities (April 1988).

Subject of one of the essays on great LDS teachers in Teachers Who Touch Lives: Methods of the Masters (Horizon, 1988) and of an extended review-essay (including a complete, annotated bibliography) in the July 1988 Sunstone.

Charles Johnson, executive director of United Way, expressed well what the honors are for: "He's a combination of an Old Testament prophet, who wants to give you his vision of what should be, and a New Testament Good Samaritan, who doesn't stand back and talk, but steps in to do the good work himself."

The vision Lowell Bennion has provided in his teaching and writing is rich in variety and implication but coherent, focused on a few basics: Humans should engage in religious thought and living because otherwise their universal needs for meaning, for creative engagement in causes greater than themselves and extending beyond life, for unconditional love and strength to repent and change their lives, will not be met. He often quotes Goethe, "Life, divided by reason, leaves a remainder," and William P. Montague, "Religion is the faith that the things that matter most are not ultimately at the mercy of the things that matter least." He loves the free, open, creative spirit of the restored gospel, especially Joseph Smith's unique contribution to Christian thought, the idea that all humans have eternal, God-like being in themselves and were not created from nothing and cannot be reduced to nothing, and thus that their very natures require and yearn for expansion, love, meaning beyond the earthly and material, in fact, for eternal progression. He does not see the gospel as prohibition and restriction, not as doggedly earning rewards or being subjected to either irresistible grace or predestined damnation from an inscrutable Deity. For him the gospel is a call to respond freely and rationally to the grace and knowledge given by Divine Beings that enable us to fulfill our own natures as their literal children. "The truly religious person," he writes, "learns to thrill in the satisfaction that comes from freely living in harmony with God's laws." But he is also a stern realist; he knows that faith brings inner and eternal satisfactions but not relief from this world's evil and pain, and that loving service will not solve all problems or inevitably produce individual wealth or social utopias. He quotes the Hindu scripture, "To action alone thou hast a right, not to its fruits."

Brother Bennion has experienced and studied a great range of human life in detail and teaches practical guides: "Do not marry anyone with whom you have not worked on a committee." "A student should not come out of a class in religion with all the prophecies dated, the celestial kingdom landscaped, the past and future of the Creator understood, and himself ready to step into a place in the council of Deity." "Try a 'work party' sometime, where you have [groups of young people] helping the widows of the ward—serving with their hands, then coming together afterward for an old-fashioned supper, for singing, for prayer." "We should never hold a meeting, teach a class, or plan an activity without asking ourselves: How is this going to affect the people who will participate in the realization of their full potential as children of God?" Along with the practical advice, he is capable of creating memorable phrases: "In the realm of knowledge, one conforms to what is; in the realm of faith, one creates life after the image carried in the heart." "Even as I prefer marriage to living alone, so do I prefer to live in a world of both faith and rationality rather than in a world of either alone." "A Christian believes in plain and simple living and high thinking." Brother B. even indulged himself once in a set of poetic lines, which provide a concise version of his philosophy of life:

Learn to like what doesn't cost much.

Learn to like reading, conversation, music. Learn to like plain food, plain service, plain cooking. Learn to like fields, trees, brooks, hiking, rowing, climbing hills. Learn to like people, even though some of them may be different . . . different from you. Learn to like to work and enjoy the satsifaction of doing your job as well as it can be done. Learn to like the songs of birds, the companionship of dogs. Learn to like gardening, puttering around the house, and fixing things. Learn to like the sunrise and sunset, the beating of rain on the roof and windows, and the gentle fall of snow on a winter day. Learn to keep your wants simple and refuse to be controlled by the likes and dislikes of others.

Lowell Bennion's greatest and most lasting intellectual contributions, I believe, are his insistence on rational coherence in theology and his use of such a coherent, rational approach to give an understandable and personally moving explanation of the Atonement, the way in which Christ saves us from mortality, ignorance, and sin. Our theology has tended to be developed piecemeal in response to continuous revelation in complex and changing historical conditions. Lowell's writing has been a major factor both in giving it elegant intellectual shape and in revealing its powerful moral implications. He shows that its diverse teachings, which seem heretical to traditional Christian thought and elicit mockery from some non-Mormon thinkers and baldly inconsistent beliefs from some Mormon extremists, nevertheless have great rational consistency. Those diverse ideas, united into a systematic theology, lead directly from a marvelous affirmation of the eternal God-like nature of all humans and culminate in the call to respond to Christ's uniquely saving power and to serve him in the world in ways that fulfill our own and others' needs and nature.

Brother B's teachings are founded in the scriptures. I noticed as a student that his standard works were not marked up like most other teachers' (probably because of his aversion to proof-texting and to analyzing the gospel into disconnected, dogmatic fragments), but they were worn, throughout, to frazzled edges. He knows them well, all of them. It was through a more careful study than most others had made of the Book of Mormon teachings on the Atonement, particularly Alma 34, that he made his key discovery about how Christ's suffering and death can save us, not by paying for our sins after we have repented, but by providing us incentive and power to repent while we are still sinners. As Amulek says, the Atonement "bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance." (Alma 34:15.) That simple change in emphasis, first articulated by Brother Bennion in his Religion of the Latter-day Saints, has, I know from much personal experience, released many Mormons from the burden of guilt they previously carried because they were focusing on paying and justice rather than on responding to Christ's mercy, his free gift. They have learned to look with assurance to Christ for strength to repent.

Despite his love for the scriptures, Brother B. has taken a helpfully rational approach to them—and to all other authority, again insisting on consistency, especially on harmony with Christ's teachings, and on individual responsibility. "I do not accept any interpretation of scripture that denies the impartiality or love of God or the free agency and brotherhood of man," he has said. His Religion and the Pursuit of Truth (1959) and Understanding the Scriptures (1981) remain among the very best works on epistemology in Mormon thought; they provide a comprehensive analysis of how we can effectively go about answering the most fundamental and difficult question we face: How do we know something is true, worthy of our commitment?

Finally, of course, Brother Bennion rightly sees his greatest contribution in his trying to live the Mormon religion rather than in his teaching and writing. The "best of Lowell Bennion" is not really in this selection of his writings but in his life. However, the two aspects of theory and practice, of word and action, as he well knows, are inseparable. In one of his first published essays, "Teaching Religion by Word of Mouth," he recognizes the great value of learning religion though experience and example but then explores the enormous value of a third way, through the spoken and written word: "The skillful writer with eyes to see and ears to hear and the talent to express his keener insight and deeper understanding singles out tragedy, builds a plot around it, holds our attention to it until we feel it more intensely than life itself." He recommends Jesus, "the artist in parable," as the great example, an example he explores in detail in Jesus the Master Teacher (1980). He himself is such an artist, constructing parables from his own and others' experience and using the scriptures with great power. But the particular power in his writing derives less from its literary beauty than from the moral authority of his life and the felt presence of that life in his teachings.

I offer as a primary example of Lowell Bennion's unique literary and spiritual achievement the short essay, "The Weightier Matters" (1978). It has been placed first in this collection because it is an excellent introduction to the values of his life and writing—and one of the very best essays written by anyone in our time.

These selected writings are arranged under eight subjects, but they have also been chosen so as to give a sense of the range and development of Lowell Bennion's ideas and approaches. They include work that taken together gives a comprehensive survey of his major contributions to Mormon thought, but not at the sacrifice of quality: The best essays, addresses, and chapters from his books are here, including most of those mentioned above. For readers who would like to read the selections in order of their writing or to trace the development of his thought, a chronological listing is provided on pages 285-86, as well as the thematically arranged table of contents. Each chapter has information about the original context and source. I have silently corrected any typographical errors or misquotations in the original printings, occasionally improved punctuation or syntax for clarity, and changed a few outdated spellings and words. Any substantive changes or additions are indicated with brackets; deletions are marked by ellipses.

Eugene England

Provo, Utah

July 1988
