Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

3

The Place of a Liberal in Religion

Words change their meaning in time through usage. Awful, for example, [^1] once meant full of fear and awe; now it usually means bad or appalling. Likewise the word radical means literally "a person who gets at the root of things," but has come to mean one who is disruptive, if not destructive.

Words not only change in meaning through usage but they also mean different things to different people. This is particularly true of abstract, general terms that lack a concrete referent. The word liberal, the focus of our interest here today, is just such a woolly word. It has enjoyed a long and quite respectable history, but today a conservative Latter-day Saint may equate his liberal brother with a heretic or an apostate, while the [apostate] may refer to a liberal Mormon as a middle-of-the-roader unwilling to stand for anything.

The title of my talk today implies that there is room within religion for a liberal. And since we are meeting under the auspices of a Latter-day Saint Institute of Religion, my title also implies that the liberal has a respectable role to play in faith in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The Meaning of Liberal

Let us first look into the derivation of the term. The word liberal has a Latin root libera from liberare and means to set free. A liberal means literally, "pertaining to a free man." From the Oxford English Dictionary we read such characterizations as these: "free from restraint," "free in speech or action," "free from narrow prejudice," "free from bigotry or unreasonable prejudice based on tradition and established institutions," "open-minded," "candid."

From Webster's unabridged dictionary we read that a liberal is a person who is "not confined nor restricted, open-minded, broad-minded, not bound by authoritarianism, orthodoxy, or established forms in action, attitude, or opinion," "tolerant of change," "not bound by dogma, tradition or convention."

One author summarizes these statements in one sentence: "The defining trait of the liberal character is a will to be liberated from the coercion of external controls."

The History of Liberalism

Liberalism as an outlook on life—a Weltanschauung—is a product of modern Western civilization, of Europe and America. It was a movement to set men free from the rigid authority, control, dogmas, and traditions of both political and religious institutions of the Middle Ages. The liberal spirit found expression in many facets of life—in economic and political changes as well as in philosophy and theology. John Milton, John Stewart Mill, John Locke, and Adam Smith in England; Descartes and Rousseau in France; Goethe, Schiller, Lessing, and Kant in Germany; and Channing and Emerson in America—to name but a few—were liberators of the human spirit. Liberalism had many roots: the Renaissance (which was to a great extent a restoration of Greek culture), the Reformation, Humanism, experimental science, but most of all man himself, a free agent seeking his own freedom. These are some of the roots, I think, of our liberal tradition.

With this all-too-sketchy effort to define the word liberal and to recount the origin of the liberal movement, let us turn to the role of the liberal in religion today. (I warn you at this point that I shall be developing my own conception of a liberal, so be critical. However, I think that what I am going to say is consistent with the traditional meaning of liberalism. It is not inconsistent with the historical usage of the term.)

I. The first characteristic of a liberal is that he thinks. This means that he does his own thinking. In fact, anyone who thinks must think his own thoughts. A parrot or a parakeet is not a thinker but a mimic.

A liberal recognizes that man is a rational creature—homo sapiens, which means literally man of wisdom or knowledge. Believing that "the glory of God is intelligence" and that man is a child of God and made of eternal intelligence, how natural for a Latter-day Saint to believe that the glory of man also lies in his intelligence.

To say that a man does his own thinking does not mean that he is self-sufficient, that he has no need of the thinking of fellowmen or God. Only a fool lives within the perimeter of his own self-generated thought. A liberal mind is simply an open mind, eager to learn from any man. If he is a religious liberal, he will also feel his dependence on God, walk with humility—seek, ask, and knock at His door.

A liberal can also even accept things on authority. This he must do or learn everything from scratch. But the liberal is careful in his choice of authorities; he follows those who have established themselves legitimately through their logical thought, experience, or intuition and revelation. And he will prove his authorities by the same methods by which they became such—by thinking, by experience, by inspiration. A liberal will test another man's thinking by his own thinking, another man's inspiration by his own quest for inspiration, another man's way of life by his own.

Religion, like music, philosophy, or science, has no meaning to a person until it becomes his own. And so a liberal in religion carries his own lantern, which he lighted by the flame of an Amos, Alma, Jesus, or Joseph Smith and which he tries to keep aglow by the Spirit of God.

(I remember a very vigorous discussion one summer with college students in a Sunday School class in the University Ward. A student from BYU answered a question by quoting her teacher in theology. The meaning of her quotation was not clear to the class and so we asked her what it meant. She said, "I don't know, but I believe it because Professor So-and-so said it." She was not a liberal.)

While the liberal in religion has a high regard for the use of his mind, his religious life is not limited to his thinking. He knows that religion's unique function in life is to help man face the unknown and his contingency and to find meaning in his total existence as part of his total being.

"Life," said Goethe, "divided by human reason leaves a remainder." Religion is one appropriate way of dealing with that remainder. Religion transcends knowledge. It is also deeply concerned with relationships—man to man and man to God—and with other ultimate values in life: freedom, integrity, love, hope. These basic values and relationships can never be known by reason alone but must be learned intuitively and experientially.

Yes, a liberal walks by faith and lives by hope. He has no other choice save despair. And he is too optimistic to succumb to despair and cynicism. His walking by faith may differ from that of some of his co-religionists in two ways. Like Paul of old, he realizes that now we "see through a glass, darkly." A liberal is not dogmatic but open-minded, eager to recheck his thinking, to change and enlarge his view of religion as he increases in experience. (He takes the ninth and thirteenth Articles of Faith literally.) He realizes that his own knowledge of even eternal truths—of God's nature, of love or any other principle of the gospel—his knowledge of these things is not absolute but relative to his capacity, experience, and position.

People talk of unchanging truths in the gospel, and they worry about anybody who talks about changing truths. Now I'm not denying that there are absolute truths in life, in the universe, in the mind of God. I think love is an absolute, universal value. The thing I'm trying to say is that man's understanding of any of these absolutes, of any truth, is not absolute, is not eternal, and ought not to be unchanging. Our own human understanding is relative to our ignorance and to our limited experience. This is a difference that some people don't seem to understand.

A liberal is willing to walk by faith, but not blindly, if and when he can see. And so he uses faith not as a blind substitute for knowledge but as a springboard or a flashlight by which to gain knowledge. He feels free to question interpretations of religion that run counter to his knowledge, experience, and inspiration. (I think it was John Taylor who said that he would not be a slave to God Almighty.)

The Latter-day Saint liberal sees in the spirit of the Mormon movement encouragement to use his mind freely. There is a strong rational emphasis running through the restored gospel—frequent reference to a law-abiding universe, encouragement to seek learning by study and by faith, the statement that "man cannot be saved in ignorance," the admonition to "be anxiously engaged" in a good cause because the power is in man wherein he is an agent unto himself. These things are said so often they become trite. But think about them; they encourage us to use reason, to think.

Mormonism, like all historical movements, is a vast and complex phenomenon, and it may appear to be eclectic, an anachronism, or a hodgepodge to the outsider looking in. But to some of us on the inside, it has an inner logic of its own. Religion is not all emotion and faith and grace, as important as these things are; it also has a rational structure growing out of faith. The Ten Commandments make a lot of sense; the Beatitudes build on each other step by step to form a remarkable set of values, which one author calls "a map of life." Faith, repentance, baptism by water, and the Holy Spirit lay a coherent foundation for the Christian life; the attributes of God—justice, love, freedom, creativity, intelligence, fatherhood—complement each other and together form an adequate conception of a personal being worthy of our full adoration and commitment. Free agency, eternal progression, the brotherhood of man, "man is in the image of God," "man is that he might have joy" are postulates of faith about the nature of man that challenge the mind as well as belief and feeling. The liberal Latter-day Saint has every reason to make thinking a cornerstone of his religious life.

We've been talking about a liberal as one who tries to think critically, thoughtfully—do his own thinking. A liberal does more than think.

II. Second, a liberal's religion has strong human interest. For him, theology, scriptures, ordinances, priesthood, and history are not ends in themselves but are sacred and important means of helping men to realize the purpose of their lives. Religion is purposeful, and its purpose is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal [God-like] life of man." Jesus said, you recall, that man was not made for the sabbath but the sabbath was made for man. He might have said the same thing for each and all the principles of the gospel. Throughout the Gospels, Jesus is depicted as one who cared for men, who related the gospel to human needs, who told his disciples to do likewise: "Feed my sheep," "Feed my lambs." "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." A liberal does not reject theology or scripture; he simply believes that they must be interpreted and used in ways that will serve the divine purpose in human life.

One of my liberal friends called Mormonism "humanism in a context of faith." And I like that. Humanism in a context of faith—a humanism supported by faith and with divine goals and eternal perspective, if you will.

With his intense concern for man's welfare here and now, the liberal is not playing the role of the heretic but is walking in the tradition of the greatest of the prophets and of Jesus. The law of Moses was, despite its occasional lapses into harshness and particularism, humane and compassionate, remarkably so for the time in which it was written. The Hebrew prophets—Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, and Jeremiah—gave justice and mercy among men top priority in religion, in man's service to God. Paul said, "Though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing." (1 Corinthians 13:2.) And Joseph Smith tried desperately in many directions to transform the life of the individual and society through the medium of religion.

III. Third, a liberal emphasizes the ethical and moral aspects of religion. This follows naturally from his human concerns. Morality has to do with man's relationship to fellowman right now, in the present. This emphasis is also basic in our Judaeo-Christian faith. The prophets were harsh indeed on men who worshipped God with their lips while they were robbing the widow and orphan with their hands between sabbaths. Hear the words of Isaiah:

To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.

When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?

Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth; they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood. Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. (Isaiah 1:11-17.)

What Isaiah is saying, as you know, is that it doesn't matter what our prayer life is like or our temple work or the ordinances we've participated in or what sacred days and ceremonies we celebrate, if we do not practice justice; and if we do not relieve the oppressed and the widow and the orphan or the minority groups or anyone else in need, then our formal religious life is vain.

The liberal does not put man above God—far from it—but he recognizes God's deep concern for man, remembering that Christ lived, suffered, and died for man, and that he loved the poor, dined with sinners, and healed the afflicted. The liberal believes, with Jesus and the prophets, that nothing should stand in the way of justice and mercy among men, that everything written not only in "the law and the prophets" but in all of scripture depends on love of God and man.

Morality is not the most unique contribution of religion to life; faith is the more distinctive gift of religion to man. However, in the teaching and life of the Hebrew prophets and Jesus, morality had a certain primacy. Religious worship and belief that ignored or contradicted justice and mercy were condemned. Micah gives classic statement to the essence of religion and ends with what I think is the creed of a religious liberal, when he says: "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? . . . He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:6, 8.)

IV. The liberal in religion feels a closer kinship to the prophetic than he does to the priestly role in religion.

Careful students of religious history have noted two types of religious leaders, particularly in Judaism and Christianity. Max Weber, a great German scholar, classified religious leaders as prophets and priests. And mind you, these are types and they are perhaps spoken of more in sociological than in religious terms.

Weber described prophets as men who spoke "as one having authority" out of their own calling. They broke with the existing order; they were critics of the immoralities and religious formalities of their people, such as I've illustrated with Isaiah and Micah. Like Jesus, they were revolutionary in their day: "It is written . . . but I say unto you." Jesus didn't reject the old, but he gave a new thrust and a different emphasis to that which had gone before: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Matthew 23:23.)

Prophets try to get people to put religion in perspective, to see it in terms of great fundamentals and in terms of ethics as well as theology. Prophets have never been bound by the past. They speak for God afresh in the interest of man, in the light of the great ideals of religion, and in the light of God's purpose and character. The other type of religious leader, Weber calls a priest. By this he means a man in any faith whose primary concern is to conserve the religion of the founder—of a Moses or Christ, for example. The priest canonizes scripture, refines doctrine, establishes tradition, records history, performs sacred rites and sacraments. In this way he builds and maintains the church, welding the believers into a meaningful fellowship.

Religion wouldn't survive if we just had the prophetic word. It would die with the prophet. Religion needs an order of religious leaders who are concerned with conservation and preservation. And I have the greatest respect for men who have done and who do this for us. If we didn't come together and partake of the sacrament as a body of believers; if we didn't sing Mormon hymns together and pray together; if we didn't have traditions to inspire us, we wouldn't exist as a religious movement, and maybe our individual religious life would fade out.

Both the prophet and the priest have great roles to play in religion, the one to create and the other to preserve. Individual leaders and followers may be closer to one type or the other or may even combine both in their lives, as Ezekiel did. But I repeat that I think liberals are more caught up with the prophetic emphasis than with the priestly.

Conclusion

Now a word in conclusion. Let me recapitulate and bear my testimony. We have described the liberal as one who feels free to think about religion and make it his very own. We have noted that the liberal's first concern is "the worth of souls," of each human being here and now as well as in eternity. Therefore, the liberal is deeply committed to the moral requirements of the gospel—to justice and mercy—in the life of the individual and in the nature of society. He sees this as the main thrust of the prophets and Jesus.

The liberal in religion has great affection for the creative, idealistic, and fundamental character of the prophetic emphasis in religion, though he also respects and sees the need for the more institutional functions of religion—if these are used to build faith and righteousness and satisfy human needs and not to substitute for them.

I have an idea that all religious people have to have some way of knowing that they are being religious, that they are religious. There is a danger, I think, that people who are too wrapped up in theology may get their religious satisfaction out of theology; or if they are too wrapped up in institutional activity—church activity—they may equate religious living with church activity. I maintain that theology and church activity, and all the ordinances of the Church, ought to lead us somewhere. They ought to result in people learning to do justly and love mercy one to another. They ought to build faith and righteousness and not substitute for these things. And every ordinance of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, if you look it up in the original, has this intention. It is a symbol of moral religious living, not an end in itself. (You're not baptized until you become a real Christian, if you read Doctrine and Covenants, section 20, verse 37.) Listen to the sacramental prayer next Sunday. We bear witness that we take upon us the name of Jesus Christ, and keep his commandments, and always remember him, that we might have his spirit to be with us. The sacrament is instrumental to the religious life, to the moral life; it is not an end in itself. We mustn't get caught up in theology and history as ends in themselves.

The liberal also sees more good than evil in human nature. As one of them, an interesting convert to the Church, said to me, "How can a person who is a child of God be more innately evil than good?" Despite man's terrible inhumanity to man, the liberal Mormon will not despair of human nature but will work for its self-fulfillment with Christ as the ideal.

A final word. There are many liberals in our society outside of the domain of religion who are highly critical of it, particularly in its institutionalized forms. I have friends who are highly critical of everything that goes on in the name of religion. Many of these liberals are not only free-thinking but also highly ethical, moral, and humane. I have great respect for them. But there are also liberal-minded people within religion—and many within the Latter-day Saint faith. Each is an individual with his own cherished faith and his own principles. It is a gross and shameful error to stereotype all Mormon liberals as heretics, apostates, hypocrites, or wolves in sheep's clothing. Many Mormon liberals—as I have tried to characterize them—share with their conservative brothers faith in God, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, faith in personal immortality, and faith in the restoration of the gospel and Church of Christ.

In my judgment, a liberal Mormon can be just as orthodox as a conservative Latter-day Saint. Orthodox means to be true or sound in belief or opinion. A religious liberal may in one sense be more orthodox than his critics because of his thoughtful commitment to the great fundamentals of his theology and religious ethic. The liberal's faith may be stronger than that of others because he has not been afraid to test it in the arena of thought and in the crucible of man's total living.

It is my hope and prayer that so-called conservative Latter-day Saints may learn to respect the so-called liberals in the Church and that liberal Mormons will respect and value the role of the conservative. After all, these terms are but labels imposed on people who are unique and human. Surely the gospel of Jesus Christ is big enough to accommodate more than one emphasis within its framework. Consider how the books of James, Romans, and 1 John differ from each other in emphasis, and yet each contributes so richly to the fullness of our Christian faith. Martin Luther called the epistle of James an epistle of straw and preferred Romans and all the epistles of Paul. Well, I like James too, and Romans, and I appreciate John's great emphasis on love. And these books represent phases: three facets, three dimensions of the Christian life. May we who profess discipleship of Jesus Christ cooperate in building his kingdom, and, in the process, may we be willing to hear one another and then to either respect or hammer out our differences, I pray in Jesus' name. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In 1977 Dr. Bennion was invited to give this address for the Education Week in the Boston Stake; it was published as a book under the same title but in a modified form, by Bookcraft in 1978.
