Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

4

The Things That Matter Most

I've been well repaid for coming here, after that long ride from Salt Lake. [^1] I've enjoyed the lectures and the music. Mormons can shift moods faster than anyone I know. But it has been a very rich educational week and enjoyable for me. I have also been pleased to meet former students here, and new acquaintances, and have enjoyed the hospitality of your stake people and the Lythgoes [Dennis and Marti]. You have received so much that I think your glass is full, but I'm going to chat with you a little bit tonight. If I see you dozing off, I think I'll turn it into a discussion. I'd rather teach than preach anyway.

I have also decided to talk off the cuff rather than to read a scholarly paper, though I certainly respect the scholarly papers that have been read.

We all think we live in two worlds. One is the world of reality, the objective world, the total world and universe in which we live. That is the world of nature and her laws; the world of human nature, of nations of people with all their problems and all their conflicts. And in the world of God the Creator, his ways are mysterious at times and not fully known to man. We live in this total reality, this total objective reality. When I think of this, I don't feel very important; I don't feel very powerful. I have to adapt to nature. I have to adjust the best I can to the laws and forces of nature. I don't have a lot of influence with my fellowmen. I can't do much about China and Russia and other nations. I can't even do much about American politics.

Man in his total existence is quite powerless and quite contingent. That is to say, he is dependent on forces beyond his control. I didn't used to think that when I was young, but I know it now. Somebody said years ago that man is an infinitesimal bit of nothingness standing on the brink of eternity. That is a special definition of man. That is even a kind of biological definition. In the face of war, cancer, and pollution, I feel quite helpless.

We are living in this larger world of what I call reality, this objective world. We also live in a subjective world that is part of the larger world, but each of us, I think, has this faith: Each of us can carve out of the larger world a life of our own. We prefer some things to others. We have desires, strong desires that we can pursue. We call these preferences values. I prefer Beethoven to rock music. You may prefer rock music. I prefer orange juice to beer. Some prefer beer—not here, but I know people who do.

When we find our values in life, things that are most worthwhile, things of greatest worth to us, then we begin to feel our individuality, our creativity, our freedom, our strength. We begin to get possession of life when we concentrate not on the whole of reality in which we feel insignificant, but when we select certain things we are determined to live for; it seems to me that's when we get hold of life again. I have here just a sentence from Plato that says the same thing: "The free individual is one who can direct his energies and labor to purposes of his own choosing." I believe that.

This world of values that you and I have built for ourselves is a very personal world, a very subjective world. The objective world out there is the same for all of us. Cancer, the law of gravitation, whatever—it treats us all alike. But you and I choose to value certain things, and we have the right to do so. Your values may not be mine. I do have the feeling, though, that since mankind has so much in common, many values are really the best values for all of us. I believe that the values of life are grounded in life, in human nature. There is a certain objectivity about them, but I respect anybody who prefers one kind of value to my value.

I am going to talk vigorously tonight, as vigorously as I can at this hour and this time of the week. I am going to honor certain values that I have found, that I cherish, that I believe in, that make my life meaningful and give me a sense of creativity and excitement about life. You can take them or leave them. All I say is that you ought to find yourself, you ought to feel like an individual, free and creative, excited about life. You need to find your values and live for them.

Now, the supreme value of life, to me, is life itself. That seems so obvious. I think of life as a gift. The gift of grace, the gift of God, the gift of my mother and father to me. And since I've thought of life as a gift, it is all the more precious to me. Life itself is the supreme gift. We have an obligation to ourselves to cherish that gift, to make the most of it, to realize it for ourselves—because it is the very substance of our being here.

Elder [Paul H.] Dunn last night very effectively told us that people count. I want to emphasize in addition what happens if people count most. It's not just enough to serve people. Elder Dunn talked about spiritual growth. What is important is this self-realization, this self-fulfillment that a person can experience as a human being. What is important in life is being or becoming what God and nature made us to be. Often our values or our goals are somewhere out there. Maybe it's position, maybe it's money, maybe it's exaltation, maybe it's getting someplace. I'd like to stress that the important thing is not getting somewhere, but being something, fulfilling one's nature, realizing the potential we have as human beings and as children of God.

The enrichment of life, the enhancement of life, growth in life, satisfying one's very basic nature: that's what I think life is all about. To me, salvation is more a process than an end. You have heard that before, I'm sure, but what is happening to us along the way is what really matters. We take so much of our salvation with us into eternity. Then God can give us new opportunities to express our being. It's not as if we earn money and get a check sometime in eternity. I asked my Sunday School class the other day what would they do, how would they live if they lost their faith in immortality. And my dear eighty-six-year-old neighbor said, "I'd have a bash." She was half-joking. "I'd have a bash."

There are people who think that religion is the price you pay—here—in restraint, in dull living, so that you might be rewarded hereafter. Latter-day Saints know that the same principles that make life good and exciting here (and I'm going to try to illustrate that) are the very principles we take with us into eternity and that will make for excitement there.

Somebody said life's only goal is infinite and unending increase—enrichment, enhancement, and expansion of life through the values we choose and live by.

The apostle Paul says over and over again that we should grow up in the likeness of Jesus, Christ Jesus. We should increase in love and abound in love. If you read his epistles in Sunday School with this idea in mind, you will find Paul excited about learning to increase growth and virtue in the gospel of Christ.

Now what are some of the values we might pursue to realize the full and good life? I can't reveal any new ones to you—mankind had thought of all of them before I came along— but maybe I can drop an idea about some of them, or maybe our total view will have some meaning for you.

Visualize in your mind a pyramid, and underneath, the ground we call footings in a building. I would suggest that two basic values I would call footings are health and economic adequacy. President [Richard] Bushman mentioned the one, economic adequacy. I don't believe in economic security. It just isn't there.

I think health, both physical and mental, emotional, is a tremendous value we ought to cherish. It is kind of an instrumental value. It is very difficult to enjoy what I might call the higher values of life—spiritual, ethical, social values of life—if we don't have good mental health. And we are greatly handicapped with poor physical health. Young people are so wasteful of life, so careless of life, what you eat and what you sleep. You have lots of accidents, more so in the teen years and early twenties than later. Guard your health; take pride in that body. I think the Word of Wisdom is a remarkable document. You know a lot of the details in that so I won't go into it except to say that we Mormons haven't learned the principle of moderation. We work ourselves to death.

Another principle I just love in the Word of Wisdom says to enjoy all these things with prudence (that is, moderation) and thanksgiving. I decided, brother and sisters, that much of our health depends upon an attitude of cheerfulness, of gratitude, of thanksgiving. Call it sane optimism. If you're grateful for food, grateful for life, grateful for everything pertaining to your body and state of mind, you will enjoy much better health.

Somebody asked me what my state of mind in my old age is. I refuse to be a cynic. I refuse to be a pessimist. I want to be a sane optimist. I want to have hope, courage. I want to endure. I'm determined to endure, determined to enjoy the battle of life. It makes for good health.

Economic adequacy: I think that the economic side of life is for life what grammar is for language. If you don't learn grammar reasonably well, it is an impediment to communication. On the other hand, if you are forever conscious of grammar, which some of us are, then it inhibits the free flow of talk, conversation. The best thing to do with grammar is to learn it and then use it spontaneously. The best thing to do with our economic adequacy, I believe, is to learn a skill, gain the ability to earn your way—preferably a skill that is within you, within your own power. Good economic virtue, habits of thrift, economy, self-control, that sort of thing. And then live for other things.

What a tragedy to make material values the supreme value of life, when the kingdom of God is not on the outside but within. We Americans are greatly blessed and can spend most of our energies in living for things other than economic survival.

Okay, health and economic adequacy are below the surface of my pyramid. Now let's go up one side. Another value is what I would call sensuous satisfactions. There are two words here that are sometimes confused: sensual and sensuous. Sensual has negative connotations. It means maybe lustful, carnal. On the other hand, sensuous simply means pertaining to the senses—to the eye, the ear, the nose, the smell, the taste, the touch. We have two ways to communicate with the world. One is verbal, through words, a beautiful way. The other way is nonverbal—through our bodies, through our senses. They support each other, they relate. In this modern urban asphalt society in which we live, I have a feeling that our senses are dull.

I took a hearing test today and was grateful to find I am within the normal range. My wife thought I was hard of hearing and the doctor said, "Tell her you have selective hearing." But you know people in simpler societies, closer to nature, I think, who enjoy sensory experience more than we do. City folk go for days without looking at mountains or the ocean. Out where I live in Salt Lake, I look at Mount Olympus. I used to milk a cow night and morning. I would go out there and feast on Mount Olympus. I'd sing "Hills of Home," "For the Strength of the Hills," and "O Ye Mountains High." I made up hymns to what my eyes beheld. I have a little ranch in the Teton country of Idaho, and it is a different life up there for a few weeks in the summertime, looking at those peaks, with the sun coming up behind them and the reflection on them in the evening, or the thunder and lightning, the changing color, and the touch of rain and the sound of the thunder. I've even walked around in lightning and thunder to get the thrill of being part of nature.

Touch. What you can't do with your hands. You know, newborn babies have to feel their mothers and their fathers. They have to have that body contact, that warmth, that closeness, nearness. We have one daughter and four sons. This last child, this daughter, I used to walk out to the swing. I liked to interlock my fingers with hers when she was young. Oh, that was fun for me to hug her, to feel her hand. I like to interlock my fingers with my wife's. I like to shake hands, firmly, with brothers, even with sisters. You have to be careful with this touch business; use a little discretion—with students.

I work with boys in the summertime. How they love to have you put your arm around them, pat them on the back, push them on their shoulders. Touch, touch, touch. We have overdone individualism. We've neglected the social aspect of man. Men belong to one another. We need each other. We need to feel of each other through sensory experience. Husband and wife have beautiful opportunities to be one, to express their love in nonverbal communications.

We lived in Europe for two years, going to school and on a mission. Europeans take two hours to eat lunch. They take an hour to sip a glass of wine. I wish I could take an hour to sip a glass of orange juice. I gulp it down, more or less. Europeans taste flavor more than we do. Good German cooks take a thin piece of round steak and wrap the onion and cabbage in it and bake it, and it is absolutely delicious. Vegetables flavor the meat, the meat flavors the vegetables. Sounds like a whole other talk, doesn't it?

Another great value in life—and some of you know much more about it than I—is what we call an aesthetic feeling. It's different from just ordinary sensory experience. Aesthetic feeling is the feeling that is aroused in us by a work of art, or sometimes nature, or something in even a human relationship. In ordinary emotions, for instance, if you witnessed a murder, it would just tear you to pieces that murder should occur. If someone were to shoot a gun at me, it would cause an emotional response that would be devastating to you—I hope. Yet you go to a Shakespearean tragedy, where there is murder all over the place, and it doesn't destroy. You come out feeling refreshed, renewed, cleansed from within, elevated, because of that make-believe situation and because of the concentration on certain feelings and senses. In aesthetic feeling, you identify with the object. You lose yourself, become one and whole, and are tremendously recreated.

I think each of us, we Latter-day Saints, ought to learn to enjoy at least one of the arts. Music is usually the easiest for many of us. Poetry or great prose, architecture, painting, sculpture: we need that each day to renew ourselves, to find a wholeness in life, I believe.

Another value that I think is tremendously important is—I don't know what to call it exactly, but maybe I would call it learning, exercising the mind. The supreme thing about man is his brain or his spirit. Animals excel us in many ways. Deer go traipsing through my ranch with more grace and speed and jumping ability than I've ever had. My pigs eat and sleep much better than I do (I'm not a good sleeper). Some sniff better, such as dogs. Birds fly. The unique thing about man, the essence of man, the glory of man, is his mind or his brain. Not only is the glory of God intelligence, it is the glory of man. And man does not fulfill his nature unless he gets excited about ideas, about learning; unless he reads books, unless he talks ideas, not just the weather and people, but ideas.

I had a father who was the seventh son, the last son of his mother. His older brothers were all farmers, and when this boy came along, his pioneer father said, we would like one scholar in the family, so they named him Milton and it inspired my father at least to go to school to become an educator, become a philosopher. And all his life he read, and wrote, and thought. One of my early recollections is of sitting at his feet and cutting open the magazine pages that didn't come uncut then, while he read the magazine. Well, my father got diabetes at forty-five. This was way back before insulin. He had his left leg amputated below the knee at sixty-nine and his right foot, part of it, amputated at seventy-three. He suffered agony. He lived to be eighty-three. The last five years of his life he went from the bed to the wheelchair and back to the bed, in pain a great deal. But you know, my father, whose life was in his mind and in his heart, never lost his sense of humor, kept that mind working. He was fascinating to talk with. I've never known a person with a vigorous mind who couldn't stand up under the difficulties of life.

There is a doctor in Salt Lake who will only take patients over sixty-five. One time when I was teaching college students, he said, "Bennion, the saddest patients I have are not the poor and not the physically disabled, but those who didn't use their minds when they were young." He said the body breaks down, but the mind only slows down. It gets richer as you go through life and you have more things to relate to one another, more memories, if you keep it alive, like a muscle. Don't spend all your time socializing, working, eating, sleeping. Get something intellectual in your life. Get excited about some intellectual dimension of life. Read, read, read, and think, think, think, and be creative in that role. And you will find life taking on an increasing interest even when the old body breaks down, practically, as my back is.

Another value that I have touched on, that I have come to cherish greatly, is what I would call human relationships, human ties. When you think of all the wonderful potential possibilities we have in our human relationships, life gets extremely exciting. For instance, friendship. I have a few friends that I am completely open and completely frank with, and they understand me and accept me and forgive me. We talk to each other, we are loyal to each other, we accept each other for what we are. We feel creative together when we are together. We stimulate each other's minds. Spirit touches spirit. Build good friendships; don't neglect them. They have to be cultivated like a garden, or they are lost. But friendship is a wonderful dimension of life. Think of others—father and son. If I had known nobody but my father, I'd be grateful to have lived. Here I am a father, a grandfather, and a son and a grandson, and a brother, and an uncle, and a husband. All these human relationships grow; each is a precious thing to me.

In the past few years, more than ever before, I have been grateful for being a man among men and women, a human being among other human beings.

In my work in Salt Lake now I have a lot to do with Blacks, with Chicanos, with American Indians. I am on committees with them— Chinese, Japanese, Polynesians, common folk, poor folk, big shots. I have dealings with all kinds of people in my daily work, and it is fascinating, it's interesting. We live and move and have our being in each other as well as in God, and I think the most important thing in life—if I dare say this, on earth—is the quality of our human relationships, not only in the intimate family circle and friendship circle, but in relationships with all men.

I just have two or three more values. I think, brothers and sisters, that all the virtues of life, the ethical, religious virtues of life, come under two categories or are summarized under two basic ethical values. The one is integrity and the other is love.

If you want to simplify your moral life, your ethical life, or even your religious life, concentrate on developing and maintaining integrity on the one hand and brotherly love on the other. Integrity means more than honesty, though that's a great part of it—more than paying your bills and speaking the truth. Integrity means oneness, wholeness. To integrate means to make one. It is the strong personal virtue. Integrity presupposes sincerity, humility, repentance, meekness, moral courage. All these strong personal virtues go to make up integrity.

I think that the essence of integrity, too, is to try to square our living with our convictions. It is important, for example, to be honest not because it is the best policy, but because we believe it is right to be honest. We shouldn't live the ethical life in order to get a reward. We ought to live the ethical life because we believe it is the right way to live. Rewards will follow.

Don't love me so you will get to heaven, please. You will love heaven. Love me because I am a human being or because it is your nature to love. I think God blesses us because he is a loving person.

The other great virtue, Christian love, I believe is the great mother virtue of all the social virtues of life. If we have love, then we are tolerant, patient, kind, forbearing, forgiving, empathetic, compassionate.

We sometimes have trouble with brotherly love because it is so very hard to love all men. Some just aren't very lovable. And I would like to make one or two suggestions on how we can love more easily all men or any man. You don't have to like a person to love him. A person can be obnoxious to you in a way and you can still love him, because love means that you treat another person in his interest or in her interest. It's not synonymous with liking. It is an unselfish interest in the welfare of another person. Some people get on my nerves, but I hope to discipline myself to work in their interest and not use them as a means to my ends, nor ignore them.

Another misconception, I believe, about brotherly love is that people think if you love somebody you have to do for that person what he or she wants you to do. I had a dear sister during the depression who was not married and was earning very well, and a man came to her and proposed marriage. He said he had had a revelation. And she felt an obligation. She came to me for advice. She felt an obligation to marry this man because he wanted her to, asked her to. She had no love for him and no particular respect for him. Listen, you can knock the man down if it is for his good, with love. You can take a man to court, I think, if need be, if you do it in his interest as well as yours.

A few times in my life, in my teaching career, I have said no to students. It is hard to do. It hurt, momentarily. But that kind of firmness in their interest, not out of anger but in their interest, turned out for their good and built a fine relationship between us. In other words, you determine how you express love. And you learn to experience the best way to do it.

I have two other quick values to mention. Let me review: We have health and economic adequacy under the ground. Up one column of the pyramid we have sensuous satisfaction, aesthetic feeling, and integrity. Up the other column we have learning, using the mind; we have building fine human relationships; and we have love. These all build up to the good life at the top.

Another value that I believe in earnestly is what we call creativity, running through all these other values. I believe that an individual should do these things in his own way, should express his own individuality. That's all creativity means. It means to do your own thinking, work with your own hands, your own imagination, and your own mind—just be yourself. Anybody who has the courage to be an individual, honest, daring—if you have these other values, you won't go wild. If you have love and integrity, I'm not afraid of what you might do creatively.

Man is a child of God and God is a creator. I think that when we were created in his image, we were born with a great need to be creative, to make things in our own image that reflect us, even as God makes things that reflect him.

I want to read a couple of quotations from a favorite book of mine. It is by Romain Rolland in Jean Christof (1913, p. 364). Romain Rolland was a great French writer at the turn of the century. He said:

There is no joy but in creation. There are no living beings but those who create. All the rest are shadows, hovering over the earth, strangers to life. All the joys of life are joys of creation. Love, genius, action, quickened by flame issuing from one and the same fire. Even those who cannot find a place by the great fireside, the ambitious, the egoists, the sterile sensualists, value being warmed in the pale reflection of its light. To create in the region of the body or in the region of the mind is to issue from the prison of the body, from the prison of the mind, is to ride upon the storm of life, that is, to be he who is. To create is to triumph over death.

Wretched is the sterile creature, that man or that woman who remains lost upon the earth, scanning their withered bodies, the side of themselves from which no flame of life will ever leave. Wretched is the soul that does not feel its own fruitfulness and know itself to be big with life and love as a tree with blossoms in the spring.

You don't have to be a mother to be creative (I mean a biological mother, although that's one way to be creative). I told my wife that one thing I envy her is that I can't bear a child. I wish I could. She said, "I wish you could too." But it must be quite an experience, quite an event, to play that large a role biologically. But we can all be creative in human relationships. Anytime you help a person to find his own worth, anytime you can convey love to another human being or spark his mind, you are playing a creative role in human relationships—more important, I think, than biologic.

You don't have to be a Beethoven or a Shakespeare to be creative. You just have to put trust in those hands. Learn to play the piano like you want to play it. I've taken to baking bread every Saturday when I'm home. My wife broke her hand. I can't stand Wonder Bread; I wonder what's in it. And I get a big thrill, since I live in an abstract world during the week, with a lot of problems, out of making dough and hammering it and molding it and throwing it around, putting different things in it every week. It comes out different and often very good. But it's my bread. I put just a little in one little pan, about that much dough. I put it in the oven until it's done at noon, and then I slice it down the middle and put a little butter and honey on both pieces, with a pint of cold milk, and that is my Saturday lunch. One of the best meals I've ever had in this world. But it's mine, all mine.

Make something, do something—with your hands, with your imagination, with your mind, with your soul, with your fellowman. Do something in their interest, something consistent with integrity and love and good reason, good sense. But, granted these other virtues, cut loose. Be yourself, be an individual, express yourself. Don't be a rubber stamp. God isn't that way. God is free, creator, full of love. We can be these too, I think, to satisfy our inner nature.

Another great value is faith or trust. As human beings we need a relationship to the whole. We need a relationship that is something of which we are only a part. In our Latter-day Saint faith, that relationship is mostly to God and to Christ, I believe. Joseph Smith entered the Sacred Grove and found his God, and built a very close and wonderful relationship with him through the years. Through Joseph Smith, we know about God, but each of us must also find him and find our relationship to him. We have to find our own Sacred Grove. And it's not easy. I confess that there are times when I have a hard time getting through to my Father in heaven. He leaves me to myself a great deal; he even left Jesus upon the cross. You remember, "My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" I think that our relationship to him can be different from our relationships person to person. Let me mention one thing that has a lot of meaning for me in my relationship to Deity. I get this from a philosopher named Montague. He said, "Religion is the faith that the things that matter most in life are not ultimately at the mercy of the things that matter least." Think about that for a moment. The things that matter most in life—and I have named some of them tonight, beauty, truth, goodness, love, integrity—are not ultimately at the mercy of the grave. If there is no God in heaven, and man should destroy himself on earth, all the beautiful music, all the great ideas, all the aspirations of man, all the human relationships that we cherish, would perish with man.

Religion is the faith that God exists and is on the side supporting, giving cosmic support to, the things that we cherish most in human experience. I have that faith. I don't know absolutely, but I know for myself, and I have faith and trust that when I live by integrity—it's hard to do so always—and when I express Christian love, and when I stand up for freedom, and when I am creating human relationships, I have the faith that God is supporting me, that he is there, that he is on my side. Whether he answers my prayers or not, he is with me when I am with him, when I am working in his interest, in harmony with his attributes. And I get a lot of comfort out of that. It sustains me—that faith, that trust.

Of all the people who have ever lived, I admire and love and I would like to be a disciple of Jesus Christ. He understood life in its deepest, profoundest sense, and to make him an ideal of life, along with faith in his resurrection and redemption, is an anchor that gives meaning and strength to our existence.

Find some values to live by, to measure yourself to, and I promise you that life will be increasingly exciting for you. Not that you don't have them now, but define them and do it over and over again as you go through the different periods of life. You'll recover your individuality and your freedom, your sense of being.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This funeral tribute to "Ed" Lyon, Dr. Bennion's first colleague at the Salt Lake Institute, was given in September 1978 and published in the Winter 1978 issue of Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought.
