Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

6

My Odyssey with Sociology

In 1925, I entered the University of Utah as a sophomore and ran into Arthur L. Beeley, [^1] fresh from graduate work at the University of Chicago in social psychology. Beeley, an Englishman by birth and early training, fluent, articulate, and excited about scientific approaches to social issues, was a most stimulating professor. I took his classes in criminology and mental hygiene, and worked one summer on a "Survey of Boy Life" [a study of youth behavior in Salt Lake City] under his direction and enjoyed many personal conversations with him. He had come back to Zion with high hopes of helping to bring to pass the "Renaissance of Mormonism," by using scientific means of realizing the social idealism of religion.

Following graduation from the U., I went to the Swiss-German Mission for the LDS Church in the fall of 1928. In the spring of 1931, I entered the University of Erlangen, Germany, hence to Geneva to attend League of Nations meetings, then in the fall to the University of Vienna, where I intended to continue studies in political science.

University students in Germany and Austria are allowed much freedom in the selection of courses. So I attended classes in philosophy, economic theory, and jurisprudence, as well as political science and sociology. It was there that I was introduced by Eric Voegelin to the writings of Max Weber.

It was also in Vienna that I witnessed the rise and fanaticism of Naziism and had occasion to stand up for Jewish student friends. We loved Vienna and would have stayed there but we saw the handwriting on the wall with Hitler coming to power in Germany, so we went to Strasbourg, France.

Maurice Halbwachs, a disciple of Emile Durkheim, headed the sociology department and allowed me to matriculate and write a dissertation on "Max Weber's Methodology." He suggested that I write it in English, which I did. All my study of Weber was in German, which I had to translate into English with an inadequate vocabulary in sociology, and I eventually defended the dissertation in French.

Max Weber thoroughly captivated me. His intellectual appetite was insatiable and the breadth of his research seemingly without bounds. He made substantial contributions in both theory and methodology. As he developed his empirical studies, he quickly recognized the need for sound theory and methodology in social science. Initially, he had little respect for the sociology of his day. It was not until he had himself placed sociology on a firm theoretical and methodological footing that he acknowledged the legitimacy of the field.

Weber had a nervous breakdown in 1897, which took him out of the classroom until 1920. He spent the intervening years in research and writing. His studies are far-ranging and diversified, substantive and creative, complex and not well organized. They read almost as dictation from a brilliant mind that is anxious to move on. I will mention a few of his concepts that excited me and have been part of my life ever since.

Value-free Sociology

One of Weber's earliest and most persistent aims was to establish sociology—and related social sciences—as an empirical science. He eliminated metaphysical considerations, reform aspirations, prophetic predictions, and political decisions from the province of sociology. As in the natural and biological sciences, the task of social science, he believed, was to describe aspects of reality as they are. Difficult as it is, he insisted on objectivity, on establishing causal relationships among social phenomena, on the necessity of verification. There are marked differences in the techniques and procedures between the social and the natural sciences, which will be illustrated later, but there should be no difference in the basic spirit and purpose of all the sciences. Each is a rational, methodical, objective, descriptive, and verifiable effort to bring order into some aspect of reality by establishing meaningful relationships within it.

Weber called his scientific sociology wertfrei, or value-free. To this day sociologists are debating his position, some holding that it is impossible for a sociologist to be value-free in his work, while others argue that he should not even try, that he has an obligation to confess his values to his audience and to work for his values in his research.

Critics of Weber's value-free sociology often misinterpret his position. He did not believe that sociologists should be disinterested in values. For him, the very essence of culture is value-related. A sociologist without an interest in human values would have no subject matter. Likewise the sociologist himself, like any other human being, must have his own values and be committed to them passionately if his life is to have significance.

What Weber tried to eliminate from sociology were value judgments (Werturteile). For him, empirical sciences could not be normative, stating what ought or ought not to be, what is good or evil, what is beautiful or ugly. Sociology, like any other science, has simply to describe what is or is not, what was, or what may be under given circumstances. It can never define for men what should be, and it should not attempt to do so.

Weber wrote a good deal about value-relationship or value-reference (Wertbeziehung). He was most interested in the values and postulates of faith that people held. He studied religious values, for example, as objective data, and observed their influence on other aspects of culture, notably economic life. But he never made value judgments concerning the various ultimate value positions entertained by Calvinism, Lutheranism, the Hebrew prophets, or Buddhism.

Weber does make one exception to his strict value position. The scientist must be committed to truth, to a tough-minded effort to understand aspects of reality, and he must believe that his scientific efforts are worthwhile. Beyond this, Weber believed that all values are subjective, born of the culture in which one is socialized and the "daemon" [unique creative spirit] within one. Unlike some of his contemporaries, he did not accept any objective or universal order of values. There is just no rational or empirical way, he believed, to decide between the merits of ultimate value positions.

Following Kant, who distinguished between the natural world, which lent itself to rational analysis, and the inner world, the world of freedom and faith, Weber recognized a similar dualism in man's approaches to reality—the empirical and the evaluative. Facts and values for him were independent types of meaning—intimately interrelated in human experience, but to be distinguished clearly in the mind and method of the social scientist.

Weber recognized how difficult it is for a student of culture, being personally involved in the value aspects of his study and being in the habit of making value judgments continuously, to free himself from this practice. The scientist's values determine his interests, his point of departure, but in his methodology he can refrain from evaluation and remain descriptive. Thus, Weber insisted that the social scientist strive for objectivity even though he dealt with the subjective and value-dimensions of human experience.

Distinction Between the Natural and theSocial Sciences

Since the social sciences developed late in modern times, it was only natural that they should ape the methodology of the natural sciences, which were already well established. A number of German thinkers before Weber recognized that both the purpose and the object of the social sciences differed radically from those of chemistry and biology.

Reality—everything that exists—is chaos in and of itself. Truth does not adhere to reality but [consists] in men's judgments of reality. Man gives order and structure to the universe, to human relationships, and to the world within himself. Man constructs his historical and social reality. Truth does not exist "out there" but in the minds of men.

The natural scientist, while recognizing that his science has given conceptual order and meaning to some aspect of reality, generally believes that there is an order in nature that he has simply discovered and has learned by ascribing names to it to communicate this order to others.

By contrast, Weber recognized that the historian and the sociologist are dealing with a reality that is truly chaotic in its complexity and infinity, and that any history or social science is not a discovery of an order that already exists. It is rather the construction of an order in the mind of the scholar, one that does not represent reality as it is, but enables the scholar to understand some very limited aspects of it. The historian could write any number of histories of an epoch of equal validity, depending on the values that determine his interests.

The natural sciences generalize, subsume phenomena under general concepts and universal laws, whereas history is interested in the uniqueness of events and their distinctive meaning. In studying the death of John F. Kennedy, for example, the physical scientist considers the cause of death in terms of forces and factors that apply to the death of all men in similar circumstances. By contrast, the historian is interested in those aspects of Kennedy's death that are unique—its effect on American history, legislation, the careers of his brothers, and so forth.

The sociologist, like the historian, is not concerned with all aspects of social action, but only with those which bear a relationship to his particular social values. For Weber, all values are relative to individuals and their respective cultures. These can be identified but not established scientifically. A scientific philosophy of life, a scientific Weltanschauung, was nonsense for Weber.

Weber was content to do particular empirical studies, which give insight into limited aspects of reality. It is not given to man, he thought, to understand the whole of social reality or to subsume it under general laws.

Weber's Ideal Type

Weber's major interest was to develop a methodology in social science that would be scientifically sound—empirical, objective, verifiable—and at the same time deal with the subjective, qualitative, and meaningful aspects of human action. To achieve his purpose, he created an original concept called the Ideal Type (Idealtypus). In some respects, the name is a misnomer because his types are not ideals to be emulated but simple logical constructs that give perspectives on social and historical reality.

Weber was a nominalist. His concepts are not[, he believed,] identical with reality. They are simply the means of giving logical or rational perspective in what is otherwise the bewildering chaos of social reality.

How did Weber build his ideal type? This can be best understood with an example of one of his historical types—modern industrial capitalism. He was a student of economics and of economic history. He had a vast knowledge of economic enterprises in various cultures and epochs. Like Karl Marx, he recognized the dominant influence of modern industrial capitalism in Western civilization. He studied this phenomenon in various countries, including Germany, in which capitalism developed so rapidly. From examining free enterprise in various circumstances, he singled out the elements of this economic form that were theoretically essential and congenial to its fullest functioning.

Thus the elements of the ideal type are drawn from empirical reality. The essence of industrial capitalism for Weber is its rational, methodical, disciplined way of gaining profit. Nearly all of the components of his ideal type of capitalism are reckonable factors. They are: (1) access to the goods of production, (2) a free market, (3) a rational technique for the means of production and exchange, (4) rational, dependable law, (5) free labor—that is, the existence of workers legally authorized and economically compelled to contract their labor on the open market, (6) the commercialization of business, (7) the separation of business from the household, and (8) bookkeeping and accounting systems. In addition, men must be of a reckoning disposition; they must have motivation and inclination to put value on work for work's sake, on calculation for profit, on self-discipline. Weber called this the spirit of capitalism, which he found to be closely akin to the Protestant ethic inspired by John Calvin's theology and social philosophy.

After the elements of the ideal type are found in history and in society, they are tested for their logical consistency with each other. Are they free of contradiction? Do they form a logical whole? They are thus integrated into a unified construct from what had been separate aspects of reality. These elements making up modern capitalism are now thought of as a single historical phenomenon. The elements and the whole are then accentuated, or "idealized," into a logical model more perfect than any existing form of capitalism.

This process of conceptualization, called the ideal type formulation, takes real factors from history and society and transforms them into logical constructs, called Gedankenbilder (thought-pictures), which are purposely made unreal. Standing on the edge of reality, they are rational possibilities that enable one to understand and to see, in perspective, real situations. They are not the goal of research but a means of gaining perspective, of building bridges across gulfs in reality. Weber called them utopias, constructions of the imagination, fictions, pure thought, or ideal (logically speaking) constructs.

I could go on and illustrate Weber's use of ideal types in his efforts to understand the subjective meaning of social action in various cultures, but enough is enough, and I shall return briefly to my personal saga.

In relative innocence, I received a doctorate from the University of Strasbourg in December of 1933. Returning home during the depression, I became an educational adviser in a CCC Camp (Civilian Conservation Corps) for nine months. Then John A. Widtsoe invited me to open an Institute of Religion at the University of Utah, which I did, expecting to remain a few years. I stayed twenty-six, interrupted by two years at the University of Arizona, 1937-39. These were fulfilling years. I was glad that I was not an expert in theology, Church history, or archaeology. I became interested in students—their thinking, their intellectual, social, ethical, and spiritual needs. In the beginning, we had no established curriculum. I developed courses in a personal philosophy of life, leadership, world religions, courtship and marriage, marriage and family life, along with the traditional studies in scripture. I was free to relate my studies in philosophy and social science to what was being studied on campus. The institute afforded me the most complete relationship I have ever had with students. I taught, counseled, dined and danced, worshipped, and served with them—with thousands of them.

In 1962, the LDS Department of Education decided to relieve me of my duties as director of the institute. I was invited to write courses of study, but I decided to leave the system and took a job at the University of Utah working in the dean of students' office and half-time under the leadership of Ray Canning on a study of juvenile delinquency.

When the latter project terminated, I became full-time associate dean of students. Henry Frost, then head of the sociology department, invited me to teach a graduate seminar on Max Weber. When Tom O'Dea left the University of Utah to go to Santa Barbara, I took over his class on the sociology of religion, which I particularly enjoyed, drawing heavily on Troeltsch, Weber, and O'Dea.

In 1972, I left the halls of ivy for the real world. The Community Services Council, a private, nonprofit social agency of agencies, needed a director. The council's financial situation frightened several very able candidates away. I accepted a draft to become the director. We proceeded to make a comprehensive study of the human service needs of the community and the present services available to meet those needs. United Way, our major funding source, wanted to do its own planning and evaluating and would no longer fund the council for these and related services. So, after losing the battle to keep them, we quite happily moved to provide direct services to agencies and individuals in the community. We now operate a food bank, do chore services for elderly and handicapped, make function-fashionable clothing for the handicapped, train quadriplegics in independent living, recruit thousands of volunteers, maintain an information and referral center, and enable senior citizens to obtain dentures and eyeglasses at greatly reduced cost and pay for them at five to ten dollars per month.

I have been involved in one other social experiment. Each summer, I take two groups of about thirty-five city boys each to my ranch in Teton country and try to raise their self-esteem through work, recreational skills, discussions, and relationships.

I have found life to be adventurous, even exciting, all the way. I am grateful to have touched base here and there with both religion and social science. In my experience, they complement each other in human experience.

I haven't decided how I shall spend the rest of my days.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Dr. Bennion gave the annual Joseph Smith Memorial Lecture at the Logan (Utah) Institute of Religion in December 1948. The talk was subsequently published in the Logan Herald-Journal on December 18, 1948.
