Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

7

Joseph Smith: His Creative Role in Religion

Over a century ago a boy had a question. He found an answer, organized a church, published a book. He gathered in our fathers from the nations [^1] of the earth and imbued them with the faith to build a Zion in their own peculiar way. This Institute of Religion is a part of Zion which they built. It is indeed fitting that we here today honor the memory of this boy, who, in the last analysis, built this institution. We have heard beautiful singing, and reading, and inspiring prayer this morning, and now it is my turn to say what is in my heart to the memory of Joseph Smith. I want you to know that I am honored and feel humbly grateful for this opportunity.

My debt to Joseph Smith is great and manifold in its source, but today I would talk to only one quality of his which I love very much. My theme is also inspired by reflection upon this audience. Most of you people are of the same approximate age as Joseph Smith was when he dreamed his dreams, had his visions, thought his thoughts, and did his work. Moreover, you are associated here together in an institution where you are admonished to seek learning by study and also by faith, which he did and which he said for us to do. In evaluating the work of Joseph Smith, one may stand at a distance, as it were, and see him organizing a church, translating a book, and building Nauvoo. If we look at him in that way, we have no great part in his work. It was done before we were born. All we can do is to accept his work gratefully and carry on.

There is another way to pay tribute to the Prophet, I think, a way closer to our time—a contemporary way. That is to seek something in his life which we can appropriate even as he knew it, something which we can share in common with him. This is our desire this morning, to call your attention to one of these things.

Joseph Smith was human even as you and I. He made mistakes and had his weaknesses. Many of his dreams and aspirations, he failed to achieve, just as you and I fail. He was martyred at the age of thirty-eight, without knowing the autumn harvest. Even as you and I, he only planted and tasted something of the summer fruit. The thing which inspires me about the Prophet, and it is something we can share with him, is this: He put his hand to the plow and did not look back. He kept his eye on the unplowed field ahead. He turned over virgin soil, again and again. One [question] led to another; one revelation called for another. Each day was a new day in the life of the Prophet.

It is this creative quality in his life, his teachings, and his work that we wish to pay tribute to today. You know, there is no joy in life, it seems to me, except the joy of creation. Creator is a name, an honored name, of Deity, and when God created man, he breathed into him part of his life, the urge to create, to build, to learn, to think, and to take old images and make them new. God has planted deeply in us the need to reproduce, to learn, and to build. When man is creative, he emerges from the prison of his own mind. He is no more a victim of circumstance, of the forces which are pressing upon him from all directions, but through the power of creation he builds his life anew, and the world in which he lives. Goethe, the German poet, says, "One sees what one carries in one's heart." The creative soul recreates life after the image he carries in his heart. Too often religion has been taught us and accepted as a conservative force in life, as something which saves man from himself and from his sins. Religion is a conservative and a saving force, but it must be more than that. It is also a dynamic force in life in harmony with man's urge to create.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was creative. Everything he touched became a new thing. In him was something of the curiosity of a child, the imagination of an artist, the practical zeal of a reformer, the idealism of a utopian, and the fire of a prophet. His theology is dynamic. He used religion to remake life. He also assigned to each of us a tremendously creative role to play in religion. Let us illustrate his creativeness in certain fields of activity. In June of 1830, he received a revelation describing a vision which Moses had from God. Moses was so overwhelmed by the creations of God that he said, "Now, for this cause, I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed." Moses recovered from this momentary disillusionment to ask a question of God. "Tell me, I pray thee, why these things are so, and by what thou madest them?" In the answer he received, we get a vision of a God who is creatively at work in the universe, bringing about his great purpose. "Worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. . . . The heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; but they are numbered unto me, for they are mine. And as one earth shall pass away and the heavens thereof even so shall another come, and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. For behold, this is my work and my glory—to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (See Moses 1.)

Revelation

This creative character of God is further reflected by the Prophet in his description of how God speaks to man. In the Book of Mormon we read, "Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough! For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from those that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have." (2 Nephi 28:30-31.)

"Know ye not that I, the Lord your God, have created all men, and that I remember those who are upon the isles of the sea; and that I rule in the heavens above and in the earth beneath; and I bring forth my word unto the children of men, yea, even upon all the nations of the earth? Wherefore murmur ye, because that ye shall receive more of my word? Know ye not that the testimony of two nations is a witness unto you that I am God, that I remember one nation like unto another? . . . And I do this that I may prove unto many that I am the same yesterday, today, and forever; and that I speak forth my words according to mine own pleasure. And because that I have spoken one word, ye need not suppose that I cannot speak another; for my work is not yet finished; neither shall it be until the end of man, neither from that time henceforth and forever." (2 Nephi 29:7-9.)

The revelations of God, according to the Prophet, were not to be confined to one man nor to one people. Men of all nations are inspired of God according to their need, their desire, and their ability to receive revelation.

"For behold," says Alma, "the Lord God doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have; therefore we see that the Lord doth counsel in wisdom, according to that which is just and true." (Alma 29:8.)

In 1842 the Prophet had reached, I think, the height of his mortal success. The Church had been established and the gospel in its main outlines had been restored. He had premonitions of the end of his own life. One might expect him to close revelation, to think of himself as the pinnacle of this great principle. It is interesting that he, at this time, set forth the Articles of Faith, indicating his great faith in the continuance of revelation. The ninth Article of Faith reads, "We believe all that God has revealed, all that he does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God." And, as though this were not enough, the last and thirteenth Article of Faith opens the door wide to eternity and to the universe. "We believe in being honest, true, chaste, benevolent, virtuous, and in doing good to all men; indeed, we may say that we follow the admonition of Paul—We believe all things, we hope all things, we have endured many things, and hope to be able to endure all things. If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things."

Surely this was no accident. The thirteenth Article of Faith is a natural and logical result of the dynamic theological concepts of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

There is scarcely any theology in the writings of the Prophet that is treated abstractly, as if apart from life. Everywhere theology is functional, related to man, beginning here and carrying into eternity. The creative role that the Prophet ascribes to man in the religious life is ever a source of wonder and amazement to me. We can only suggest and illustrate this in one or two ways here.

Man's Relationship to God

Man is not simply God's creature, according to the Prophet's words. There is something in man that is co-eternal with the Creator himself. Mark these words from the Doctrine and Covenants: "Man was also in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be. All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence. Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is the condemnation of man; because that which from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light." (D&C 93:29-31.)

These words, intelligence, truth, and agency, are not defined carefully in scripture, but it seems clear that the intelligent basis of man's life, including his capacity for creative and moral living, is uncreated, and co-eternal with God and with other aspects of the universe. If so, man's relationship with Deity, with his fellow intelligences, and with himself has been, is, and ever will be creative and dynamic.

I like these oft-quoted words the Prophet sent to the Saints who were trying to establish Zion in Jackson County, Missouri, in 1831. Evidently some of the Saints thought that God was to establish Zion without their help: "For behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward. Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall, in no wise, lose their reward. But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with a doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:26-29.)

Even in this great principle of revelation, God revealing himself to man, the Prophet has given man an active part. The finest statement we know in scripture on the meaning of revelation is in the first section of the Doctrine and Covenants: "Behold, I am God and have spoken it; and these commandments are of me." So far, in that passage, revelation seems to be all of God, his work alone. But, the scripture continues, " . . . and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding. And inasmuch as they erred it might be made known; and inasmuch as they sought wisdom they might be instructed; and inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might repent; and inasmuch as they were humble, they might be made strong and blessed from on high, and receive knowledge from time to time." (D&C 1:24-28.)

The Prophet's own experience with revelation had taught him that God speaks to man when there is a need, when man is aware of that need, and when man is seeking, learning, desiring, and pleading in humility and faith with an eye single to the glory of God and his work.

It is quite self-evident, I think, that when it comes to living the great principles of religion, faith, humility, and love, they have absolutely no meaning to man unless they are experienced and participated in creatively by man.

Joseph Smith also made of the religious life an everyday creative experience. The Book of Mormon, in particular, is filled with exhortations to us all to have love, charity, compassion, and tolerance for fellowmen.

King Benjamin links theology and religion beautifully when he says: "And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17.) A little further along in the same sermon he adds this note: "And now, if you believe these things see that ye do them." (Mosiah 4:10.)

In chapter 34 of Alma is an exhortation to us to pray—to pray over our flocks and herds and households, to pray for ourselves. Toward the end of it, however, we read this: "Yea, and when you do not cry unto the Lord, let your hearts be full, drawn out in prayer unto him continually for your welfare, and also for the welfare of those who are around you. And now behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you, do not suppose that this is all; for after ye have done all these things, if ye turn away the needy, and the naked, and visit not the sick and afflicted, and impart of your substance, if ye have, to those who stand in need—I say unto you, if ye do not any of these things, behold, your prayer is vain, and availeth you nothing, and ye are as hypocrites who do deny the faith." (Alma 34:27-28.)

Most everyone knows that in the great principles of religion, life is a creative experience. People believe in the great principles. Most religions hold many of them in common, but there is a certain aspect of religion in which many people see no value. We refer to the ordinances, the rituals, and the ceremonies of a religion. Why should a man be baptized? Why should he partake of the sacrament? How can these things help a man to be a true disciple of Christ? Even in these sacramental aspects of religion, Joseph Smith gives man a creative part. There is not an ordinance mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants or the Book of Mormon that is not inseparably aligned with a religious life. It is only efficacious as it prepares or inspires us to live righteously. We would like to illustrate this with one ordinance.

Nowhere in the Prophet's teachings is baptism taught as a means of bringing forgiveness of sin for which we are not responsible. Nor is baptism taught merely as a gift from God bringing us entrance into the Church and remission of sin, in exchange for passive obedience. The Book of Mormon teaches a wholly new emphasis in baptism that makes of it an exciting adventure.

Nephi, in discussing the baptism of Jesus, ignored the usual reasons for baptism when he raised this question: "Now, I would ask of you, my beloved brethren, wherein the Lamb of God did fulfil all righteousness in being baptized of water? Know ye not that he was holy? But notwithstanding he being holy, he showeth unto the children of men that, according to the flesh, he humbleth himself before the Father, and witnesseth unto the Father that he would be obedient unto him in keeping his commandments." (2 Nephi 31:6-7.)

We have been taught that Jesus was baptized merely to set us an example, to show us that we must also be obedient. But in this passage in Nephi, we find that Jesus' baptism meant something to him. He wanted to be baptized, to show to men and to his Father in heaven that he, too, humbled himself before God and took upon himself the will of God. And that, indeed, is to fulfill all righteousness.

In Mosiah, chapter 18, we have an account of Alma's baptizing several hundred people whom he had converted. Before doing so, he told them the meaning of the thing they were going to do. I think it the most beautiful of any scripture on baptism. Note man's part in this ordinance as I read this passage to you. "And now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, and to stand as witnesses of God at all times and in all things, and in all places that ye may be in, even unto death, that ye may be redeemed of God, and be numbered with those of the first resurrection, that ye may have eternal life—now, I say unto you, if this be the desire of your hearts, what have you against being baptized in the name of the Lord, as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that you will serve him and keep his commandments, that he may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon you?" And, the record continues, "when the people had heard these words, they clapped their hands for joy, and exclaimed: This is the desire of our hearts." (Mosiah 18:8-11.)

Baptism is not simply an ordinance which brings salvation, it is the believer's joyous expression and witness that he is covenanting to be a true disciple of Jesus Christ. Even the baptismal prayer in this chapter of Mosiah brings out man's part in the covenant:

"And now it came to pass that Alma took Helam, he being one of the first, and went and stood forth in the water, and cried, saying: O Lord, pour out thy Spirit upon thy servant, that he may do this work with holiness of heart. And when he had said these words, the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he said: Helam, I baptize thee, having authority from the Almighty God, as a testimony that ye have entered into a covenant to serve him until you are dead as to the mortal body; and may the Spirit of the Lord be poured out upon you; and may he grant unto you eternal life." (Mosiah 18:12-13.)

Toward the end of the Book of Mormon, in Moroni, the subject comes up again. Here, again, it is man's creative part in baptism that is stressed. "And the first fruits of repentance is baptism; and baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins; and the remission of sins bringeth meekness, and lowliness of heart; and because of meekness and lowliness of heart cometh the visitation of the Holy Ghost, which Comforter filleth with hope and perfect love, which love endureth by diligence unto prayer." (Moroni 8:25-26.)

This covenant, which we make in baptism, is renewed again in the sacramental prayer. Each week we have opportunity to witness to God that we are true disciples of Christ. And the words in the sacramental prayer are almost identical with the words Alma uses in his description of baptism. ". . . . and witness unto thee, O God, the Eternal Father, that they are willing to take upon them the name of thy Son, and always remember him, and keep his commandments which he hath given them, that they may always have his Spirit to be with them." (Moroni 4:3.)

I wish time permitted to show you that the priesthood, the gift of the Holy Ghost, temple marriage, as well as baptism and the sacrament, have no power or influence in our lives except as participation in them teaches us the true meaning of discipleship of Christ and inspires us to realize his kingdom. How I love this intimate marriage of the ordinances and ritual of religion with the moral life throughout the works of the Prophet Joseph Smith!

Religion and Life

Joseph Smith was consistent in his theology, creatively so, and likewise in his desire to apply theology and religion to life.

To borrow a figure from Amos, Joseph Smith stood upon a wall with a plumbline in his hand, and every important institution of life which was not in line with the fundamental principles and purposes of religion and human welfare must needs be made straight. Religion was not to be like a bottle of wine, placed in the cellar for safekeeping and aging, to be drunk one day in the celestial kingdom of God. No, it was to be a vine in the vineyard, ever producing its soul-refining juices. The vine would grow and expand over the wall, over every obstacle that stood in the way of Christian living.

I need only remind you that, in the Word of Wisdom, health was taught as a basis of intellectual and spiritual life; in the concept of the law of consecration, human values were placed above economic values. In his plan for the city of Zion, community welfare was far more significant than real estate values. In government, human rights arrived at through democratic processes were given divine sanction. Education in all things was encouraged as a means of establishing the Kingdom.

The Prophet did not live long enough nor receive enough cooperation to realize many of these dreams. His, however, was a creative spirit, expressing itself in fundamental principles. We have fallen heir to his unfinished work. We shall never accomplish it unless we keep alive in our own hearts something of the creative spirit of religion so characteristic of him. How can we be creative, even as he was, when his work was so well accomplished, when so much has been done, when the fullness of the gospel has been restored? Let me try, in conclusion, to suggest to you some ways in which we may emulate his creative spirit.

No less a mind than Goethe once said, "What from your father's heritage is lent, earn it anew to really possess it." Material things can be passed on from one generation to another, from one man to another. Sometimes the receiver appreciates them even more than the giver. But things of the spirit, of the heart and the mind, cannot be inherited, cannot be given from one to another. Religion is not like a cloak that one can receive and wrap around his shoulders, and in which he may feel secure, not for long.

I learned this truth anew one day last spring when some students took me up to Brighton to ski. It was the first time in [my] forty years that I had been on skis. Because I had at one time played other sports, I assumed I could learn to ski rather rapidly. For a half hour I tried to go fifty feet uphill; afterward I made a lunge for a hose which was to carry me up the lift. I caught hold all right, but my feet became involved with one another. It took many minutes to extricate them and resume my journey up the hill. Coming downhill, I spent the afternoon learning how to arise with greater facility.

On that majestic mountain slope, however, I learned something else with greater conviction than I had ever learned it before. My relationship to skiing was not unlike my relationship, and your relationship, to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Skiing is a well-accomplished art; there are thousands and perhaps millions of people in the world who can ski, but to me it is only an opportunity, a possibility; it was not mine. And so it is with the gospel of Jesus Christ. It was restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. He went into the Sacred Grove and found God. He learned through faith and humility to commune with his Maker. He knew God lived; he loved him and served him with courage and faith. Because Joseph Smith went into the Sacred Grove, and loved God and knew him, doesn't mean that we Latter-day Saints know God. It only means, it seems to me, that we know about him. If ever you and I are to know God, it will be because we learn to pray and to commune; it will be because we find our way to love God with all our hearts and serve him. This is true of every principle of religion. Humility, faith, love, and repentance, the great concepts we have inherited as Christians and Latter-day Saints, are only words to us until we make them our own through our own creative living.

There is a great difference between a truth and our understanding of that truth. Jesus Christ's concept of love I accept as an eternal and universally applicable truth, but my conception of love is not eternal and is not universally applicable. My conception of love is no greater than my experience with love. I must forever grow and learn the larger meaning of love and of every principle of the gospel. God is that he is. But what God is, and my conception of what God is, are two different things. My knowledge of God is partial and limited, and so is yours. I like, again, the words of King Benjamin in Mosiah, when he said: " . . . believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend." (Mosiah 4:9.) Or the words of Isaiah: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isaiah 55:8-9.)

To be creative in religion, brothers and sisters, we must not think we possess it; we must look upon it more as an opportunity, as something to be realized. May I illustrate that with a humble experience.

Some time ago, during the war, I had a cow which went "the way of all flesh." I went about looking for a new cow. Cows were in demand and no one would sell me one. One day a very fine Jersey cow strayed over from a neighbor. I looked at her and I admit that I coveted her, but finally my Christian faith got the upper hand and I returned the cow to her rightful owner. I said to him, "Brother, what do you do with all the milk from this cow?" He said, "My wife is so tired of straining, skimming, and bottling milk, I have taken to giving the morning milk to the pig." Whole jersey milk to a pig! I said to him, "How would it be if I came over every morning at seven o'clock and milked the cow and took the milk home. I'll be happy to pay for more than my share of the feed, if you'll think upon the cow at all other times. Think it over carefully," I told him. It's easy enough to love all men, and to cooperate with them—the difficulty comes when we specialize.

He and his wife thought it over and said they were willing to give it a try. That was two and a half years ago, and this morning, even before seven o'clock, I went over to my neighbors' and milked a cow.

Why do I tell you this experience? You know, I had always thought that we were free because we had free agency. It is one of the great doctrines of the Church. But I've discovered a new freedom in sharing a cow. And I would like to tell you about it. It saves me one hour a day not to have to go home at night and change clothes, usually twice, and milk that cow. Moreover, it is often a late hour and a very precious hour when sleep is needed. That is not all. When I am ill, or when we go on a vacation for a week, my good neighbor milks the cow and brings the milk over, or keeps it as we desire. My wife has freedom; she only strains and takes care of the milk once a day. We save money, and money may be an avenue to freedom. My neighbor has found freedom. Whenever he is ill, I milk his cow. When a relative dies in Ogden, he may go there while I take care of his cow. We have both gained a lot of freedom, but more than that, before we shared we were people who had a common property line between us, a fence. Now we are neighbors. Every morning we greet each other. In the wintertime he greets me through a kitchen window with the glow of a fire to his back. He is a man of seventy-four and suffers some from arthritis. It does my heart good to see him stay in the kitchen on a cold morning. In the summertime we exchange ideas, greetings, and build friendship. I found that I could help him with heavy jobs—put up his hay and the like. He has a wheelbarrow with a pneumatic tire which is at my disposal, and I did not know it until I went over to milk his cow. He has tools. More than that, we love each other; we have mercy for one another. Yesterday I administered to him in his illness and he thanked me with tears in his eyes. If sharing a cow can bring man freedom and cultivate mercy, understanding, and love, as I love him, what could we not do if we would look upon our religion as an opportunity to become true disciples of Christ rather than to take for granted that we are such, because the gospel has been restored.

You students have often been hiking in the mountains, tired and thirsty, and have come to a mountain spring. You know the joy of falling to the ground and of putting your face in the water and drinking that cold water. To me, the gospel of Jesus Christ might be likened to that mountain spring. It is there before we come to it and it is there, flowing, when we do not think of it, and it is there after we are gone. When we get thirsty, we kneel down and drink of the truths of the gospel. I pray that we may be humble more often and thirsty more often and desirous of partaking of something that is so much greater, in a sense, than we are. If we would adopt that attitude toward religion, we would carry on in the spirit and tradition of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Faith

There is a second way to be creative in religion. It is the way of faith. We live in a world where many have been greatly disillusioned in their faith. There are intellectuals who prefer to live by knowledge and who distrust faith, especially the kind that is associated with religion. I, too, wish to live by knowledge whenever and wherever I may gain it. I would rather have knowledge of the character and cooking ability of a prospective wife than just faith in these things. But I have learned that knowledge is not sufficient to meet the demands of life. Knowledge we gain through past and verifiable experience. Life is dynamic and every day is a new day, and people who live by knowledge only often become cynical and conservative and afraid. Their hearts and minds are not equal to the creative possibilities of life. Faith is an attitude of mind by which we live as though the possibility were already a reality, and by that very process we create reality out of the things we carry in our hearts. Let us not live by a blind faith—a faith without works, one that is in contradiction to our knowledge and experience, or one that has no meaning or value because of the things in which we have faith. Let us be true to the first principle of the gospel, faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Faith in Christ means faith in his Beatitudes, in the two great commandments. It means faith in our Father which is in heaven. It means faith in one's self and in every man who is our brother and a child of God. Living by faith is a great and creative adventure, if we have faith in the right things.

To the Prophet Joseph, as already indicated, religious faith was an instrument through which to realize Zion and the Kingdom. Let us keep it as such. Theology is not the end. Religion is not something to be preserved. The Church is not something to serve simply as an organization. Life is the end: to bring to pass the immortality and God-like life of men. Self-realization toward a more Christ-like life for all men is our goal. Like the Prophet Joseph, let us keep people in mind, use our theology, live our religion, and serve our church, as great instruments through which, by faith, we may help to realize God's eternal purpose. Such a faith will bring its own reward and its own satisfaction. To be creative in religion, we must look upon it as an opportunity and not a possession. We must not be afraid to live by faith, faith in Christ that makes a difference in every walk of life, in our homes in our business, in government.

There is a third way in which we may be creative. No one is truly creative anywhere in life unless he loves that which he does. No one is creative in religion unless he rises above fear, duty, reward, and compulsion of every kind and lives his religion because he believes in it and loves it.

In the Bible we are told that "perfect love casteth out fear"; and Jesus and the author of Deuteronomy both said, "Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy soul." This we cannot do if our religious life is impaired by the love of other things or by the love of ourselves.

There is one last passage I would like to read to you from the works of the Prophet Joseph, a little gem that many of us have passed over for decades without appreciating. In chapter 32 of Alma, Alma is speaking to some people who have been cast out of their synagogues because of their poverty, and do not know how to worship in their condition. In rather a direct and blunt way, Alma says to them, "I say unto you, it is well that ye are cast out of your synagogues, that ye may be humble, and that ye may learn wisdom; . . . for it is because that ye are cast out, that ye are despised of your brethren because of your exceeding poverty, that ye are brought to a lowliness of heart; for ye are necessarily brought to be humble.

"And now, because ye are compelled to be humble blessed are ye; for a man sometimes, if he is compelled to be humble, seeketh repentance; and now surely, whosoever repenteth shall find mercy; and he that findeth mercy and endureth to the end the same shall be saved.

"And now as I said unto you, that because you were compelled to be humble ye were blessed, do ye not suppose that they are more blessed who truly humble themselves because of the word?

"Yea, he that truly humbleth himself, and repenteth of his sins, and endureth to the end, the same shall be blessed—yea, much more blessed than they who are compelled to be humble because of their exceeding poverty [or of any other circumstance, we might add]. Therefore, blessed are they who humble themselves without being compelled to be humble; or rather, in other words, blessed is he that believeth in the word of God, and is baptized without stubbornness of heart, yea, without being brought to know the word, or even compelled to know, before they will believe." (Alma 32:12-16.) It is only when we love humility and take delight in it that we have a chance to learn its deeper meaning. And this is true of every principle of religion.

I love the creative spirit and the creative way of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is a divine way. I humbly pray that you and I may emulate that spirit by walking with humility and learning the gospel of Jesus Christ, by having faith in him, and by learning somehow to love every great principle the Master taught. If we will do this, we shall honor the memory of Joseph Smith, and we shall become worthy sons of God and true disciples of Jesus Christ. God help us to this end, I humbly pray in Jesus' name. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This essay, printed in Brigham Young University Studies, Autumn 1973, was originally given that spring as an address to BYU faculty and graduating students who had received the Phi Kappa Phi award for academic achievement.
