Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

11

Salvation Through Jesus Christ

The Mission of Jesus Christ

To the men who wrote the New Testament, Jesus Christ was a singular person who had come into the world to bring salvation [^1] to mankind. He was more than a prophet, more than a teacher, more than a friend. In him was the very light and life of men, the hope of mankind. Note how overwhelming and consuming was their conviction that Jesus Christ was sent by God to all men, and that all men needed to have faith in him, to receive him in their hearts:

And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. (Mark 16:15-16.)

Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, if we this day be examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole. This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. (Acts 4:8-12.)

And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. (Hebrews 5:9.)

Through the ages since biblical times, untold millions of men and women—the learned and the unlearned, clergy and laymen, sinners and saints, bond and free—have looked to Jesus Christ with hope, with faith, with wonder, and even with anxiety and bewilderment, trying to understand him and to come to terms with him. He has meant many different things to different individuals and groups of people. A Christian religion is naturally centered in the mission of Christ. The interpretation of this mission reveals the character of any religion that professes his name.

Latter-day Saints affirm in their hearts the beautiful words from John: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved." (John 3:16-18.) We believe . . . that Jesus Christ is the Son of God who came into the world to do things for all mankind. What did he come to do? What is his mission among the children of men? . . . The Meaning of Salvation

The root of the word salvation means to save. The entire word means "the act of being saved." Taken in this literal sense, there are things in the lives of men from which they would be saved, evils or limitations that they desire and need to overcome. Christ came to save men from these things. We might well ask, What are the evils of life? What things do we need to overcome?

The evils or limitations of life that men need to overcome trace back to three basic characteristics of human life: (1) mortality, (2) ignorance, and (3) sin. All of man's suffering, frustration, and remorse come, we believe, from one of these causes. Stated positively, Christ came to bring us immortality, knowledge, and the power to conquer sin.

I. Mortality

There are many people among us who are half-starved, cruelly oppressed, or suffering from incurable diseases. To them, life may be a heavy burden and death often a blessing. There are others among us who have sufficient to eat, enjoy the comforts of life and medical care, have access to things of the spirit and rich human companionship. To them, life is not a burden. With William Corey, they may say,

Sweet, sweet is this human life, So sweet, I fain would breathe it still.

But even for those who enjoy life richly, it is fraught with deep tragedy. The richer and fuller one's life, the greater, in a sense, is the tragedy of its ending in death. To know life in its abundance, in its joy and power, whether in ourselves or in other persons, and then to see it end in death would be tragic indeed if death held final victory over life.

Christ died that men might conquer death and life. He came to save us from death. This was his own witness and the triumphant and exultant theme of his disciples. Jesus took the occasion of the raising of Lazarus from the dead to tell us of his power to raise all men from the grave. He said to Martha, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?" (John 11:25-26.)

Paul is assured of Christ's victory over death. He describes Christ as the first fruits of them that slept and declares that through him all shall be raised from the dead: "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Corinthians 15:55.)

II. Ignorance

A second great limitation of man's life is his ignorance, his lack of awareness of the nature of life. Buddha is reported to have said, "Long is the night to him who is awake, long is the mile to him who is tired, long is life to him who does not know the truth." Where there is ignorance, there is fear, superstition, and frustration. Man's progress in all fields has come largely through the discovery and right use of knowledge. This is as true in the social, moral, and spiritual life of man as it is in engineering or medicine.

Christ came to lead us out of spiritual darkness, to free us from ignorance. He taught us the truths and values of life, the will of God. These he also exemplified. He came to save us from ignorance.

"Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:31-32.)

III. Sin

The third limitation of life is sin. To sin is to knowingly and willfully act contrary to that which one knows to be right. To act knowingly contrary to our own convictions is to sin against ourselves. To act knowingly contrary to that which we know to be for the well-being of society is to sin against society. To act knowingly contrary to that which God has declared to be right is to sin against God. Sin is moral wrongdoing.

Sin divides the self, brings evil into the lives of our fellowmen, and pits us against God and his purpose. It is a most destructive force in life, more so than ignorance, for when we sin we are out of harmony with the laws of God and we also know it. Hence we suffer the evils which come from violating laws, even as we would if we were acting in ignorance. In addition, we suffer all the damage wrought by man working against himself.

Christ came to save man from sin, to inspire him to rise above it, and to bring him forgiveness. To understand Christ's relationship to man's sins is a vital part of Christian theology. Salvation in its literal sense means the act of being saved from death, ignorance, and sin. This is the mission of Jesus Christ—to save men, or at least participate in the salvation of men, from these three limitations and evils of life.

The Fall of Man

Christian churches generally, while they give God full credit for the creation of man and his life on earth, believe that things got off to a bad start. It is believed that Adam and Eve, though originally created in a state of grace and divine favor, committed some grave sin and fell from grace. With their "fall," they plunged all mankind into death, sin, and damnation. Both Catholic and the major Protestant movements of Lutheranism, Zwingliism, and Calvinism have looked upon human nature as being depraved, having inherited original sin from Adam. According to this view, man is wholly evil by nature until God, through Christ, lifts him again into a state of divine grace or favor and redeems him from death and sin.

Latter-day Saints hold quite a different concept of the Fall from this traditional point of view briefly described above. In our belief, the "fall of man" was not a misfortune. God's plan did not go awry in the beginning. Adam was not a sinner who plunged mankind into a depraved and utterly helpless condition.

We believe that men lived a meaningful, spiritual life as children of God before they were born in the flesh. Earth life was planned by God and Jesus Christ as a necessary and valuable stage in the eternal progression of men. Men knew of the plan before they were born, and looked forward to coming to the earth to gain the experiences of mortality.

Adam and Eve were two of the noblest children of God. For this reason they were chosen to come to earth and to initiate mortal life for others of God's children. Just how God brought about man's life on earth, we do not know. The Bible is a deeply religious account of creation, not a scientific record. The story of the fall of man in scripture is an effort to explain the divine origin and purpose of life and should be read with this thought in mind. The story is brief and somewhat figurative and symbolic in language, but from it we can glean a few fundamental religious convictions. Latter-day Saint scriptures have thrown additional light on the creation story.

Adam and Eve were not sinners in the traditional sense of the word. We believe God gave them a choice of remaining in their premortal state or of taking on mortality with its attendant opportunities and suffering. They were given a choice between two conditions. They could obey the laws of their premortal natures and remain free from death and moral responsibility associated with mortality, or they could become mortal and subject to death and learn the hard lessons of life.

Adam and Eve chose the courageous role, the one God wanted them to choose. They "broke" the law of their premortal life, becoming mortal, or subject to death. The Bible says they partook of the fruit of the tree, of which God had said, "Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." (Genesis 3:3.)

Just how they became mortal, we do not know. But of one thing we are sure: they were not sinners. They chose to leave the presence of God and walk by faith, to learn to cope with the laws and forces characteristic of earth life. They "fell" in the sense that they left the presence of God and became subject to the limitations of mortality, including death, ignorance, and sin.

Adam's first choice, as we have seen, was to become mortal or to remain immortal. His second choice was either to remain in ignorance or to receive knowledge and thus become a moral, responsible son of God. He chose the latter alternative. As Latter-day Saints, we honor Adam and Eve because they had the courage and faith to become mortal and also to assume moral responsibility. We believe that in making these two choices, they were doing God's will and initiating the same two great experiences for us, their posterity.

The Book of Mormon adds a purposeful, optimistic, and new reference to the Fall:

And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy. (2 Nephi 2:22-25.)

The Doctrine and Covenants, in harmony with the teaching of the Book of Mormon, rejects the whole idea of original sin. "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." (D&C 93:38.)

Men are not born in sin, nor do they inherit the sin of Adam. From Adam we inherit mortality and death. As the Apostle Paul said, "By man came death," and "in Adam all die." (1 Corinthians 15:21-22.) From Adam we have inherited a knowledge of good and evil, the opportunity to become truly moral and spiritual beings. With him we share human nature with its potentiality for life and death, righteousness and sin. Adam was no different in his mortal life from us. He simply had the privilege and honor of initiating life on earth as a full, responsible child of God.

Another interesting passage from the Book of Mormon throws light on the Fall. Speaking of little children, we read, "Behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall." (Mosiah 3:16; emphasis added.) The Fall simply means that we became mortal and may rise or fall in our mortal probation.

While Latter-day Saints reject the traditional views of the Fall and the nature of man held in Christendom, this does not mean that we in any sense reject the mission of Christ. Man is subject to death. Man is ignorant and needs divine guidance to find the truth, and man does sin. In his choice between good and evil, he inevitably sometimes chooses evil as well as good. He needs salvation from sin. In the wisdom and love of God and Christ, the latter was chosen to be a Savior to mankind, to help man rise above death, ignorance, and sin.

Christ—and the Purpose of Life

Christ's mission may be thought of not only in negative terms—in salvation from death, ignorance, and sin—but also in positive terms. He lived and died to help men gain immortality and eternal life. He came to earth to help each of us realize the very purpose of life. What is that purpose?

Men are that they might have joy—that joy which is the fruit of self-realization of persons who are eternally free and also children of God. Men's destiny is to grow in the likeness of their Eternal Father as manifest in the life of his Son, Jesus Christ. "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

The mission of Christ may be summarized in one word—the Atonement. The word atonement means, literally, at-one-ment. Christ's mission was to bring about a state of at-one-ment, agreement or harmony, between God and man. Man, dwelling on the earth, subject to the limitations of mortal existence—to death, ignorance, and sin—is estranged from his Father in heaven. He needs to be one with his Maker, to know him, and to be worthy to return to him. Christ, the Son of God, is the great Mediator between the Father and his children. His role is to help us effect an at-one-ment between him and us. He accepted the responsibility of overcoming the estrangement between Deity and man. On this point all interpreters of the Atonement probably agree. The important question is: How is it to be done?

Some theologians in Christendom have thought of the Atonement in this way: When Adam fell, through sin, as they believe, all mankind was lost. God, in his anger, became estranged from men and, as it were, turned his back on them. Christ, by dying for the sins of men, restored men to favor in the eye of God, bringing about an at-one-ment between the Creator and his creatures. In other words, according to this view, Christ's mission was to reconcile God to fallen humanity.

As Latter-day Saints, we believe God to be the living Father of all men. Never has he turned his back on them. He is not estranged from men. The opposite is true. Men frequently estrange themselves from God. Men leave God, the fountain and source of their lives, and, like the Prodigal Son, go into a far country to spend their lives in riotous living. God, like the father in the parable, is waiting for his children to return and is ready to run to meet them.

If we may carry the analogy one step further, we may add that the Father has sent Jesus Christ, his Only Begotten Son, to bring man back to him. Christ lived and died not to reconcile God to man, but to reconcile man to God. It is man who must have a new vision, a change of heart, and be born again if he is to be one with God. This is clearly indicated in scripture as well as dictated by reason. In speaking of his death on the cross, Jesus said, "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." (John 12:32.) And again, he said, "I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkness." (John 12:46.)

Christ's love for mankind and his great desire and effort to bring them unto God are also forcefully stated in the Book of Mormon: "For behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you that the Lord God worketh not in darkness. He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world, even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation." (2 Nephi 26:23-24.)

The Atonement can be suggested in a chart, which may help us to visualize the mission of Christ:

Man's Moral Nature

Man is moral by nature and by nurture. He has the capacity to make choices, to choose between things good and things evil. He must come to terms with himself, justifying his every act.

At times, man's moral nature brings him feelings of joy and strength. He feels free and creative in giving direction to his own life. He feels whole and strong when mind and heart are harnessed in pursuit of self-chosen goals. Man's moral agency can be a source of deep satisfaction.

Man's moral nature is not only a source of strength, but also makes him aware of his weakness and failure. Try as he will, it seems to be the fate of man to fall short of his ideal. He finds himself, in moments of weakness, acting upon impulses and out of motives not in harmony with his higher desires. Shakespeare describes this human trait:

If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches, and poor men's cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions: I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done, than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood; but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree. (Portia to Nerissa in The Merchant of Venice, Act I, scene 2.)

The Apostle Paul likewise recognized this tendency in man to believe in the ideal and then act contrary to it. This he called sin:

For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. . . . For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? (Romans 7:14-15, 18-24.)

We all fail to measure up to our ideals in one particular or another. We are all sinners, though in various ways. The only person who will not acknowledge this is probably the self-righteous person who, in fact, is the greatest sinner of all because his self-righteousness blinds him to all his other sins.

Man not only suffers a sense of failure in particular things, but his life as a whole never quite measures up to that which he wants it to be and which he believes it should be. For the reflective person, his life is never fulfilled; it never attains the ideal to which he aspires.

The gospel of Jesus Christ offers to man the means whereby he can overcome his individual sins and also his sense of failure and inadequacy about his life as a whole. The first step in the plan is faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, which culminates in true repentance. We shall first discuss the meaning of repentance and then indicate how faith in Christ can give us the power to repent.

Two Paths Open

It is a law of life that man be whole, that conviction and action, the ideal and the real, be one. Man is ever striving to bridge the gap between his ideal of what he should be and the reality of what he is. There are two ways to do this that are well known to students of human nature. They may be illustrated in a diagram:

The upper line represents a man's idea of the right, his standard of behavior. It is made with an upward reach to indicate a growing conception of the right. The lower line, man's actual behavior, is likely to be irregular in its deviations from the right. There will always be some gap between the ideal and the real, but when the gap becomes too great, the mind is compelled to act to close it.

One method of accomplishing oneness is called rationalization, self-justification, or self-deceit. It is a process by which man, in search of unity and comfort, lowers his ideals to coincide with his actual behavior. It is embarrassing and humiliating to confess one's sins even to oneself. It is much easier to pull a blind over the mind. Some of us, although slow and sluggish and unimaginative in many ways, become highly ingenious and imaginative in our own self-deception. One can avoid some of the consequences of sin through self-deceit. But at what price? At the cost of lowering one's behavior to a point that is out of harmony with the constructive principles of one's life. If one is to change his standard of conduct, let it be because that standard is no longer valid, or because he has found something better or higher, and not merely because he wishes to be comfortable in wrongdoing. The truth seems to be that no one is completely successful in his self-deception. In more reflective and objective moments the wrongdoer becomes aware of his own effort at rationalization. He remembers also his conception of the right and secretly wishes he were capable of living in harmony with it. . . . Repentance is the achievement of unity in life by lifting one's behavior to the level of one's ideal. It is a constructive principle by which man overcomes a sense of failure and inner frustration and works toward self-fulfillment. Repentance has been the watchword of the prophets throughout history.

The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel. (Mark 1:15.)

Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance. And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. (Matthew 3:8-9.)

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. (Acts 3:19; read Isaiah 1, Amos 5, or Jeremiah 6, Alma 5, Acts 2.)

The Meaning of Repentance

Repentance has several related meanings in scripture. Most often it means to have "a change of mind," or to have "another mind." It calls for a new outlook on life, a "turning back" on old ways, freeing oneself of desires no longer deemed worthy to entertain. Repentance means action. Error, wrongdoing, and shallow living give place to truth, right-doing, and wholesome living. The old gives way to the new. Life is lived on a higher plane. Belief and action become identical. The exact steps in repentance may vary somewhat from person to person and from time to time, but they usually include the following:

"Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit." (Psalm 51:10-12.)

No Other Way

Repentance is not an arbitrary commandment of God. It is a law of life which has been revealed to us for our own good, the means by which we may improve and gain increased integrity and freedom. In our belief there is no other way to free oneself from sin and its consequences, from evil, failure, and frustration, except through repentance. It is the second step in Christ's plan of salvation. Without repentance we cannot see the kingdom of God. Scriptures are emphatic on this point.

And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to repent. (Acts 17:30.)

The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. (2 Peter 3:9.)

I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. (Luke 13:5; see vv. 1-5.)

But wo, wo unto him who knoweth that he rebelleth against God! For salvation cometh to none such except it be through repentance and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ. (Mosiah 3:12.)

The Strength to Repent

Repentance is not easy. Often in life we take the first few steps; we recognize our wrongdoing, feel remorse, resolve to do right, and then fail to do the right. Our need is to find genuine motivation which will give us the power to repent wholly of single evils and which will help us to increase in the fine quality of our total living. Where is such strength to be found? The strength to repent does not come from the evil done. There is no positive strength in evil. To preoccupy oneself with wrongdoing is to succumb to it more often than not. A person whose sin is covetousness does not surmount it while preoccupied with desire for other men's goods.

Repentance is more than a rational consideration. It is good to look at our mistakes and shortcomings with the cold, appraising eye of reason. Often help comes from a knowledge of habit-formation, from a vision of the consequences of behavior, and from other reasonable means of understanding ourselves. But reason alone is an inadequate weapon against the strength of such powerful forces as habit and desire. Reason is a necessary and essential guide in life, but by itself it is not the best source of motivation to act.

Jesus Christ came to earth to bring about "means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance," and "only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption." (Alma 34:15, 16.) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ can bring us both the desire and the power to overcome our sins and our sense of failure. He can inspire us to overcome that which is evil and shallow and mean in life.

"Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil." (Ephesians 6:10-11.)

The same idea is taught by Alma, a Book of Mormon prophet:

"Preach unto them repentance, and faith on the Lord Jesus Christ; teach them to humble themselves and to be meek and lowly in heart; teach them to withstand every temptation of the devil, with their faith on the Lord Jesus Christ. Teach them to never be weary of good works, but to be meek and lowly in heart; for such shall find rest to their souls." (Alma 37:33-34; emphasis added.)

A man went to his bishop one day and confessed that in childhood and youth he had learned to lie to achieve his ends. Now in his full adulthood he was continually plagued with the same desire and tendency. The bishop asked him what he had done to try to break the habit, and the man replied that he had fought it. The bishop knew a better way. They knelt together in prayer. The bishop assured the brother of his moral support and of the help he would receive from God and Christ if he would try to live as they wanted him to live. The bishop gave him a good book to read, a fine service to render in the Church, the responsibility of speaking in meeting. In short, the understanding bishop helped his brother to so fill his life with the things of God and Christ that the need to lie gradually went away. The man became a new person through a living faith in Christ.

Christ's love for us is expressed in his willingness to forgive. Even on the cross, he said of those who had so unmercifully nailed him there, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." The meaning of forgiveness and the conditions under which we may receive it will be developed in a subsequent chapter. Let it be noted here that the assurance of complete forgiveness gives us faith to repent. That assurance has been proclaimed again and again.

Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. (Isaiah 55:6-7.)

But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live? (Ezekiel 18:21-23.)

For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance; nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord shall be forgiven. (D&C 1:31-32.)

The Remission of Sins

On the day of Pentecost when Peter and the other apostles were preaching the gospel with power from the Holy Ghost, thousands believed and asked Peter what they should do. He answered, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." (Acts 2:38.)

Sin is any willful, conscious transgression of the laws of God. Sin is moral failure. When we fail to do that which we know we ought to do, or do that which we ought not to do, we are sinning. Some wrongdoings are far more serious than others, to be sure, but in all instances, the process remains the same: we are knowingly acting contrary to God's will and to our own better judgment.

Justice

We live in a world of law and order. This is immediately plain in our relationship to nature. The farmer who understands and obeys the principles pertaining to good soil management produces the best crops. A man who ignorantly or willfully ignores the laws of health will pay the price of ill-health sooner or later. There is a law of compensation operative in nature. As we sow, so do we reap.

Law and order prevail in the moral and spiritual life of man just as they do in the world of nature. Here, too, we suffer from both our ignorant and a willful neglect of the moral laws of life. The Apostle Paul expressed it this way: "Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." (Galatians 6:7-8.)

The Lord inspired Jeremiah with the same idea: "Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it." (Jeremiah 6:19.)

"Do they provoke me to anger? saith the Lord: do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces?" (Jeremiah 7:19.)

Sin has far-reaching consequences. When we are selfish, for example, we do injury to ourselves and to others; we are out of harmony with God and with his laws. Our behavior sets in motion consequences which are beyond our power to recall, control, or make good. Sometimes in our sin we do evil beyond our capacity to repair. If justice were the only principle of life, we would be forever in debt to those whom we wronged—to God, to fellowmen, and even to ourselves.

Fortunately, justice is not the only principle which governs the lives of men. If it were, some of us might be hopelessly obligated to others. But there are other principles of life, each with its contribution to make. Justice is one law, and very essential and beneficial too; but mercy is another, equally valid in its place, and more gentle.

Forgiveness

God is a Father. He loves his children. Even when we do wrong, he still loves us as any good earthly parent loves his child no matter what he has done. Our Father's work and glory is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) He is more interested in persons than he is in impersonal laws. Our sins are important to him because of what they do to ourselves and to others. We cannot do evil without hurting others and without bringing injury to our own character and personality. Therefore, God hates sin but still loves the sinner whom he is trying to help. . . . God's love for sinners was taught effectively by the Savior both in word and deed. Often he singled them out for special consideration. When Pharisees murmured against the Savior's disciples because they ate with publicans and sinners, Jesus said, "They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." (Luke 5:30-32.) Is it not remarkable that he who was without sin should draw "near unto him all the publi-cans and sinners for to hear him"? (Luke 15:1.) How else could this have been accomplished save through understanding and love?

When they came to him, he gave them hope and comfort. He taught three simple beautiful parables to help them feel and remem-ber how God is reaching out, searching for the sinner, and rejoicing when he is found and turns home toward his father's house. Whenever the Savior meets with sinners who are aware of their sins and are responsive to his loving appeal to them to "sin no more," there we find him talking of mercy and forgiveness. (Read Luke 15 and John 8:1-11.)

Remission of sins means forgiveness of sins. God will freely forgive or pardon the moral failures of those who truly repent. This follows naturally from his loving nature. He is not interested in our condemnation but in our joy and salvation. The prophets of old, as well as Jesus, make this abundantly clear. Isaiah, after giving his people a sound tongue lashing for their iniquities, said,

Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isaiah 1:16-18.)

Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. (Isaiah 55:6-7.)

Ezekiel portrays the Father's real interest in man and his willingness to forgive and forget the sins of the truly repentant:

But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live? (Ezekiel 18:21-23.)

"Mercy Claimeth the Penitent"

It is evident from the above scripture and numerous other passages that remission of sins comes only to those who are repentant. Until a sinner repents, he is subject to the law of justice. His wrongdoing condemns him. He is in no condition of mind or heart to receive forgiveness or pardon. His sense of guilt estranges him from his own best self, from other men against whom he has sinned, and from God, whom he knows to be a person of righteousness and truth. In his sin, he is in no position to be reconciled to himself, to others, or to God. His very sins reproach him and keep him in bondage to their influence on himself and others. Mercy cannot enter his life to counter the laws of justice. As long as he remains unrepentant, he suffers all the consequences of his wrongdoing. This is a law of life—the law of justice. We reap what we sow.

But when a person humbles himself, sees the evil of his ways, and effects a genuine change of mind and heart; when his repentance is successful, other forces become operative in his spiritual life and in his relationship to others and to God. Justice is not obliterated, but a new power is felt which enables him to find his way out of the meshwork of sin in which he had previously been entangled. When man invented the airplane, he did not do away with the law of gravitation which pulls everything toward the earth, but he introduced other factors which enabled him to leave the earth and remain aloft in the air. Repentance does not do away with justice, but it does invoke mercy. And mercy as well as justice can do things for man, under certain conditions, as the Book of Mormon states so effectively.

But there is a law given, and a punishment affixed, and a repentance granted; which repentance mercy claimeth; otherwise, justice claimeth the creature and executeth the law, and the law inflicteth the punishment; if not so, the works of justice would be destroyed, and God would cease to be God. But God ceaseth not to be God, and mercy claimeth the penitent, and mercy cometh because of the atonement; and the atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice. For behold, justice exerciseth all his demands, and also mercy claimeth all which is her own; and thus, none but the truly penitent are saved. (Alma 42:22-24; emphasis added.)

Baptism—a Witness of Forgiveness

As we noted in previous chapters, baptism is a witness of a covenant between Deity and man. It is man's witness to God that he has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the faith that has given him power to repent of his un-Christian acts. In his baptism he promises "to be a witness of God at all times and in all things, and in all places," to take upon him the name of Christ, and always remember him, and keep his commandments, that he may have his Spirit to be with him. (See Mosiah 18:8-11; Moroni 4 and 5; D&C 20:37.) Baptism is also the witness on the part of Deity that man's sins are remitted, pardoned, and forgiven. Before God, he is clean again, born again, ready to begin a new spiritual life. His sins will not be mentioned unto him again as long as he refrains from sinning.

Baptism means forgiveness of past sins on condition of repentance. It also means forgiveness of sins in the future on condition of repentance. This point needs clarification. There is no perfection in human nature. And though a man has corrected mistakes of the past and is committed in faith to Christ, he is bound to err and fail in the future. Repentance, like learning, is a constant need of man. Therefore, baptism is both retroactive and operative in relation to the future. It is the divine assurance that the earnest, repentant disciple of Christ will be forgiven the sins which he will no doubt commit in his progress toward perfection in Jesus Christ.

The promise of forgiveness, both in relationship to the past and the future, must not be taken as license to sin. Moral failure brings with it sorrow and suffering for ourselves and for others. And though, through repentance and baptism, we attain a remission of sins, we will have already suffered considerable loss and have done harm to others. Foolish is the man who toys with sin through confidence in forgiveness. Such an attitude ignores the law of justice in his own life and the principle of mercy toward others, and may make it much more difficult to gain mercy for himself. A man does not know his own strength. By dallying with temptation and sin, he may readily succumb to them and find repentance beyond his power.

Forgiveness and Punishment

A question often asked is this: Though we be forgiven of our sins, will we not have to pay the full price of our sins—either here or in the hereafter? It is true that no one can do wrong without suffering a loss. Forgiveness does not mean that no damage has been done. In our wrongdoing we suffer pain and forgo all the rich experience and development which would have come had we been spending our strength in worthwhile pursuits. Even the repentant sinner will have suffered certain losses through his wrongdoing. There is no question about that. His sinful deeds in the past, with their effect on himself and others, are not undone by repentance and forgiveness. But this does not mean that a person must pay the full price of justice for his sins.

There is an element of grace in forgiveness. If a person had to pay the uttermost farthing for his wrongdoing, or, in other words, if justice alone prevailed, then forgiveness would have no meaning. Neither would love or mercy have place or meaning. Forgiveness implies that there is something to forgive, some unfulfilled obligation that is pardoned and erased. Let us illustrate.

A father had a son to whom he lent $5,000 at a low rate of interest. The son signed a note—a promise to pay. He began to repay the note faithfully; then misfortune overtook him. His wife's ill health and his own failure in a business venture ruined him financially. His intentions were good. He tried honestly to fulfill his obligation to his father. Time and again, the son sacrificed his own comfort to make a small payment to his father.

One day the father said to his son, "My boy, despite your misfortune and the prolonged and expensive illness of your wife, you have made every effort to repay me the loan. I am going to forgive you the rest of the note. Here it is, torn to bits."

The father was happy to forgive his son because the latter had done his part as well as he could. The father truly forgave because there was something to forgive. Most of the original loan had not been paid. It was to be cancelled. Had the father said, "Son, I forgive you the loan, but you must still pay it back with interest," what meaning would forgiveness have?

Forgiveness comes immediately with full repentance. There is no concept of purgatory in our theology—no place after death where men will be punished to satisfy divine justice for sins committed in the flesh of which man has repented fully. The repentant sinner pays a price for his wrongdoing; he knows sorrow and remorse and the digression or delay his wrongdoing has brought into his life. He can know also, however, that God's interest is in helping him attain unto godlike living, not in punishing him for the sake of justice, revenge, or glory. Therefore, to the repentant sinner the Lord will not add his own punishment to that which is the natural consequence of sin.

Forgiveness is complete and final if our repentance is also complete and permanent. God has no interest in punishment for punishment's sake. His greater interest is in the sinner, not the sin. As the late Matthew Cowley (a beloved apostle in the LDS church) said, in our hearing, "A sinner is greater than all his sins." This is illustrated in Jesus' parable of the Prodigal Son. When the Prodigal Son returned home, having "come unto himself," "when he was yet a great way off, his father had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him." Then the father put a robe on him, put a ring on his finger and shoes on his feet, and killed the fatted calf and made merry. Why? Because his son who was dead "is alive again; and was lost and is found." The lad's repentance had begun; therefore, the father could rejoice. The boy's spiritual recovery was his father's whole concern. Such is God's love for the sinner, his willingness to forgive him fully and completely. Of course, the son must do his part. His repentance must also be complete or he cannot accept his father's forgiveness; his life cannot again become whole and increase in righteousness as God would have it increase. This is made amply clear in a passage in the Book of Mormon, which states that Jesus Christ lived and died to bring about "means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance. And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption." (Alma 34:16.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This special Christmas sermon was prepared for the fourth issue (Winter 1966) of the independent periodical, Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought, for which Lowell Bennion was serving as an advisory editor.
