Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

13

Overcoming Our Mistakes

Somebody has said that the purpose of religion is to comfort the afflicted and to afflict the comfortable, and I debated for a day or two which [^1] stance to take here. I decided to try to comfort the afflicted, and, as I talk about a certain affliction, those of you who are not afflicted may leave. This is a devotional, and I have chosen a personal topic in the gospel.

I had a friend who not long ago spent an hour and a half telling me about his wife, who, a few years back, made a big mistake in her life and who does nothing now but brood over it. She has lost her purpose and joy in living and has even threatened to commit suicide. All of her wonderful potential as a human being has come to the point of arrest, and this is tragic for him and his family. Furthermore, because she is so unhappy within herself, she makes life almost unbearable for her friends and her husband. She harasses them continually.

Historians have said you can't wage a war on two fronts; if you do, you generally lose. And the Germans have lost two wars fighting on the eastern and western fronts. (There may be other reasons too.) I find too that you can't carry on personally two battles in life—one the outside battle and the other the battle within yourself. And he who fights himself least is better prepared, I think, to fight the outside battle best. In fact, the outside battle is always there. The way I've learned to enjoy life is to not expect the ideal or the perfect. I look to it and work toward it, but the way to enjoy life is to acknowledge that it is a battle and there'll always be problems. There'll always be disappointments, and one must learn to relish the battle rather than the successful outcome of it.

All of us make mistakes in life, and some of us very serious ones. Any thoughtful person has a sense of failure because of his sins or his moral failures. If there are any sinners in the audience besides myself, I am talking to you, and I'd like to suggest what we might do about coping with our failures of the past so that they don't immobilize us for life today and for fighting the outside battle. Shakespeare once said, "Canst thou not minister to a mind diseas'd, pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, raze out the written troubles of the brain, and with some sweet oblivious antidote cleanse the stuff'd bosom of the perilous stuff which weighs upon the human heart?" (Macbeth, Act V, scene iii.)

But if we're not all sinners by commission, I think we are all sinners by omission. The longer I live, the more I regret not my sins of commission but my sins of omission. We can go through life so indifferent to the things around us and so unaware of our calling, if you will, of our ethical demands, that all of us ought to suffer from neglect and from our omissions.

Just a few suggestions on what we might do to overcome our sense of failure, our sense of wrongdoing, and to learn to live with all our power in the present without dragging the corpses of the past with us. The simple solution is to say "Repent and you'll be forgiven," but I find repentance not easy. And even if we repent, sometimes memories cast a shadow on us, so I'd like to be more specific.

Aldous Huxley, in his introduction to Brave New World, said something like this: that "one doesn't get clean by rolling in the mire." One doesn't get clean and whole by brooding over the past and by reliving his mistakes. I've learned that there's no strength in weakness; there's no strength in sin; and we can't overcome our mistakes and our sins by fighting them directly. I think we succumb to them if we dwell upon them. I agree with Huxley that we ought not to roll in the mire and rehearse and rehash our past mistakes.

The second suggestion I have is that we ought to realize that no matter what we've done in life, no matter what we do, God and Christ still love us just as much as they did before we failed. God and Christ do not separate themselves from the sinner, from the wrongdoer. I'm speaking boldly—I shouldn't speak for God or for Christ, but I feel to do it on the basis of scripture. . . . In the Prodigal Son, the father expressed the feelings which Jesus felt our Heavenly Father has toward one who does wrong. You will remember that when the Prodigal Son remembered his home and turned back again, the father ran out to meet him. He didn't wait for him to get home and exercise full repentance, proven repentance, but ran out to meet him and fell on his neck and kissed him, and said two or three times in the parable, "This my son was dead and is alive again, and was lost and is found." And that seemed to be all that really mattered to the earthly father.

I remember a returned missionary who dropped into the institute when I was here, down on University Street. He was just freshly returned from the mission field three weeks, and he had committed a grave mistake that caused him to think that his life was ruined forever. I said to him, "God loves you just as much today as he did last Thursday," and he couldn't believe it. The thought had never occurred to him. He wept like a child. You know, sometimes we think that God loves us to the extent that we please him, to the extent that we're good boys and girls, good men and women. Love is not earned. Love is not merited. If it is, it's justice and reciprocity and reward. Love comes from a loving heart, and God's love is unconditional. And he loves the worst of us and the best of us equally, I believe. We cause him to suffer when we do wrong, when he sees us live our lives in ways which destroy us, if you will, and when he sees us hurting other people—this must cause him pain. Christ suffers because of our sins, I think, perhaps more than for our sins, because he loves us.

I can understand this, being a father. I have good boys and a good girl. And, you know, when you're worried about your sons, you don't love them less, and when they're in trouble, you're not less anxious. You really love them more. I can understand why Jesus said that when the shepherd went after the lost sheep and brought him home, there was more rejoicing in heaven over one that was lost than over the ninety and nine that were safe in the fold. That used to tempt me to "make whoopee," so somebody would rejoice when I returned, but I find that not necessary to try. We once had a child who was very, very ill and on the borderline of possible death. Our other children were well at the time. We loved the child who was ill, and we rejoiced at the time of his recovery more than over the others who were well. At the moment nothing else mattered. And I think that's the way Christ and God must feel about the person who's done wrong and who comes back. Even before he comes back. I think God is forgiving whether we repent or not. He asks us to forgive. He doesn't say forgive when people repent. He says forgive them seven times seventy. I don't think God would ask me to be forgiving when he is not. I think somehow that the principles of the gospel are his principles, too, don't you? Therefore, the reason we have to repent is to be able to forgive ourselves and to be able to get in harmony again with the principles and laws of good living, of life. We don't have to repent to earn God's love, even though some scriptures portray him as being pretty angry with the sinner. Others portray him as angry with the sin, not with the sinner.

Another thing we can do to overcome the past is to make amends. We know when we've done wrong, but sometimes we're afraid to go to those whom we've wronged. We are too proud. I've been too proud to admit my failures, my wrongdoing. When I've had the courage to do it, I find that great reconciliation has taken place. And if it doesn't, I've done my part. It's the offended person's responsibility to react to my efforts to be reconciled. Sometimes it's impossible to right wrongs that we've done with the person whom we've wronged. It's also impossible to pay those who've done good for us. I shall never be able to compensate my father and mother for what they've done for me. Never! I have friends of the same stripe; they've enriched my life to the point that I could never possibly repay them. And when you can't compensate a person for a wrong, when it's too late or impossible, then you can bless other people. We all belong together in this world. We're brothers and sisters with the same Eternal Father; we belong to the same human community. There are others we can bless, though we can't repair the damage we may have done to others of his children.

A fourth suggestion I would make is that the past, which some of us regret at certain points, is not as fixed and rigid as we ordinarily think it is. If you have shameful moments in your past, you're prone to isolate them, to rigidify them and think of them as being fixed. You've heard the saying that you cannot change your past—but you can. You can! You can't change single events in the past, but you can change the past as a whole—your past—and when you change your past as a whole, the meaning of every part of it changes. The significance, the value, the importance of every event in one's past is constantly changing by reason of the kind of past we're building. I'll tell you where I came onto this idea. In Germany, years and years ago, a young girl confessed to my wife a very tragic period of her life, and she said, "Please tell Brother Bennion about it." So she came and told me. I won't go into her life, but it was a tragic life, and I've never seen a girl with sadder, darker, bigger brown eyes than this lovely girl of eighteen. And in trying to give her some comfort and hope for the future, it dawned on me that we're adding to our past, we're building onto it each day we live. Life is not a rigid, fixed, quantitative kind of thing. It's a growing, qualitative, whole thing. And a whole is greater than any of its parts, and the whole gives meaning to its parts. My arm by itself hung on the wall is one thing; my arm as a part of my body and servant of my mind is another thing. An event in that girl's past or even ten events were one thing at eighteen, when she was in the depths of despair. And then she came into the fold, was baptized into the Church, found some faith in Christ, converted her husband, reared a fine family, and her life has been going like this ever since. This valley of failure in her life is one thing by itself; it's another thing when it's one dip in a long, beautiful life. This may not appeal to you, but it surely does to me. This idea makes life dynamic. It's comforting and exciting to know that you can climb out of any low, just as you can fall from any high if you become complacent, self-righteous, and indifferent to life.

I think God feels this way about our lives. I want to read to you a familiar verse from Ezekiel. He says, "If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him." I don't believe that the books are going to be opened, literally, in heaven someday, and all the red marks weighed against the black marks. If any book's going to be opened, I believe (I'm just giving my opinion), it will be the book of life, what you are on judgment day. What I am. And the past is only significant in terms of what it has made me become. Ezekiel says, "All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him. In his righteousness that he hath done, he shall live. Have I any pleasure at all if the wicked shall die? saith the Lord God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?" (Ezekiel 18:21-23.) And Isaiah said, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool." (Isaiah 1:18.)

This I believe. If God loves us, his only interest is in us. "Let no one till his death be called unhappy. Measure not the work until the day is out and the labor's done." I would say, don't measure life ever—even into eternity. We're still building on it; we're changing it.

I have two other suggestions. One is, I think we ought to be aggressive in our idealism, in our desire and effort to do what is right. I am the adviser to the Student Behavior Committee on campus and have been for eleven years. It was kind of painful when I started out; I wondered why I'd left this beautiful institute program to deal with students in serious trouble with the university. Then I found out that they were about like you and me; most were careless or frustrated in their families or in their personal lives and did foolish things in that mood. Many of us do wrong and get in trouble because we're not thinking of the right. Our concept of the gospel is very general. We feel good about it; we have a testimony; but we don't sharpen what we believe in. We can't say I'm going to be honest, and what does honesty mean? And what does it mean in this circumstance and in that circumstance? Or, I believe in chastity, and what does it mean and what is the spirit of it, and what is the nature of it? I think we get caught offguard when we don't define for ourselves repeatedly what we stand for, what values we hold to. And we don't tell ourselves why we believe in these values so that they become our very own—internalized. They're not God's laws only, they're our laws too, because we've come to test them and to believe in them. I'm very much impressed by basketball players who are trained to do very specific things, such as to retrieve the ball, to get the rebound. And they count how many you get in a game—anywhere from none to eighteen. Players are aggressive. In football you outcharge the other line—that's half the game. You don't sit back apathetically and see what happens to you. You outcharge your opponent.

Now why not be aggressive—and I don't mean with the mouth, I don't mean to boast or to be loud—but why not clarify what values we believe in? This applies to you whether you're a believer or a nonbeliever—Latter-day Saint, Catholic, Jew, Protestant, atheist, or anything else. Every man has to be whole within himself. He has to have integrity. You can't have integrity without clarifying your convictions or values or goals. You can change them, but you must always have some, I believe. And so you clarify your ideals and you determine to live up to them. If you're going to work in a bank and handle money, don't decide while you're handling money whether or not you'll be honest. Make up your mind before you go into the bank, before you accept the job. Say in your morning prayer, "Lord, help me not to take money today." Money is such a temptation when your wife needs so many things. It is so easy to replace, we think. This is the way we get caught in dishonest actions. The Apostle Paul said, "Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God. . . . Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace." (Ephesians 6:13-15.) These words don't ring much of a bell to us as symbols in this day, but "put on the armour of God" and face life with whatever ideals you believe in, and shadows will disappear.

My final point is to make a friend of Jesus Christ. In the sacramental prayer each Sabbath day we hear and we say (I think rather routinely) that we bear witness to the Father that we take upon us the name of Jesus Christ and always remember him and keep him commandments, that we might have his spirit to be with us. Now, what does it mean to take upon us the name of Christ? What does it mean to always remember him? How many of us make him part of our daily life without being fanatical, without being "other-worldly," still living in the world? How do we draw upon the strength that comes with fellowship with our Savior? Do we leave it to Protestants to talk about fellowship with Christ? I had an experience in the mission field that is very memorable to me. A man came to me after church—he was twice my age, a very unhappy person—and told me that he had committed a grave sin before he joined the Church; that his wife would not forgive him, would not divorce him, and constantly reminded him of his good-for-nothingness. He said, "I've come to think of myself at her estimate. How can I be whole again and pure of heart, clean in my thoughts?" I said, "What have your tried to do for this problem?" He said, "I've fought it. I've fought it." I'd had a class in psychology before I went on a mission, and I told him there must be a better way than to fight sin. We knelt in prayer together, and afterwards I gave him a book to read—As a Man Thinketh in His Heart, So Is He—and then I put my arm around him (he was shorter than I) and gave him a firm handclasp and told him that he could overcome his problem. And then, by inspiration or coincidence, I said to him, "How would you like to prepare the Lord's supper for Sunday School?" (He was a teacher in the Aaronic Priesthood.) He said, "Do you think I'm worthy to do this?" I said, "No, I don't think any of us are. But I think Jesus would be pleased if you would render him this service." And so he proceeded to set the Lord's table each Sunday morning. After about six weeks I met him coming up the aisle before Sunday School one morning. I put out my hand to reassure him. He put his hand behind his back and said nothing. I said, "Have I offended you?" He said, "Oh, no. I've just washed my hands with soap and hot water, and I can't shake hands with you or any person until I've set the Lord's table." That's the most beautiful reverence I've seen in that simple act of setting the Lord's table.

In another six weeks he came to me after church again and said, "I'm a new man. I'm a new man." Then I asked him to give a talk in church on some principle of the gospel of Christ that he really believed in and why. I kept him thinking about the Savior. Well, through serving the Savior in a simple way and thinking about him during the week, this man became a new creature. It was beautiful. And I realized that I'd never used the Savior in my own life in the same way. I don't mind telling you that I did after that. I had the wonderful thrill of overcoming what I thought was a weakness in me by thinking of him and making him the center of my prayers and my life.

The biggest tragedy of life is not to live—not to function with your full soul, with your whole life, with enthusiasm, with spirit, with faith, with love. And so, I humbly pray that none of you and none of us will be so burdened by mistakes and by failures and by sins that we won't have the courage and the wisdom to turn to the ideals of the gospel, to the wonderful Son of God, and to each other to find the strength to live life as it is meant to be lived. It's a beautiful existence we have, and it is not too late for any of us to enjoy it to the full. God help us keep faith with life, I humbly pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In April 1941 Lowell Bennion published this as the first of his many essays in the Church's major official magazine, the Improvement Era. It was republished as part of a series of classic Era reprints, in the November 1970 issue, and appeared in somewhat altered form as chapter 41 in Teachings of the New Testament (1953).
