Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

14

The Fruits of Religious Living in This Life

Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?" Each tree produces its own kind. What fruits may one hope to pick if one plants a tree in the garden of religion? [^1] This question demands an answer for all those who would judge religion by its earthly harvest.

A short time ago a Gleaner girl made this confession: "Two months ago I had faith; I was happy in my religion. Everything seemed just right to me. Then my father became ill and died, leaving my mother and several small children. We had prayed for him: we needed him, but he went. And now, something has gone out of my life. I have lost the strong testimony that was mine."

A young man recently made this statement: "My father had worked all his life for the Church. He is as honest as any man who ever lived. In fact, he is too honest. Men have taken advantage of him. During the last few years he has lost the little bit that he did have. I can't see where his religion has helped him any."

We meet people of all ages and various experiences who have become disillusioned about religion. Among them are sons of pioneers, converts from the old country, young people who have been reared in the organizations of the Church—good, sincere individuals who feel that they have been deceived, that religion is not what it is purported to be. The difficulty sometimes lies in the fact that religion has been misrepresented to them, leading them to expect the wrong thing from religious living.

The two stories related above represent the two most common misconceptions of the fruits of religious living. The first is that religion will save men from all suffering, sorrow, and disappointment in life. Religion, thus conceived, is a guardian angel who steers life's ship over smooth seas. But religious history and teaching prove that life is not that, and that religion makes no such promise.

The book of Job has a moral that man should not deny God even though he suffer loss of family, of property, and be sorely afflicted. One hundred thousand Jews died in defense of things sacred to them, as Syrians and Romans desecrated their sanctuaries. Early Christians suffered repeated persecutions unto death because of their faithfulness to the Cross. John Huss, Savonarola, and men of their type lost their lives in defense of religious truth. The Huguenots in France, the Puritans in England, the Jews the world over have suffered because of religious conviction.

No Latter-day Saint should forget the lives that Mormonism has cost to date. In the history of the Mormon church, men have endured almost every form of persecution and privation that man and the elements can impose. Joseph Smith experienced this both in life and in death, giving fervid expression to it in his prayer recorded in section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Religion literally leads men to places where sorrow, suffering, and difficulties abound. Jesus came to share the burden of the sinner, to minister unto the sick and afflicted, to comfort those who mourn, which means in effect to share the burdens of life, and he said unto his disciples, "Go thou and do likewise" . . . "Feed my sheep."

The religious life is not a fairyland existence which promises escape from the realities of life, but rather a life that shares responsibilities in the most vital of life's processes. It is not a flight from the world either in thought or in deed. Jesus makes this clear in his Sermon on the Mount: "Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand: and the rains descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it." (Matthew 7:24-27.)

All those who base their lives on the teaching of Jesus build their house upon a rock. Those who do not, build their house upon the sand. Note this, that both houses receive the same punishment. The rains descend, floods come, and winds blow and beat upon both houses. The difference is that one withstands the onslaught, the other does not.

The Master said to his beloved disciples: "I send ye forth as sheep in the midst of wolves." (Matthew 10:16.) And they found out that his words were true as they laid down their lives for him. To Ananias, who objected to the baptism of Saul of Tarsus, the word came: "Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me. . . . For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake." (Acts 9:15; emphasis added.)

No, religious living does not insure us against all tragic experiences in life. Religious people die like everyone else. They become involved in accidents not of their own volition or fault. Sometimes they suffer things that the carefree escape. But religion does spare one from much suffering. The keeping of the Word of Wisdom in its fullest sense will help to keep one physically fit and better able to resist disease and physical and mental strain. In prayer, faith, and administrations to the sick, religion offers one unique aid to health.

Most of the suffering and sorrow man experiences is not physical, but mental and spiritual. It is here that religion makes perhaps its finest contribution. The enemies of good mental health are based largely on a wrong conception of the place of self in the world. The religion of Jesus gives man the true conception of self in relation to other selves. The religious man is spared the life-destroying attitudes of envy and jealousy which result from selfishness; the hatred and licentiousness which follow from a want of sympathy and reverence for life; and the fear, worry, and anxiety which spring from ignorance, wrongdoing, and a lack of proper perspective.

The second misconception, illustrated by the statement of the young man, is that religious living will make one prosperous. There is justification and evidence for this point of view. It is a belief held by the Hebrews, Book of Mormon people, the Puritans, and Latter-day Saints.

History has vindicated this belief in certain religious groups. Book of Mormon history repeatedly testifies to the prosperity that followed righteous living. The followers of John Calvin, particularly the Puritans of Holland, England, and America, who were the preeminent creators of our modern industrial order, were greatly inspired by religious beliefs and practices. The Jains and Parsis, two small sects of India, are the most prosperous of the native people of India. Their prosperity is attributed in large measure to their religious way of life. The religious influence on the economic status of Latter-day Saints is apparent from the earliest beginnings of their history.

The gospel of Jesus Christ does and should produce prosperity in two ways: First, by developing the well-named "economic virtues"—industry, honesty, integrity, punctuality, thrift, and frugality. These inevitably lead to financial success, other things being equal. Second, a religious philosophy of life gives good direction to one's expenditures. Earnings are invested in the home, educational and cultural advantages for children, and physical, mental, and social health, and are not dissipated in channels that are destructive of or indifferent to man's truest needs.

But people will be disappointed in religion if they think that it guarantees one a rich share in the material goods of the earth, that one of the chief functions of religion is to make people wealthy. The fruits of religion cannot be measured in material terms. History records the ironical paradox that even when religion led to prosperity, this, in turn, tended to undermine the religious spirit. This was true of Puritan and Nephite history. It is also evidenced in the lives of many individuals.

It was certainly not the primary purpose of God to make the Latter-day Saints prosperous when he directed them to leave the fertile lands of Ohio and Illinois, potential commercial and manufacturing centers of great magnitude, to struggle with the physical hardships of the Rocky Mountain country and its more restricted types of economic endeavor compared with the East, the Pacific Coast, and the Great Lakes regions.

Motives more important than material interest led Brigham Young to develop agriculture rather than mining in the West, resulting in the acquisition of great sources of wealth here by non-Mormons. Then, too, much of the wealth produced by the Latter-day Saints goes into economically speaking nonproductive channels such as missionary work, temple work, the erection and maintenance of beautiful houses of worship, recreation halls, charity, and religious education.

There are a dozen better reasons for paying tithing than the hope of material blessings in return, in the spirit of making a trade with the Lord. Love of God, a sense of sharing in his work and pur-poses, loyalty to his church, love of service to fellowmen, the love of giving, the joy of practicing unselfishness are more noble and more blessed.

Yes, religion reaches down and permeates our material well-being, and indirectly leads to happiness and success in this important phase of life. Yet, let it be remembered that the Lord "maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." (Matthew 5:45.) Let no one measure the fruits of religious living primarily in dollars. It is not fair to the purposes of religion.

In one of the most beautiful chapters in sacred literature (Alma 32), Alma pleads with his people to plant the seed of faith with this promise:

Behold, it will begin to swell within your breasts; and when you feel these swelling motions, ye will begin to say within yourselves—It must needs be that this is a good seed, or that the word is good, for it beginneth to enlarge my soul; yea, it beginneth to enlighten my understanding, yea, it beginneth to be delicious to me. (Alma 32:28; emphasis added.)

Then, comparing the religious life with a tree, Alma writes:

But if ye will nourish the word, yea, nourish the tree as it beginneth to grow, by your faith with great diligence, and with patience, looking forward to the fruit thereof, it shall take root; and behold it shall be a tree springing up unto everlasting life . . . Behold, by and by ye shall pluck the fruit thereof, which is most precious, which is sweet above all that is sweet, and which is white above all that is white, yea, and pure above all that is pure; and ye shall feast upon this fruit even until ye are filled, that ye hunger not, neither shall ye thirst.(Alma 32:41-42.)

Second Peter 1:5-8 reads:

Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. (Emphasis added.)

Paul enumerates the fruits of religion in Galatians 5:22-23:

But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law.

Among the most delicious fruits of religious living are things spiritual, as these writings testify. They relate to the mental and moral life of man; and where is life with its possibilities of either joy or misery, if not in the mind?

Religion, like music, opens up a new world to man. The truly religious person becomes identified with law. He learns to thrill in the satisfaction that comes from freely living in harmony with God's laws. To love fellowmen, to hold life in reverence, is no more a duty, but a passion that needs to be satisfied. And such a man, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, will surely be filled.

Religion will not preserve man from all sorrow and suffering, nor necessarily make him prosperous, but it does promise him the precious fruits of the spirit—peace, joy, love, and a meaningful life. And that promise holds for today, as well as for tomorrow: these fruits of the spirit are to be tasted and enjoyed in this life as well as in eternity.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This is an introductory lesson from one of Dr. Bennion's most widely read and translated manuals, Goals for Living (1952), which was used for the M Men and Gleaners until 1968.
