Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

IV

PRACTICAL RELIGION

15

An Attitude of Joyful Acceptance Toward Life

When life is threatened by ill health or danger, it assumes great value [^1] to all of us. We go to great lengths to save it. Strange how little we cherish it sometimes in routine living, in our days of safety and health. Our ardor for living is lost in a maze of petty concerns. We become apathetic and bored. Monotony and self-pity set in.

Let each one ask himself a few questions: How long has it been since I arose with a thrill to greet the dawn? When did I last kneel in prayer overwhelmed with gratitude for the gift of life? How much of my life passes in discouragement, remorse, and self-pity?

Let each of us discipline his mind and heart to accept life and to develop faith in it and to live it hopefully and joyfully. Even in moments of sorrow, danger, and failure, let us remember that life is good and worth the living. Such an attitude, we believe, is a worthy goal to seek and to develop.

Life's Reality

Question: What are some of the things which cause people to lose faith in life?

Lest you think us unduly optimistic and sentimental about our existence on earth, we would like to make a confession before trying to convince you that life merits our faith. We have lived long enough to know some of the realities about us. Ours is not a blind, irrational faith in living.

Surely, life is heavy-laden with tragedy. Death, which is no respecter of persons, robs us of loved ones and eventually of our own breath. Old age creeps up on a man, just at the time when he has reached his prime and has greatly increased his desire to realize many of life's riches. Old age can be burdensome and tragic. Millions suffer from incurable diseases such as cancer. Millions are starving or near starving in the world today. Innocent children suffer from the ignorance and weaknesses of their parents. Other millions are victims of hate and lust for power.

No wonder so many poets are pessimistic in their writing.

Men's hearts fail them and they question the worthwhileness of living. All this we see and hear and can understand. Still we say, "Believe in life. Love it despite its tragedy. Be glad every day to be alive." How can we say it?

Reasons to Believe in Life

Question: What things help us to believe and rejoice in life?

Life is rich, full of goodness. We have acknowledged the sorrow and tragedy. Let us look at the other side. What is there to enjoy?

There are people. Not all of them enhance one's faith in life, but many human relationships do. To know a father's or mother's love and confidence, to have a life's companion stand at your side through joy and sorrow, to feel a lad's arms around your neck or to look into his trusting eyes, or to hold the hand of a friend—any one of these experiences can compensate for a good deal of trouble. Yet these experiences are all available to many of us every day.

The other day we were talking with a former student whose life's plans have been thwarted by prolonged military service. We asked him how things were, and he answered: "Wherever I go there are people. And they never cease to fascinate me. I have never met a person who was not interesting to me. I can always wonder what makes him tick as he does."

Will Rogers, the great American comedian of this century, said, "I never met a man I didn't like." Maybe that is why people liked him so much. He believed in man, in every man. He thought as much of the man on the street as he did of the President of the United States, and used the same language when he talked to either of them.

It is great to be alive just to know people—to love them, to converse with them, to work shoulder to shoulder with them, to seek their happiness, to suffer with them, and to laugh and make merry together.

There is nature. Just now she is arrayed in rich autumn hues that change under one's eyes in the setting sun. There is rain—fresh, clean, life-giving rain. There are stars—bright, shining and steadfast in the sky; lakes, rivers, and brooks; meadows, hills, and mountains; and lofty pines and quaking aspen, graceful weeping willows, leafy birch trees, and sturdy oaks. Nature is beautiful and usually bountiful and good to man.

There is art. Music, literature, drama, painting, architecture, sculpture, creative dancing—these things are available to us in number and extent far beyond our capacity to receive. Music or literature alone can give any sensitive soul cause to rejoice in life eternally.

There are everyday common things—work, play, sleep, a glass of water, bread and milk, a fresh peach, a bunch of grapes, a spring salad, ice cream with fresh strawberries, tired muscles, a refreshing shower, birds singing, children laughing—what more does it take than these things to give us faith in life if we have ears to hear and eyes to see?

"One sees what one carries in one's heart," said Goethe. True, life is full of the bitter and the sweet, but man has it within his creative power often to choose the sweet and even to turn the bitter into sweetness. Man need not be simply passive, taking a constant beating from life. He can be active, shaping life after the image he carries in his own heart. Life does not present itself as a finished product. We are all the time working and reworking it for us and even for others after the model of our own despair or hope.

There was a lady in Idaho, a widow, who lost her only two sons in the war. She had been dealt hard blows. She stood alone. It seemed more than she could bear, and she was becoming ill in body and mind. Finally her doctor said to her, "Look here, Mrs. 'Blank,' if you continue as you are now thinking, you will end up a burden to this community. Why don't you forget yourself by helping folks in this town who need you?" She decided to take his advice. She became "Granny" to the whole community. Soon she was beloved by all for her kindness, service, and good cheer. She found a joy as great as any she had ever known in life, perhaps greater.

It lies within our power to create, to give, to plant, to build, to learn, to think, to find new meaning. All these things should lend wings to mind and heart.

Even sorrow and tragedy can become the means of rich living. Jesus suffered with the poor, the sick, the sinner, but he also rejoiced with them and brought them hope, health, and forgiveness. One can learn to rejoice in sorrow. Nearly every cloud has a silver lining for the eye of faith.

Albert Schweitzer, the great French musician, thinker, and medical missionary, concluded early in life that life was tragic and replete with suffering. For this reason, and out of gratitude for his own buoyant health, he dedicated his life to the relief of suffering. He chose to do it in the heart of Africa among illiterate natives. A great man has made peace with the tragedy of life by his love for humanity.

We like the lines from "Renascence," by Edna St. Vincent Millay:

The world stands out on either side No wider than the heart is wide; Above the world is stretched the sky,— No higher than the soul is high. The heart can push the sea and the land Farther away on either hand; The soul can split the sky in two, And let the face of God shine through. But East and West will pinch the heart That can not keep them pushed apart; And he whose soul is flat—the sky Will cave in on him by and by.

Even if life were bitter and pointless, how much more pointless it is not to accept it, since we must. To complain or despair of life is to be twice beaten—once by circumstance and once by oneself. Yes, we have at times cause to complain even to high heaven. And we would recommend it, if it would do any good. But it doesn't; it makes us feel worse. It saps our vitality and power. It diverts our attention from the problem to be overcome.

Not to believe in life is to contradict our very nature. Deeply imbedded in nature, including human nature, is the will to live. Man was born to function, to be active, to express himself. When we have hope, live by faith, and take a positive view of life, we are more in harmony with our needs; we fulfill our natures. To be alive and yet in attitude to deny life seems a contradiction that spells nothing but misery and defeat.

Faith in God lends support to faith in life. Even without faith in a personal God, people can believe life worthwhile and more good than bad. We know professed atheists and agnostics who rejoice in living and do everything within their power to cause others to live in good cheer.

A classic illustration of the cheerful acceptance of life by a person without faith in God, Christ, or immortality is found in the writing of the great Roman poet Lucretius, called The Nature of Things.The religion of his day was repulsive to him so he proceeded to build a faith in life without religion. He found life itself rewarding and tried his best to teach man to accept it and live it without fear.

The author of Ecclesiastes, though acknowledging his faith in God, was extremely realistic and pessimistic about many things in life and death. He is the author of the famous phrase "All is vanity, all is vanity." Still he could say:

Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works. . . . Live life joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.

Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest. (Ecclesiastes 9:7-10.)

We who believe in Jesus Christ and in a personal Heavenly Father have every cause which the atheist has, and more, to believe in life. Without Deity, man can struggle alone or with other men for values and goals he cherishes. He can be moral and heroic. He can hardly know, however, the gladness of the believer. The unbeliever has no assurance that "the things of the spirit"—such as truth, beauty, love, integrity, friendship—exist apart from mortal men. If there were no God, our goals would be human goals and would be destroyed, should man's life end. (This thought is developed by W. P. Montague, in Belief Unbound.) If God lives, the greatest things in human experience remain in him and in our immortal selves, no matter what might happen to men on the earth.

Faith in God means faith in justice, wisdom, and mercy. These things are at the heart of the universe and will prevail. Nothing we can do to help his cause will be in vain. We like the scriptures which follow:

The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established by the heavens. By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew. My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion: So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck. Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. When thou liest down, thou shall not be afraid; yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken. (Proverbs 3:19-26.)

Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works. (Jacob 4:10.)

Admittedly, life is difficult and always a bit uncertain and dangerous. We like the courage of the poet-philosopher who penned these lines at the moment it looked quite certain the plane in which he was riding would crash.

If in some midnight quietness, Some roseate burst of dawn Or noonday foggy frightfulness— These wings would haply fall to earth, And the friendly feverishness of life Surrender its quick charms To the final friendliness of death, Enfolding, nescient arms, Say this, and only this you say, On that not too unwelcomed day: "He loved his life but recked it not, And gladly died while the blood was hot." Then scatter these ashes from a safer place While the motors drone this last refrain: "He loved life, loved it all; Loved this too, this last quick fall!"

Let us have courage to die, but even more, the courage and wisdom to live with faith in life's potential goodness. Let us accept life with good cheer and with fortitude even in its darkest hour. In the Doctrine and Covenants, men are encouraged by our Father in heaven to "be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves." (D&C 58:27-28.)

The best cause of all is life itself. Let us be "anxiously engaged" in it.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In August 1960 the "Era of Youth" section of the Improvement Era, edited by Elaine Cannon and Elder Marion D. Hanks, published this personal account of Dr. Bennion's appreciation for the Church's emphasis on work.
