Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

16

"In the Sweat of Thy Face"

Eleven years ago, our grand old neighbor, Bryant S. Hinckley, then eighty-two years of age, walked through his orchard one day to [^1] behold an unusual sight in the back of our lot. My brother-in-law, another neighbor, my three sons, aged eight, eleven, and fourteen, and I were pouring footings for a new barn. The old red barn had crashed to earth in a strong wind, and the boys and I decided to build a new one. This was to be rugged, rustic, of our own design, and to be built with our own hands. So off to Weber Canyon we had gone, sixty-five miles away, and hauled down load after load of poles and slabs in a big truck.

What Brother Hinckley saw that summer morning pleased him. He patted the boys on the shoulder and said, "That's the way to do. No boy ever becomes a man until he learns to love to work."

Many young folks look upon work as a duty, a necessary evil, or even a curse. They associate fun with eating, playing, entertainment, or a car ride. If it were not for the necessity of getting money, some might never lift a hand to work.

Work can be fun and can satisfy a person's desires as few things can. When I was fourteen years of age and my brother sixteen, we went to work on a ranch 180 miles from home, driving all day in a chain-driven truck to get there.

Uncle Teddy was our employer, a man who had as much courage in adversity as any man I have ever known. He had a way with boys. Seldom did he give detailed instructions; he simply told us what to do and expected us to do it. The first time we harnessed a team of horses, the collars went on upside down. One day we were told to clear off ten acres of sagebrush. We had never done anything like this before and were making slow progress. So I went to find Uncle Teddy to get him to tell us how to do it. His answer was simply that a neighbor boy, whom we had thought quite stupid, had grubbed out ten acres the previous spring and done a fine job. Nothing more needed to be said; we cleared the field of brush.

Before the summer was over, we had changed the course of a mountain creek, dug a new canal, put in miles of fencing, and helped put up a stack or two of hay every day for weeks. But best of all, we had come to feel strength in our shoulders, backs, arms, and legs. More thrilling than our physical strength, however, was the self-confidence we had gained. No longer were we afraid of tackling any new job.

After working for Uncle Teddy for two summers, I was afraid of no man. I suppose if the Lord had asked me to run the universe, I would have answered,"Yes sir, when shall I begin," so great was the strength, courage, self-confidence, and independence of spirit that I had gained.

In my observations of college students for some twenty-five years, my own earlier experience has been verified again and again. Boys and girls who like to work, who have learned to use their hands, who have stayed with the job in the face of great difficulty, are the happiest and most successful in study and in marriage.

Some twenty years ago two quiet, unassuming freshman boys came to us from their farms in Fielding, Utah. They were not unusually brilliant boys, but were very steady and conscientious. I suppose they had thinned beets day after day until every muscle in their bodies ached. They applied their work habits to their studies, and today they both have Ph.D.'s in science and are teaching at two major universities in the United States.

One spring our fraternity at the institute of religion decided to have a new kind of party. The committee in charge searched out widows, the aged, the afflicted in the vicinity of the university. Then they divided the boys and girls into groups of six, with a captain over each group. Homes and yards were cleaned with enthusiasm, and in fellowship and the vigor of youth.

After the day's work, the groups came together in the recreation hall, where hot sandwiches, salad, ginger ale, and pie la mode were served.

Then the fellows and girls "kicked up their heels" in a Virginia reel and many other old-fashioned dances. The governor's son remarked, "I've never had so much real fun in one day in my whole life."

Another work experience was equally rewarding. One Sunday morning the leader of the institute priesthood group said, "Brethren, we've talked about priesthood here all winter. Don't you think it's time we did something in the name of our priesthood?"

"All right. What do you suggest?" asked a member.

"Well, let's clean up yards for some widows next Saturday," the leader replied.

In arranging for places to work, a woman was called on the telephone to see if she needed some help. Her reply was, "How much will this cost me?" The answer was, "Nothing. Some college boys want to help you just for fun and fellowship."

This good sister broke down and wept, and said something as follows: "I have been a widow for eight years. I live alone. This is the first time anyone has ever offered to help me in a physical, tangible way."

Think of it! No neighbor, no Boy Scout troop, no Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood quorum, no MIA group of girls—all belonging to the true Church of Jesus Christ—had ever thought to put their shoulders to the wheel to gladden the heart of a precious child of God.

A wise Father in heaven knew man's need when he sent Adam and Eve forth from the life of ease in the lush Garden of Eden to eat their bread "in the sweat of their face" with the remark, "Cursed is the ground for thy sake; . . . thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee." (Genesis 3:17-18.) These words in Ecclesiastes were meant for us too: "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do [that is, thy labor under the sun], do it with thy might." (Ecclesiastes 9:10.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In a rare mood of nostalgic personal reflectiveness, for a collection called Turning Points (1981 Bookcraft Inc., used by permission), Brother Bennion shares some intimate details of his life and his simple gratitude for practical gospel teachings.
