Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

17

From the "Golden Days" of My Youth

When I was a boy of fourteen, I went to work on a ranch in isolated country 180 miles from my home in Salt Lake City. In those days, this [^1] was a long way away. In the valley where the ranch was located there were only three families and a few hired men and boys.

One day my boss sent me into the mountains with a hired man to change the course of a mountain creek. Much of the water which came to us through the old channel sank into the sand before it reached the ranch. A new canal had been made. Our job was to connect the mountain stream with the new canal. It was an exciting job and took nearly a week to accomplish.

My pardner, in charge of our two-man crew, was a fine fellow and a skillful, steady worker. He had one bad habit. He was a chain smoker. He didn't offer me any cigarettes, but I must confess his smoking was mighty interesting as we sat around the fire in the early darkness. On the third day at camp, my pardner ran out of tobacco. His Prince Albert can was empty. I watched this good man become nervous, restless, and irritable. He searched the ground around the camp, picking up cigarette butts out of the dirt where men and horses had walked. The nearest store was miles away, and we had only a wagon and team for transportation.

Watching my good friend's misery and helplessness, I vowed then and there that I would never be a slave to a "weed" or drug.

A few years later I was serving a mission in Bielefeld, Germany. Near Bielefeld was an institution for the mentally ill and retarded, called Bethel. Over five thousand mentally handicapped people in all stages of their limitation resided there. In addition, there were wonderfully devoted ministers, doctors, nurses, and others who cared for them. Bethel was a little city all by itself.

One day we missionaries toured the little city and found out that it had been established by religious people who had compassion for the ill. We asked about the cause of their illness. The guide said that it was believed that heavy drinking of alcoholic beverages was one important cause.

There are many causes of mental illness and mental retardation; and heavy use of alcohol, we have learned in recent years, is one of them but only one.

A few days after the visit to Bethel, my companion and I were tracting in a nearby village. We knocked on a farmhouse door and were invited in by a rough, growl-like greeting. In the corner of the room was a half-drunken father. Hearing our message, he ordered us to get out of the house "with our Mormonism." As we left, two forlorn-looking sons our age waved goodbye to us.

This was the second time in my life when I was deeply moved to thank God for my Mormon upbringing and for my father and mother who had given me a healthy mind and body.

My wife and I studied at the University of Vienna following my mission. This was during the Depression in 1931-1932. We lived on sixty dollars a month of borrowed money. We had no telephone, no car; we bought no clothes, and we walked or rode the streetcar everywhere we went. Saturday evenings we went to the grand opera house and sat in the top gallery for twenty-five cents each. Sometimes I stood up for fifteen cents.

The end of the month found us often very low on cash. We usually went to the market—which was held in a nearby street—to buy vegetables, fruit, and meat from farmers. Our object was to make a soup to last us until our monthly check would arrive.

One day after we had spent our last pennies on food at the market, as we were leaving I stooped down and picked up some outer cabbage leaves one of the farmers had thrown away. This embarrassed my good wife and she chided me good-naturedly. I told her that a new flavor in the soup the third day might taste pretty good. As we got near to the street where we lived, we heard a young man about my age singing a heart-rending song in the street:

My mother loves me not, My father I do not know, I do not wish to die, I am so young.

A few people would open their windows and toss small coins to him in the street. I noticed that he not only picked up the coins but also gleaned cigarette stubs and cigar butts from between the cobblestones where men and horses walked. I turned to Sister Bennion and said, "In our poverty I may have to pick up cabbage leaves to feed my hunger, but thanks to Mormonism, I don't have to pick up cigarettes and cigars from the dirty street."

In the years which have followed these experiences of my youth, I have learned that there are things in life and religion that are far more important than not smoking and not drinking. Humility, honesty, chastity, faith, love of God, and love of neighbor are the great fundamentals of religion and of life.

I have also learned that many fine people have developed smoking and drinking habits. I do not judge or condemn them. (Many would quit if they believed they could.) But I shall be eternally grateful to my religion for giving me the incentive to leave tobacco, liquor, and other harmful drugs alone. (I have enough faults without them.) I have also come to appreciate the words of Alma to his son Shiblon: "See that ye bridle all your passions, that ye may be filled with love." (Alma 38:12.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The purpose of scripture is primarily religious and moral. "For the fulness of mine intent," says Nephi, in writing the Book of Mormon, "is that I may persuade men to come unto the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and be saved."(1 Nephi 6:4.) The first sentence in the Bible also indicates this emphasis: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth." (Genesis 1:1.) After one and one-half pages in which the manner of creation is described, the Bible record continues another nine hundred pages describing man's relationship to God and his obligations to fellowmen. Again and again God is affirmed as the Creator of heaven and earth. "The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens." (Proverbs 3:19.) Hardly a reference, however, do you find describing the exact process, the "how" of creation. Think of Jesus' emphasis, the greatest religious teacher of all! In December 1939, shortly after returning from founding the Tucson institute to be director of the Salt Lake Institute of Religion for a second time, Dr. Bennion published the following essay in Week-Day Religious Education, a periodical for seminary and institute teachers.
