Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

V

TEACHING AND LEADING

19

Good Teaching and Leadership

Everywhere one looks in life, purpose is the great motivating idea which makes people's activities [^1] significant. The doctor aims to relieve pain and save life. The coach aims to win the game and, happily, quite often to build strength of character in boys and men. The army trains to protect its country from surprise attack. The carpenter aims to build the house.

It is no different in the Church. The first thing a teacher or leader in MIA must know is where he is going. He must ask himself: "What do I wish to accomplish through this activity or in this class?" The Lord's work does not take care of itself. If it did, he would not need us to work in it. Each teacher must define his purpose to himself—whether he is teaching M Men and Gleaners, conducting a Boy Scout meeting, or planning a Young Marrieds' fireside. If he fails to do this, he is working blindly, like a hunter shooting without a target, or a football player running out of bounds.

Choosing Objectives

A worker in the Church needs to establish for himself three kinds of objectives, or purposes:

He will keep "1" and "2" in mind throughout the year in everything he plans and does. And then, as he prepares each lesson or activity, he aims at a limited and very specific target in harmony with his larger and long-range objectives.

Thinking of People

In choosing objectives, remember that there is nothing on this earth so important as people—men, women, boys and girls, Brother Jones, Sister Smith, Tom, Dick, and Harry, Mary and Janet—whoever the individuals are who belong to your class or group in MIA.

God himself said that his work and glory in his endless creations was "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man." (Moses 1:39.) In his service, our purpose must be the same as his, or we shall find ourselves working against him.

We should never hold a meeting, teach a class, or plan an activity without asking ourselves: How is this going to affect the people who will participate? Because, ultimately, the only measure of our labors is this: what happened to the people because they came to our class or function in MIA. A class is no better than what happens to the people who attend. Meetings, classes, subject matter, activities are a means to the end; the people are the end.

I. The general, overall objective

Our overall objective, then, is to help people gain exaltation in the kingdom of God. Since this is achieved by accepting Christ and living in harmony with his will, workers in the Church might best conceive of their work as: helping people to become real Christians, genuine Latter-day Saints; helping them to understand, love, and live the principles Christ taught, that they might come to know the increasing joy that comes to men when they are growing in the realization of their full potential as children of God.

II. The basic objectives in each course for the year

As he plans the MIA year, each leader or teacher should try to write down several objectives for his particular group which he will pursue during the entire year. These should be more specific and adapted to the immediate needs and interests of those in one's class. They may already be stated in the manual or course of study. Whether they are or not, the teacher must find them and be able to state them in his own words. Let us illustrate what these long-range objectives might be for different groups.

A. The Young Marrieds

B. Boy Scouts

Suppose you were a Scoutmaster: what would your objectives be in the coming year with thirty boys, ages twelve to fourteen? Would it be to get them all enrolled, in uniform, and taking the Boy's Life? No! These are simply a means to an end. Your objectives would have to be stated in terms of something that is happening to each boy's personality and character.

You might proceed as follows: Ask yourself, "What do boys of twelve to fourteen need the most in a long-range program of building Christian character? What would I, as a parent, want the MIA to accomplish most for my boy right now?" You might come up with some objectives like these:

III. The single objective for each lesson and activity

As you plan each lesson, fireside, or activity, you must find a very limited and specific objective. In teaching, it is always best to have just one aim in mind. It has been said, "A good talk is one idea organized and illustrated." This is also true of a good lesson—just one idea, organized and illustrated, and of vital importance to members of the class. Do not misunderstand. Several ideas can be introduced in every lesson, but they should, to be most effective, always be related to a single major objective. All concepts should hang together and point to one big one.

It is not enough to have a single subject, such as faith. This is too big and too broad a theme for a single lesson. One could write a book on the subject of faith. Some teachers conscientiously feel that they should teach everything that is to be known about faith—what it is, how we gain it and lose it, wherein it differs from belief and knowledge, in what sense it is a gift of God, its relationship to grace and works, and the life's story of all the great men of faith, such as the brother of Jared, Abraham, Peter, Alma, Joseph Smith, and Wilford Woodruff—all in one lesson. Obviously, one would get lost covering so much subject matter in one lesson even though everything was related to the general subject of faith.

One should find a more limited and specific aim within faith, which is needed by the students, and seek to achieve this in one evening. Then, next week, another should be chosen. The following are some objectives under the topic of faith, each suitable for a single lesson:

Any one of these objectives—and there are many more available—is large and important enough for a single lesson. To have several objectives is to weaken all of them. The mind can really grasp only one idea at a time effectively.

Another example of having a single objective for one lesson may be illustrated in the lessons for the Laurels in the area of courtship.

One lesson deals with chastity. The single and only purpose of this lesson is to inspire girls to want to keep their chastity. Every idea and illustration in the lesson should lead to this objective.

Another lesson deals with dating. Obviously, this subject has many facets, and a teacher could be led in many directions by it. Hence, the teacher, with a knowledge of her girls and their needs, should decide on the most important idea or attitude needed by her girls which she can put over in relation to dating. It might be one of the following:

Revealing the Objective

The question is often asked: Should the teacher write his objective on the chalkboard at the beginning or even at the end of the lesson?

This, we believe, depends on the kind of lesson that is being taught. If one is dealing with factual, objective material and is seeking—primarily—to convey information, then it might be very helpful to declare one's objective in the beginning. For example, a new Boy Scout leader announced the first evening he met his troop of eight boys, "Next week I am going to teach you how to shoot a gun." Twenty-five boys showed up the following Tuesday. Or, if one were to teach a lesson on the topography of Palestine, the teacher might state his purpose and carry it out.

However, when one's purpose is to affect people's lives—to bring about changes in attitudes, feelings, and otherwise influence human behavior—we believe it is much wiser for the teacher to keep his purpose to himself. For example, suppose his purpose were to inspire greater honesty in the lives of his class members, and he wrote on the board, "Today, I am going to inspire you all to be honest." What would be the result? Would not some students, jealous of their right to choose, say to themselves, "Like fun you will. I'll show you that you can't!"

Teaching a lesson has much in common with telling a joke or a story, which should carry its own point or message. It is a sad day when one tells a joke and then has to reveal the point of it. On the other hand, how effective is a well-told story that carries its own message, such as the parable of the Prodigal Son.

A teacher who would influence human behavior keeps his purpose clearly in mind in planning and teaching a lesson. However, he does not rob his students of the free, creative thrill of arriving at their own conclusions and resolutions. Many a lesson has been ruined by moralizing and by endless repetition. If the lesson is well-given, sensible, and inspiring in character, the student can be trusted to draw a good conclusion.

Understanding Human Nature

As a lad of fourteen I went to work on a ranch. One day the boss sent me up into the mountains with a man twice my age to change the course of a mountain creek. We were losing the water as it came down the old channel in the valley, so we decided to bring it to the ranch in a newly constructed canal.

With the enthusiasm and folly of youth, I jumped into the creek and proceeded to dig a channel that would lead to the newly made canal. I began to shovel out gravel and dirt from the bottom of the creek with vigor. My older and wiser co-worker tapped me on the shoulder and said, "Son, just pick up the larger rocks and let the water do the rest of the work. It will wash the dirt and fine gravel with it."

This was my first lesson in working with nature. I learned that life is much easier this way. One's strength can be used to accomplish much more if one works with, rather than against, the laws of nature and of life.

My second lesson came during World War II when I was trying to get by on a limited rationing of gasoline and also attempting to keep an old car running. I learned to gauge my speed so that I would seldom have to stop at a red light. This conserved gas, brakes, and general wear and tear. Other drivers frequently sped by me, only to slam on their brakes at the next semaphore light. Then they sat tensely waiting for a green light, only to gun their motors, waste gas, and speed up for a stop at the next light.

If we are to teach and lead people in the Church, we need to understand more about human nature. For if we understand people, we can get through to them and will have a better chance of seeing gospel teachings take effect in their lives.

Students resist the teacher and his ideas if he is working at cross-purposes with their thinking and feeling. They build up resistance and reject the teaching if it is not presented in a way that is congenial to human nature.

Each individual is unique. He lives in a different world from everyone else. He interprets the thinking of the teacher, not in light of the teacher's thinking, but in the context of his own experience. When we teach a group of individuals, each living in his own world, how can we possibly work in harmony with the human nature of each individual?

This would be quite a hopeless task were it not for another fact about human nature, namely, that people also have much in common. Each has a unique heredity and environment, even children of the same family, but they also have things in common. The wise teacher respects individual differences, but he also learns to work in harmony with those aspects of human nature shared by all men. And, we may ask, what are these facets of human nature shared by all?

Men have basic needs in common. All men hunger for food, thirst for liquids, seek air to breathe, and have other physiological needs such as rest and relaxation. Even more important for the teacher to remember is the fact that people share social, psychological, and spiritual needs. All wish to be acceptable to other human beings, to express themselves creatively and adventurously, to feel their own worth, to find a purpose and meaning in life.

Consciously and subconsciously people strive to satisfy these needs. Much of life's motivation to act is in anticipation of their fulfillment. The effective teacher is aware of these needs and strives in his personal relations with students, in his manner of teaching, and even in the things he teaches, to help students satisfy their spiritual and psychological hunger. The gospel lends itself both in spirit and in idea to the gratification of man's basic spiritual desires, as we shall see later on in this lesson. But first, let us spell out these basic human needs more explicitly. What do students of human behavior generally agree are man's most basic human needs above and beyond the physiological ones?

Inactivity is a sign of death. In a living person it may be pathological. The quiet, shy member of your class may be greatly lacking in deep emotional satisfaction. In his silence he may be conjuring up more troubles for himself than the happy, outgoing youngster who is more disturbing to your class.

The young people in your class hate routine and are bored with dull generalities. They want to be challenged with new ideas. They want to use their hands, imagination, and minds. They would like to think that the gospel is as exciting—in its own way—as a new car.

In our experience, too few people are genuinely self-accepting. Even those who appear to be most proud—the bully, the conceited, the snobbish, the rude, the loud, the "show-off" type, and the domineering, authoritarian individual—are likely unaware of it themselves and are just trying to cover up for a deep-seated sense of inadequacy and inferiority. There are no real egotists, but those who act that way in search of ego fulfillment and status.

Satisfying These Needs

The teacher and leader in the Church should try to work in harmony with these needs and help rather than frustrate his students in their efforts toward fulfillment. He is not simply a teacher of subject matter, nor is he simply a teacher of students. His aim should be to teach ideas to students and provide activity for them in a way that will help them satisfy their basic needs. (We will now make a few suggestions under each need as to how this can be done. The teacher will think of many more out of his own experience.)

a. The arrangement of the room itself can do much. Make it a clean, pleasant, warm, friendly, and comfortable place in which to meet. Arrange the chairs in a circle or, if need be, in two rows in a semi-circle.

b. Include everyone in discussion. This is done easily and fruitfully in a class under twenty or twenty-five by having each one in the circle, starting at teacher's left or right, give his views on an issue. In a larger class that must be seated in rows, the teacher can start at one end of a row and have each one react to a question or issue. The teacher can also point simpler questions to the more timid or less well-informed and more difficult ones to those who are better informed.

c. Some teachers are not good listeners or learners. They are so eager to tell the class all they know that even their questions are a farce. They prefer to answer their own questions; students are only allowed to nibble at them, and they invariably give the wrong answer. A teacher must have respect for the thinking of his students. He need not and should not agree with them always, but he should protect the dignity of the person. This is an art.

d. Immediately before and after class, a teacher should have the opportunity to show interest in those who need his interest most. There is a tendency for teachers to visit with students whom they enjoy or who are most responsive. They should not neglect the quiet, lonely, or even belligerent youngsters. Casual conversation, the calling of a person by name, a pat on the shoulder, a shake of the hand, a personal inquiry, a deserved compliment—these things may be quite as effective as the lesson itself. They require no extra time or exhausting effort, but just thoughtfulness.

e. An occasional social project or field trip planned for real fellowship can also help. Some students do not excel in the classroom, but they might do very well repairing toys for a Christmas service project. Others excel in eating. The feeling of acceptance is gained through pleasant group experiences. It takes a good variety of them to give all students this feeling of belonging.

The above methods, and others a teacher can think of, will be of no value unless he has a genuine interest in and liking for people. Paul's words are so true: "And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity [the pure love of Christ], it profiteth me nothing." (1 Corinthians 13:3.) Every teacher should examine his own conscience to see how he feels toward each of his class members. If there are those whom he does not accept, these are the ones he had better serve the most in order that he might learn to love them.

a teacher, especially one dealing with youth, help them to satisfy their great urge for self-expression and do it in a manner consistent with the ideals of the Church?

a. The teacher can be enthusiastic, genuinely interested in, and excited about the lesson or activity. This attitude is contagious, enabling students to experience the teacher's love for the thing at hand. If a teacher would only remember how much is at stake each time he faces a class, he would not have great difficulty in meeting his class with eagerness and readiness.

b. The teacher should make sure in his planning that the students are going to have a learning experience. Not only should a teacher have a single aim, but it must be either entirely new to his students or be a substantial enrichment of what they already know. Our students have minds. They desperately need adventure in the realm of the mind. This is more rewarding and far less dangerous than youth's search for excitement on the highway, in drink, or in crime and sin. Teacher, what new idea of significance is your class going to learn the next time you teach them?

c. Friendship is always a source of adventure. Many of the methods of achieving acceptance indicated above are also extremely adventurous. Prayer, worship, service, kindness—these may be rich in spiritual adventure, especially when they are shared by the group. Too often we think of adventure only on the pleasure level.

d. Self-expression means participation. A Boy Scout must learn skills, do a good turn, take part in raising the flag, swim, hike, and play with his associates. Mia Maids, Explorers, Laurels, M Men, and Gleaners must be involved in the planning of their activities. They need responsibility. Teachers and leaders should do fewer things for them and use their imagination to let the young people do more for themselves, for each other, for the Church, and for the community. It is what a person does, what he accomplishes, his satisfying experiences, which fulfill his basic needs and build his character.

a. Achievement is a real source of self-esteem. Young people, and older ones as well, have a great need to be successful. Too often we try to make people happy and keep them close to the Church by giving them a lot of attention, awards, rewards, and even bribes. These things do not satisfy the inner man. Many a spoiled child turns with hate and disrespect on his parents who have done everything for him except let him prove his own worth by real accomplishments. More imagination should be used by parents, teachers, and leaders to have youths give of themselves, carry responsibility, and serve them and the Church. A mother loves her child so deeply because she has given and sacrificed so much for it. The same psychology applies to youth. Young people will love the cause if they give richly and meaningfully to it.

Achievement is quite a specific thing. A leader must plan carefully and persevere greatly to enable each youth in his care to learn skills in such areas as discussion, reading aloud, leading, speaking, presiding as a class officer, playing games, dancing well, participating in music and drama. It is important that we measure our labors, not in terms of activities and group statistics, but in what is happening to each person in our class. What is he learning? What is he achieving? Wherein does he feel and know his own strength?

b. Self-approval is also won by the genuine approval of others. The teacher or leader should see that each student is approved quite frequently by at least one person, namely, the teacher himself. Sometimes a leader will have students of such maturity and fine spirit that he can encourage one or more of them to give moral support to a person in need. This must be done with the utmost caution and tact.

c. Self-esteem comes from integrity. Integrity means wholeness and oneness. To have integrity, one must have purposes, values, and ideals, and then pursue them. Any assistance the teacher can give to youth to inspire them and to help them succeed in the pursuit of these things will build self-esteem.

a. To help a student find a genuine and growing faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ is the sum and substance of all of our teaching and leadership. This will be greatly facilitated if the other needs, already discussed before, are on the way to fulfillment in the lives of our students. A student, for example, who is loved by others can usually find it easier to believe in a loving Father or to appreciate Christ's life of love. A boy who is having high adventure in gospel living will have no need to kick over the traces. A girl who has self-esteem can more readily exercise the faith in herself and others which the gospel so clearly teaches.

b. Acquiring faith and testimony is a gradual process. Even sudden and miraculous conversions are usually followed by ebb and flow, like the tide. Students should not be told that they either have a testimony or they have none. Rather, let them know that it grows like a tree and bears fruit. Find ways of strengthening their faith through teaching and through other experiences, such as in worship, service, and achievement. Testimonies, like friendships, are built of many single experiences. Testimony is inseparably linked with one's total life-experience. It must be a growing tree with many roots to nourish it.

Summary

. . . We should work with human nature rather than against it. This is perhaps best achieved by thinking of people as persons who have needs or desires which somehow must be gratified. These desires seem to be—on the psychological and spiritual level—(1) belonging or being accepted, (2) creating self-expression or new experience, (3) self-approval or esteem, and (4) a philosophy of life based on the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . .

Finally, it may be said that the gospel is perfectly designed to satisfy man's spiritual needs. Love, the very heart of Christ's teaching, satisfies man's need to belong. Faith, freedom, and creation satisfy man's urge for adventure and creative self-expression. The dignity and worth of every human soul harmonize beautifully with man's need for self-approval. Our task is to take the gospel out of the books and plant it deeply in the lives of men, for, truly, human nature will thereby find and fulfill itself.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This address was given at a conference of the Deseret Sunday School Union on Sunday, October 7, 1962, and was printed in the April 1963 Instructor, under the title, "The Joy of Giving."
