Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

20

The Joy of Teaching

One afternoon a junior student at the University of Utah who was majoring in elementary education came to my office and said she had a [^1] problem with her Sunday School class. She was teaching twelve-year-old boys and girls. They were out of hand. And I asked her, after her description, "What do you have in mind when you prepare your lesson during the week?" Her very honest and interesting reply was, "How to keep the children quiet while I give the lesson."

If giving a lesson were the end of all teaching, the most effective way might be to gag the children, hog-tie them, and play a phonograph record. Brother Robert Thomas [Professor of English at BYU and the previous speaker] has beautifully told us that teaching is more than giving lessons; it is giving them with understanding, with knowledge, and with love. If the Lord will bless me, I would like to suggest that there is one more step in teaching, if we would know the joy of giving as teachers.

I learned this from one of my students who was in a class on marriage and family life. I had been very much occupied in telling these unmarried students all that I knew about marriage. After class I noticed an older student lingering; and, when they linger, they usually wish to talk. He came up to me and said, "I'm a sophomore medical student. I do very well in my present work. I can memorize and learn and pass examinations. But," he said, "next year I go to the hospital and make tours with doctors, and they will interrogate me about patients. I am frightened to death whenever I speak to anybody. Can you help me?" That was in the middle of the quarter. I said, "Yes," but I did not know how at the moment.

The next time we met in class I wrote on the board the word "Children." It was a small class seated in a circle, and this medical student was about in the center of the circle. I said to the class, "We'll start on my right and each one of you say anything you want about children. Raise a question, state your wishes, do as you will, but say something."

When it came his turn, he had to speak. There was no pressure there; it was his turn. The rest of the quarter we handled the course in this fashion. Not only that, but we put him on the spot and fired questions at him and talked with him again and again. He came up at the end of the quarter very, very grateful for the degree of confidence that he had gained to face his professor the next year.

This experience gave me another idea. If you have ever taught a class on reasons for faith in God, you perhaps will have experienced (especially if you have taught college students this subject) that those who were convinced were of the same opinion still; and those who were doubting were perhaps still doubting after your rational explanations.

So this time I went into the class, having been taught the value of individual participation by the medical student, and I told one or two experiences in my own life which had given me faith in God. One time was when I had done something foolish and wrong, and had been humbled to my knees and felt the Spirit of God answering my plea for forgiveness. Another time was when I had felt deeply grateful for the life of a child. Those were moments when I had felt God near me and when prayer was real and answered.

After I had mentioned these experiences, I said to the class, "What experiences have any of you had which have made you realize the reality of God's existence?" A boy spoke up—very much to my surprise because he was a playful sort of chap, a bit loud, and not the spiritual type at all on the surface. He said, "A week ago Friday evening, I went to the Roof Gardens at the Hotel Utah with students from the LDS Institute—about 150 couples. It was a beautiful moonlight night as we stood there looking over at the lighted temple and the Angel Moroni. As I looked at those young people, my friends, for the first time in my life I really knew that God lives."

Other students spoke up in class and bore witness to their faith in our Father in heaven, each out of his own unique experience. It is thrilling for a teacher not to lecture to the class, but to initiate something which brings thought and feeling from the group.

One Easter Sunday morning I returned to my Sunday School class of university students and said, "Faith in Christ doesn't mean anything in the abstract. Faith in Christ means whatever we have faith in because of our faith in him. I'd like each one of you on the back row to stand up in turn and declare, 'I have faith in this or that because of my faith in Christ.' "

The first three or four students gave the answers one would expect. And then a tall Indian boy stood up—a Hindu, twenty-five years of age—and said "Because of my faith in Christ, I am not afraid to die."

I said, "Did you used to be afraid to die?"

"Yes," he answered.

"When did you lose this fear?" I further asked.

"When I became converted to the restored gospel of Jesus Christ."

How thrilling in a class to hear a young man of twenty-five say and mean it, "I am not afraid to die."

As we went down the row, a girl about twenty-five years of age stood up and said, "Because of my faith in Christ I am not afraid to live."

I said, "What do you mean? Did you used to be afraid to live?"

"I did. I was worried about myself, my future; I'm unmarried"—and she continued to speak frankly of her concerns. But, she said, "I found faith in Christ. I found a trust in my Father in heaven. I have found things to live for, things to do. I'm not afraid anymore."

(You will pardon all these personal stories, but I was told to speak this way about the joy of teaching.) I had an experience last winter in a Book of Mormon class. We were coming to Alma, chapter 36, in which Alma the younger confesses his wrongdoing and tells his son about the wonderful joy of his conversion. As I prepared this lesson, I thought of a young man in my class who had recently been divorced, who had been in to talk with me, and whose life, at the moment, seemed empty; he felt he had ruined it.

I knew how much he needed to make a fresh beginning, to know that repentance means a clean slate if it is complete. So I tried to convey to the class the feelings which Alma relates in chapter 36. The young man spoke up and said, "Brother Bennion, I believe in repentance; but how do you get the assurance of forgiveness, and how do you get the strength to have a new mind and become another person after you have made serious mistakes in life?"

This question gave me an opportunity to talk about how fellowship with Jesus Christ and service to him could give one a new spirit and a sense of forgiveness and renewal.

Another member in this class told about how he had overcome a great weakness by relating his shortcoming to the partaking of the sacrament. He let the sacrament go by for several Sundays. While it went by and during each week, he prayed to God in the name of Christ that he might overcome his particular weakness. After a few weeks he overcame his difficulty and told us how he sat with tears in his eyes as he finally partook of the sacrament with gratitude to the Savior for the strength which he had received through faith in him. Never had the sacrament meant so much to him.

A few weeks later a girl in this same class handed me a note. It read something like this: "Ever since I was in elementary school, I have had two weaknesses which have plagued me. I was not able to overcome them until that lesson in which we learned about turning to Christ for strength to overcome our sins." She said, "Now I believe I have conquered them in the same way in which that boy overcame his wrongdoing."

Brothers and sisters, the people we teach are afraid. They have feelings of failure and guilt. And they need to believe in themselves, trust their own thinking, and lose themselves in loving their fellowmen.

I believe that the greatest moments of teaching consist mainly of knowing, understanding, and loving our students; but, in addition, we have in some way to open the door for them to give back to us—give of themselves, if you will—to find their faith and their courage, to find themselves.

There are many ways by which we can help them to do this. I only mention one or two. I think if we were to look into our own lives to know our own fears, hopes, and aspirations, we would understand their needs. I believe too that if we would study the life of the Savior and see his wonderful ways of drawing sinners to him, of rebuking people and having them still accept him and follow him, we would get many insights into the best ways by which we could let students give of themselves and find themselves. May we do this with all diligence, humility, and love, I pray, in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Not long after he received his doctorate and returned home from Europe (December 1933), Lowell Bennion wrote What About Religion?, a lesson manual for M Men and Gleaners (sixteen-to-eighteen-year-olds) of the Church's Mutual Improvement Association. This is the first chapter of that manual.
