Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

21

What Ought I to Do with Life?

What is life and what ought I to do with it? One of the most fascinating aspects of history is the struggle of mankind to understand life, [^1] this thing which is so interesting and dear to us and yet so difficult to comprehend. Great thinkers of past civilizations have left us their conclusions. Some have called life a blessing; others, like Buddha, have taught that life and the desire to live are the source of all our troubles and that we must escape from life.

All the explanations of the sages of the past have failed to satisfy the man of today. In earlier civilizations man was much more concerned about the world in which he lived than he was about man. Moreover, life was more simple, with fewer explanations. It was, no doubt, easier to choose between them.

In recent centuries mankind has increased rapidly on the earth. Man has produced many goods. He lives and thinks in terms of these products of his hands and mind. Not only his material life but also his intellectual life is far richer and more complex today than ever before. And yet all the accumulated knowledge and the numerous theories of men leave us with the fundamental question: What ought I to do with life?

The problems of life have not changed so much as have our living conditions. We still begin life in the same manner. We entertain and worry our parents in much the same way. In modern times schoolteachers in increasing numbers have been added to the list of those whom we vex and cause to wonder. As we approach young manhood and young womanhood, our schoolwork or the task of earning a livelihood tends to make us reflective. Or some new experience in life, such as the blunt questions of someone younger, the conversations of an old man, the loss of someone close to our lives, or the responsibilities of parenthood, awakens us to the realities and problems of life.

There is only one thing we should do about any problem—try to solve it. Most people make an effort, either feeble or great, to find the solution. Many of them conclude that there is no solution to be found, and just keep "livin'." They adjust themselves to their lack of success and go on sailing. Some drift through life like a ship without a sail. Others find a rudder which guides them to one port after another, although they must always decide which way to turn the rudder.

Here we shall not concern ourselves so much with that which other people do. Each individual must meet life's problem himself. It is a personal matter which we shall discuss together. The burning question is: Who can tell me what I ought to do? Where can I look for an answer or for help?

Science

Science has been slow in coming into its own. The Medieval church jealously tried to monopolize all avenues to truth by denying that reason, as expressed in experimental science, was a path leading to knowledge. Its error deprived mankind of the blessings of science and eventually destroyed much of man's faith in that which he had thought to be true religion. The fact that the source of religious truth—revelation from God—was, as is very evident, lacking in the church of the Middle Ages, coupled with the fact that the principles of Christ were at low ebb in practice, added one misfortune to another.

In our day the situation has been quite reversed. We have learned to acknowledge and encourage scientific research and to benefit from scientific discoveries. We are interested and active in scientific pursuits. Today men look to science for enlightenment where they once turned to religion for guidance. Therefore I may well ask: What does science offer me in the solution of the problem? What ought I to do?

Science teaches us how to do things—what can be done. It has given us the tools and means of reaching certain goals or attaining certain ends. When the pioneers left Nauvoo, they had one of three choices as to how to get to the Rocky Mountains—in wagons, on horseback, or on foot. Today we have the same possibilities and, in addition, the automobile, the bus, train, or airplane. Science has increased our means and ways of doing things.

Why did the pioneers go west? Did they base their decision on science? The fact that they could go in a wagon did not determine their decision. The problem for each one was, "What ought I to do? Stay here in a prosperous section of the country where land is cheap, fertile, and available or keep my faith and go to the unknown, ill-reputed West?" It was a question of values. Science could tell them what the possibilities were and how to attain each possibility, but not which one should be chosen.

Today science offers the young man called to go on a mission the possible routes and means of transportation to his field. It tells him how to get there. That question does not worry us anymore. The thing the young man wants to know is, "Ought I to go?" Science will further tell him what his possibilities are: going to school, going to work, or going on a mission. But again it does not make the choice. The choice depends on one's philosophy of life.

Science produces the airplane which may carry mail or passengers. It may be used to rush aid to a sick child or assistance to a lost party. Or it may be used to bomb and destroy civilizations. Science puts in our hands the means to maintain or to destroy life. It leaves man to decide what he will do with that means. That will depend on his reverence or lack of reverence for life—a problem which is not controlled by science.

The accomplished physician of today understands, in many cases and to a certain extent, how to preserve and prolong life. The accomplishments of medical science are marvelous and have been of great benefit to mankind. Compared with the craft of the primitive medicine man, its results are astounding. The conscientious physician works on the assumption that life is worth saving. And yet he knows no more about the meaning of life perhaps than did the medicine man. His science has taught him how to save life but not that life is worth saving.

If I can learn from some source or other what I ought to do, science will render me great service in helping me to understand how to do it.

Everyday Experience

Experience is a good teacher. Science is but one form of experience pursued methodically with definite aims in view. What are the sources of experience? We have (1) the experience of past ages recorded as history, (2) the experience of associates, if we care to consider it, and (3) our own experience.

The chief disadvantage of experience is that it is limited. We know too little of history. Our associates and elders are only human, as are we; hence their experience is limited to a few years. It is highly instructive but not absolute. Men have different experiences and interpret them differently. Men whom we respect and honor for various reasons have had different experiences, cherish different ideals, and give different advice. Whom should I follow? My own experience, although invaluable to me and very personal, is greatly limited. It alone has not told me what I ought to do. On the contrary, it has just led me to ask the question and ponder over it.

Finally, the old adage, "Experience is a dear teacher," is only too true. The man who lost his fortune in the stock-market crash may vow never to speculate again—sweet consolation to him if he is old and in dire need of the necessities of life. The man who loses his good name or his own self-respect ordinarily would not do it a second time—if he had it to lose.

We do not wish to minimize the value of experience. Life is an experience. Experience is, however, experimental. It seldom leads us to absolute truths. As in the case of science, its chief value lies in telling us what can be done based on what has been done. It points out the various paths men have chosen in the past. It is particularly uncertain as to the future, since new situations are always opening up in the lives of nations and individuals.

Human experience, vast and interesting as it is, has not as yet solved the problem of life. Men are asking more and more: What ought we to do?

Religion

The very fact that science and experience, including philosophy, have not as yet given us absolute truths nor answered the question "What ought I to do?" is sufficient reason to give religion a chance. What does religion claim to have that these other fields of thought and life do not give us? It claims as its own an original source of knowledge and power not recognized in the method of science. (Although many scientists may believe in religion, it is not a part of the science itself.) That source of knowledge and power is God.

Consider the two possibilities: (1) a life in which man is left entirely on his own resources to solve the mysteries and problems of life, and (2) a life in which another Being, far superior in intelligence and far richer in experience, points the way and offers a guiding hand. One may argue that both possibilities are challenging. That is true. The difficulty with the first is that it involves a tremendous amount of waste and often disaster and failure. The individual life seems often to be wrecked before one discovers what one ought to do.

The second possibility, in which God plays the directing role, is by no means without a challenge or devoid of the chance of being both ingenious and courageous. No one in his right mind has ever insisted that we know too much or that God has done everything for us. Life is still teeming with problems and questions. Man is still engaged in a struggle with nature, with man, and with himself. The difference in these two proposed possibilities lies in the fact that under the direction of God, we are all sure of our goal and the journey of life can be enjoyable and profitable.

The very purpose of religion is to tell us what we ought to do. It does so by giving us new light on the meaning and purpose of human life. It even goes a long way in teaching us how to live. For example, the Word of Wisdom is a guide in matters of mental and physical health, and the Great Commandment, "Love thy neighbour as thyself," is a key to happy human relations.

Religion inspires idealism and courage, which express themselves in action. Glance back through the pages of history and see how religion has changed the world—not always for good, because it has been misunderstood, misinterpreted, and even falsified. In your mind try to erase the lives of the great religious leaders and their movements from history. How does the picture look? Whatever your verdict may be, you will admit that religion has played a tremendous role in the past. That alone should stimulate us to consider it.

How has religion affected the lives of individuals? What did it do to the life of the first member of your family who accepted Mormonism, whether he was one of the early pioneers or a recent convert from the old country? How has it changed your life directly, or indirectly through the lives of your parents and grandparents?

Yes, you will say, religion offers an answer, promises to be a real help—even indispensable—if it is true and if God lives. You want to be sure that religion is something more than another name for a certain part of philosophy. You wish to know that it comes from God and is not just man's wondering and thinking about God.

Mormonism claims to be a revealed, and not a man-made, religion. We have seen the need for such knowledge that God could give to man. If that need is felt, then let us consider together in ensuing discussions what the message of religion is and finally on what grounds such a message and answer to our problem rests.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Religion gives man faith that his life has meaning and purpose. In daily life and in the specialized sciences, faith is usually expressed in some particular thing or process. In contrast, religion is primarily concerned with the meaning of man's whole existence. Is the universe indifferent to man's fate, or is there an intelligent Being who is realizing his benevolent purposes in human life? Most religions are based on the faith that life is not a matter of chance, not the result of the operation of impersonal forces, but is the result of divine wisdom and planning. . . . "Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from his hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that he counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works." (Jacob 4:10.) The scriptures bear witness that there is a light emanating from Deity which inclines men to believe in God and to have faith in that which is good: In 1959 Lowell Bennion published Religion and the Pursuit of Truth, his most thorough study of the different ways of knowing the truth and of the contributions the various disciplines and components of life can make to religious seeking. Reprinted here are parts of the section on how the adventurous, creative quality of faith is crucial to the pursuit of religious truth.
