Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

VI

LEARNING HOW TO KNOW

22

Faith: Values and Limitations

Faith permeates the religious life as sap runs through every branch of a living tree. Faith is as vital to religion as the circulation of the [^1] blood is to the body. Faith nourishes and motivates the religious life as the root system feeds a plant. Without faith, religion loses its most distinctive element. Our most basic beliefs about God, Christ, and man rest in good part on faith. Our most fundamental ways of living religion, such as repentance, service, love, and forgiveness, are expressions of faith. It is logical, therefore, that the first principle of religion is generally considered to be faith.

The very fact that so much of religion rests on faith is disturbing to some earnest college students. In their philosophical studies they are encouraged to question, to doubt, and to be critical. In their scientific studies they are taught to think factually and objectively—to weigh, measure, observe, and describe with the faculties of the mind and the senses wide awake. To ask a student thus engaged in critical thought and careful experimentation to accept things on faith sometimes seems to him to be asking too much. Religion appears sometimes to rest on mere credulity, something for which trained minds have little respect.

It is the purpose of this chapter to examine the nature of faith, to consider what it is, its values and limitations. Its relationship to knowledge and belief also needs to be considered. In short, an effort will be made to ascertain whether faith has a legitimate and helpful role to play in the life of the student.

Faith, like so many important intangibles of life, such as truth, beauty, and goodness, is not easy to define. And yet it must be given some definition, or one's contemplation of this principle will be confusing and meaningless. The scriptures exhort us to live by faith. They illustrate its nature on many pages, but define the term only two or three times and then only briefly. In Hebrews we read: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." (Hebrews 11:1.)

And in Alma we read: "And now as I said concerning faith—faith is not to have a perfect knowledge of things; therefore if ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true." (Alma 32:21.)

A number of definitions from writers and thinkers will be given here, and then what seem to be the essential elements of faith will be extracted.

Faith is that power within us which impels us to act without our knowing the result of that act. (F. B. Hammond.)

Faith is the personal resolve to take risks, to adventure forth on a hazardous quest (living is always a hazardous quest; we stand in jeopardy every hour). . . . Faith, then, is loyal and courageous affirmation of the highest values man envisages. It is a bold and risky confidence in the response of reality to our deepest needs and highest interests. (From Joseph A. Leighton, The Field of Philosophy [New York: D. Appleton and Co., 1930].)

Faith is a hypothesis, held in all humility in the absence of ultimate proof and in the hope of an increasing clarification. (Jonathan Swift.)

Religion deals on the side of faith with the uncharted region of human experience. (Gilbert Murray.)

The faith-state is the sense of the exceedingness of the possible over the real. (William James.)

The fact of accepting or the disposition to accept as real, true, or the like that which is not supported by sensible evidence or rational proofs. (Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.)

Faith is at once an affirmation of truth and surrendering to the truth affirmed. Apart from the first it would be blind; apart from the second, without practical significance. (Morgan, in Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, 5:589.)

Faith is reason grown courageous. (Sir Wilfred Grenfell.)

Faith is to act with confidence in realities not factually and not rationally known nor proven. (Anonymous.)

Faith is the sphere of the possible. (Anonymous.)

Goethe said: "Human life divided by reason leaves a remainder." Faith deals with that remainder.

Considering the above statements about faith, what, may we conclude, are its basic characteristics?

The Essential Elements of Faith

I

While one of the most essential ingredients of faith is feeling, it cannot be confined to feeling alone. Faith also includes and presupposes rational factors such as belief, the power of imagination, and the ability to construct hypotheses. However, unlike knowledge, which is abstract and symbolic of reality, faith is concrete experience. Faith is felt. Belief and hypothesis are swallowed up, as it were, by feeling, which becomes the dominant emphasis in the experience of faith.

To say that faith is essentially feeling does not discredit it. Life itself is experienced more in feeling than in thought. Motivation to work, play, love, and create is born largely of feeling, and all of life's satisfactions are felt.

A freshman student became considerably upset one day because her psychology teacher had said in class that if feeling were taken out of religion, there would be nothing left. The student, of course, had interpreted the statement as a criticism of religion. But whether or not it was a criticism, it needed amplification and qualification. In the first place, religion is more than feeling. The great religions of mankind contain ideas which relate concretely to human behavior. Anyone who has read Deuteronomy, Amos, Isaiah, or Luke would know this. But—and this is equally important—if religion did nothing more than help man feel right and feel deeply about life, it would be justified, because feeling is a large part of living. Humility, faith, and love are essentially feelings, or attitudes; and they make their rich contributions to life. No apology need be made for faith because it is, in good part, a state of feeling.

Because faith is linked with feeling, it need not be evanescent and whimsical, without substance and, like a soap bubble, easy to burst, even though the faith of some people is of this kind—blind, inconstant, and without foundation. A strong, solid, and enduring faith is grounded in knowledge and experience. And, like aesthetic feeling, Christian love, and other emotional states, faith may not only abide, but may increase in strength and richness. Later in this chapter the relationship of faith to knowledge will be discussed. Then it will be seen how a solid faith is grounded in knowledge and experience.

II

Faith varies in strength and character from person to person, and even from time to time in the same person's life. This is to be expected of something so personal and subjective as faith. Faith then is not cut and dried, is not fixed and static, but is something as dynamic as life itself. It may lie anywhere between mere hope and certitude, which is a feeling of complete assurance. Between these two extremes, faith of various degrees is experienced by almost everyone. In some things, a person's faith is as strong and sturdy as an oak tree; in other things, it may bend with the wind like a weeping willow tree. Faith is a product of one's total life-experience. As this experience increases, one's faith in certain people and in things and ideas is bound to increase or to decrease.

III

Faith relates to the unknown, to things unseen or not yet realized. This is evident in many definitions quoted above, including the two from Hebrews and Alma. Here again faith is different from knowledge, for knowledge relates to the past. Knowledge is awareness of reality through repeated and verifiable experiences. If one knows a thing, he no longer needs to have faith in it, as Alma declared: "Yea, there are many who do say: If thou wilt show unto us a sign from heaven, then we shall know of a surety; then we shall believe. Now I ask, is this faith? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; for if a man knoweth a thing he hath no cause to believe, for he knoweth it." (Alma 32:17-18.)

Faith is the sphere of the possible. It is an hypothesis, suggested by the existence of some facts, but projecting beyond these to the realm of what might be or could be. This characteristic of faith is readily illustrated in a couple's feelings about marriage. The typical couple approaching marriage will say that they know they will be happy. This they cannot possibly know from experience or logic. Having never been married to each other and being aware of the unhappiness and the divorce statistics for married people today, a couple can only believe and feel that they will succeed. Marriage is consummated in faith, and this should be recognized by the participants. The success of each marriage is only a possibility envisioned by faith.

IV

Faith is adventurous and creative. It not only is the sphere of the possible, but is also the power which often makes the possible come into being. Faith is that remarkable quality of the human spirit which first envisages the possibilities of life, then lives as though these possibilities were realities, and by this action often makes them real. In the realm of knowledge, one conforms to what is; in the realm of faith, one creates life after the image carried in his heart. Faith adds another dimension to life. Recognizing the borders of knowledge, it transcends them.

Jesus recognized this wonderfully creative, dynamic power of faith. He likened it unto a mustard seed and said that he who had faith even as a grain of mustard seed could move mountains; that nothing would be impossible to him. Faith is like a seed because of its great potential to multiply itself, to increase reality. Faith is like yeast in its capacity to expand and enlarge whatever it becomes a part of. Faith is like a tree that takes root, grows, buds, blossoms, and bears fruit. . . .

V

Faith impels action. In the language of James, "Faith without works is dead." One might also say that faith without works is not faith, but mere belief. Then belief is not feeling, or assurance, but is a thing of the mind. A person says he believes something is so when he thinks it is, but is not sure. Belief might be called uncertain knowledge, or one's best guess about something. Many beliefs do not compel action; they are merely opinions concerning things. For example, even though he attends the University of Iowa, a student may believe that Ohio State University will win the conference football championship. This is purely an intellectual conclusion; no action is taken to support the belief. Such a person may even cheer against the team he believes will win. Faith, in contrast to belief, is a conviction which leads to action. And actions mirror quite accurately the character and strength of one's faith.

Faith That Is Blind

In our discussion of faith thus far, its positive qualities have been stressed. Indeed, if men could always exercise faith in things not seen and not yet realized which are good and true, living by faith would always prove rewarding.

The truth is, however, that people experience much the same feeling of hope and assurance in things that are not good. One can also place his trust and faith in that which is not true. This experience turns out to be blind faith—not the kind that is based on knowledge and experience or quickened by the spirit of Deity. And yet it is commonly called faith and has feelings in common with it.

Two illustrations may help: A couple marries with little understanding of each other's personalities and with even less knowledge of the nature of marriage. But their minds and hearts are full of hope, adventure, confidence—attitudes which accompany the feeling of faith. Their blind faith often leads them not to bliss, but to the divorce court. Or, to cite another example, two men form a business partnership. Visions of mutual benefit and profit gladden their hearts and blur their vision of reality. They too visualize unmade profits as already won. But their naive trust in each other may also be shattered on the hard anvil of reality.

Men can also be disillusioned in religion. Through the ages, in the name of religion, men have frequently and continuously been exercised by a faith in things which appeared to be real, and in things which could not fulfill their hopes. They have worshipped gods of wood and stone made by their own hands. Divine favor has been sought through sacrifice of the firstborn. Revelry, prostitution, infanticide, suicide, flattery, deception, bribery, and lip service have been used to ingratiate the gods, and even God, but to no avail. Religious feeling can be as blind as any other expression of faith. And when it is blind, it takes a person out of touch with reality just as does any other ill-founded faith.

Faith and Knowledge

Faith should not be considered a substitute for knowledge. Whenever knowledge is available, it should be used. For it is generally better to live by knowledge in particular things than by faith, if knowledge is available. A man would rather know that he has money in the bank when he writes a check than to write it in the faith that the money is there. It is better for a man to know that his bride-to-be has a good character than to marry her without knowledge of this fact. It would be better to know the cause of cancer than merely to have faith that by refraining from eating certain foods one would not become a victim. An appreciation for the great role of faith in life should never deter us in our search for knowledge. It is knowing the truth that makes men free.

Faith is a means of reaching out to gain more knowledge, like a searchlight casting its beam ahead into the "uncharted region of our existence." Man lives in a law-abiding universe. This is the faith of both the scientist and the religionist. Man satisfies his needs and attains his goals by learning and by lending obedience to both the laws of nature and the moral laws of God. Faith was never intended to be a blind substitute for knowledge, but rather an impelling motivation to seek and to know reality. The Savior seems to indicate this in the following statement: "Then Jesus said to those Jews which believed on him, If ye will continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:21-22; emphasis added.)

In Alma's inspiring discourse on faith (Alma 32:27-43), the object of the experiment with faith which he recommends is that it will lead us to knowledge. Men of faith need not be indifferent to knowledge nor in any sense minimize its worth in order to glorify faith. There is ample need of and room for both a sound faith and all the knowledge we can gain. The gospel plan teaches the wisdom of walking by faith in this life. It also teaches us to seek knowledge and to obey the laws of life. No matter how much knowledge a person gains, he is increasingly aware of how much of his life is lived by faith.

A sound faith needs roots. It should, as has already been mentioned, be grounded in knowledge, experience, and revelation. Like a house, its walls should be laid on good foundations lest in time they crack and crumble. Faith should not be considered an enemy to knowledge, nor a competitor. The student should not feel compelled to choose between faith and knowledge. Let him gain and use knowledge where it is available. Let him walk by faith where knowledge is not available. Let his faith include, but transcend his knowledge.

The relationship of faith and knowledge is not like this:

Faith or Knowledge

It may be more truly represented in this way:

Faith Knowledge Faith Knowledge

There is no genuine faith without some knowledge. However, knowledge, by its very nature, is limited. Any quest for it is a venture in faith. Any acquirement of it only makes one aware of his need for more faith.

Faith as "reason grown courageous" will ever be an essential need of life. The simple faith of a child is a beautiful and touching thing to observe. Sometimes, however, under the storm and stress of life, it proves to be as fragile as a piece of pottery. It is difficult, if not impossible, for a person to retain his childhood faith as he grows to maturity. Why should he not strengthen and mature his faith until it is the full expression of his whole mind and heart? The late Guy C. Wilson frequently quoted the following statement to illustrate the relationship of faith and reason:

Faith is a conviction born in the mind that has looked at all the facts available and found in them a meaning with which the soul can rest in peace. It does not abhor an invitation to think—for it is the result of the thinking of a mind that is candid and unafraid. (Author unknown; from notes taken at a lecture by Guy C. Wilson.)

Religious Faith

Faith, as it has been discussed and illustrated thus far, is not limited to religion. In every walk of life, as one lives in the present and looks to the future, one necessarily exercises faith—lives in anticipation of accomplishments and realities not yet known. The attitude of faith is necessary in all human relationships: in marriage, business, sports, politics, war, and peace.

Even science and philosophy, which place so much value on the use of reason, are based on certain assumptions of faith. The scientist, for example, trusts his senses, believing that they report the world quite accurately. He believes also in a world of law and order, of cause and effect. He believes he can think and that thinking is worthwhile. These assumptions, he feels, have been verified through science. Still they remain assumptions. Although the doctor assumes that life is worth living, he cannot prove it with all his science. Faith underlies all of his work in the highly honored practice of medicine.

Religion has no monopoly on faith, nor is the experience of faith in religion wholly different from the experience of faith in everyday life. In both instances one faces the future and the unknown with a limited knowledge and with a feeling of hope and assurance. Religious faith is characterized largely by a difference in its objective.

Characteristics of Religious Faith

The man of religious faith believes that life is meaningful and potentially good because it is the creation of God who "counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all his works."

According to our Christian faith, man's life on earth is purposeful, part of a divine and eternal plan. And though we don't have all the answers about many particulars, our religion sustains us in the positive feeling of faith toward the whole of life.

Religious faith means the dedication of one's whole life "in search, reverence, and service" to the object of one's faith, to the great purpose of life. Religion means a commitment of the whole self to that which is supreme, highest, and best in life and in the universe. Religious faith is no partial, limited, or temporary loyalty. It is a devotion to the whole of life in its highest spiritual meaning now and forever as long as religious faith is real. This complete commitment is often indicated and encouraged in scripture. . . .

O, remember, my son, and learn wisdom in thy youth; yea, learn in thy youth to keep the commandments of God. Yea, and cry unto God for all thy support; yea, let all thy doings be unto the Lord, and whithersoever thou goest let it be in the Lord; yea, let thy thoughts be directed unto the Lord; yea, let the affections of thy heart be placed upon the Lord forever. Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings, and he will direct thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto the Lord, that he may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto God; and if ye do these things, ye shall be lifted up at the last day. (Alma 37:35-37.)

Jesus' words to Nicodemus, who came to him by night wishing to know how to enter into the kingdom of God, illustrate the wholeness of religious conviction. Jesus said to him, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." (John 3:3.) Nicodemus was confused, thinking Jesus meant he had to be born again of his mother in the flesh. But Jesus had reference to finding a new faith, becoming a new person in one's religious and moral outlook, living a new spiritual life. Baptism by water and the gift of the Holy Ghost were means of helping man to bear witness of his spiritual rebirth.

"Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow." (Isaiah 1:16-17.)

The entire Sermon on the Mount, given in Matthew 5-7, is a call to idealistic and nobler living, challenging man to be like God in his impartiality and love—"Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48. Note verses 43-48.)

Faith in the improvement of human nature, in man's perfectability, slow, long, and discouraging though it be, is implicit in the Hebrew, early Christian, and Latter-day Saint faiths. This is true not only of individuals, but is also the goal of society. Prophets of God have been concerned continuously with the establishment of a righteous people of Zion, a social condition among men where justice, mercy, peace, and good will may prevail. . . . 4. Another characteristic of religious faith is this: It involves the will; it calls for moral and spiritual action. Religious faith inspires moral effort. In contrast, often when one, in faith, projects a hypothesis in science to explain the facts, the imagination is simply being exercised and the scientist acts upon intellectual hunches and curiosity. When a man acts on faith in business, he does so for economic gain and perhaps in the spirit of adventure. But neither in business nor in science is man often required to exercise his full moral or spiritual capacities, whereas religious faith calls for self-discipline, self-control, humility, repentance, meekness, and other attributes of character.

Granted that religious faith has many desirable features, that it would enhance life by giving it increased significance and motivation, the question still arises, how does one gain this faith? Is it a gift from God? Or may it be won, even as knowledge, by one's own effort? The answer is neither simple nor single.

Avenues to Faith

For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil; wherefore, I show unto you the way to judge; for everything which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may know with a perfect knowledge it is of God. . . . Wherefore I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently in the light of Christ that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will be a child of Christ. (Moroni 7:15-16, 19.)

In this sense, faith is a gift of God. But it lies within the power of man to receive or to reject the influence of the Spirit of God. The gift of faith, like a muscle, becomes strong with use and weak with neglect.

Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and taught. And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knoweth this man letters, having never learned? Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory: but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. (John 7:14-18.)

One learns the value of work by working, of play by playing, of food by eating; and one learns the value of faith by exercising faith, of love by trying to love fellowmen. Even so, if one would have faith in God, he must at least say to himself, "It could be that he lives. I shall give the idea a fair trial. I shall do his will. I shall read the scriptures, especially the life of Jesus, and I shall try to live as God would have me live. I shall at least give religion a fair chance in my life."

However faith may come to one, it does not come fully mature. Like flowers, trees, and children, it must grow and increase. This need for gradual growth in faith is explained in Alma's great discourse (Alma 32:14-43) in the Book of Mormon. The writer is fair and suggests that we exercise only enough belief to make an experiment with faith. His words deserve a careful reading.

A Postscript

In this discussion of faith we have been dealing with it in a broad and general way—in a sense which might fit any religious group. Each religious movement also has its own particular objects of faith. The Moslems declare faith, for example, in Allah and in Muhammad as his prophet. The Jews declare, "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord."

Latter-day Saints declare their faith in many things. The most comprehensive, though by no means complete, statement of our faith is given in the thirteen Articles of Faith. At the heart of these lies the most central principle of all—faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. To Latter-day Saints, Christ is central. Through him we can overcome death, ignorance, and sin. Through him we can come to know God and attain unto eternal life.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This address was given at the priesthood session of general conference, April 6, 1968, and was published in the June 1968 Improvement Era and in the official Conference Report.
