Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

24

Scriptures: Values and Limitations

Inspired of God but in Man's Language

Elder John A. Widtsoe had an interesting point of view on scripture: [^1] "The message of the scripture is divine; the words in which it is clothed are human. Failure to make this distinction has led to much misunderstanding. Intelligent readers will separate the message of the scripture from its form of presentation." (The Articles of Faith in Everyday Life [YMMIA and YWMIA of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1949], p. 60.)

This same idea is stated in scripture itself: "For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for he speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding." (2 Nephi 31:3. Italics added.)

As one reads scripture, one must think not only of God and his purposes, but also of men, of the writer, and of his audience, and not expect perfection. Brigham Young implies this in his forthright style:

I am so far from believing that any government upon this earth has constitutions and laws that are perfect, that I do not even believe there is a single revelation, among the many God has given to the Church, that is perfect in its fullness. The revelations of God contain correct doctrines and principle, as far as they go; but it is impossible for the poor, weak, low, grovelling, sinful inhabitants of the earth to receive a revelation from the Almighty in all its perfections. He has to speak to us in a manner to meet the extent of our capacities. (Journal of Discourses 2:314.)

Man plays a most significant role in both translating and creating scripture. The Lord's instruction to Oliver Cowdery explaining why he failed in his attempt to translate the Book of Mormon applies also to the receiving and writing of revelation.

Behold, you have not understood; you have supposed that I would give it unto you, when you took no thought save it was to ask me.

But, behold, I say unto you, that you must study it out in your mind; then you must ask me if it be right, and if it is right I will cause that your bosom shall burn within you; therefore, you shall feel that it is right.

But if it be not right you shall have no such feelings, but you shall have a stupor of thought that shall cause you to forget the thing which is wrong; therefore, you cannot write that which is sacred save it be given you from me.

Now, if you had known this you could have translated; nevertheless, it is not expedient that you should translate now. (D&C 9:7-10.)

My favorite passage in all of scripture on the nature of revelation is found in the Doctrine and Covenants. It applies equally to scripture because much scripture is a record of revelation.

Behold, I am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding. And inasmuch as they erred it might be made known; and inasmuch as they sought wisdom they might be instructed; and inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might repent; and inasmuch as they were humble they might be made strong, and blessed from on high, and receive knowledge from time to time. (D&C 1:24-28.)

Revelation is of God and is authoritative for the believer, but it is given in man's language and weakness, in his own thinking and understanding. Much of it is correction of sin and error or affirmation of correct thinking—but always in words man understands. Men do violence to scripture if they ascribe every word of it to God.

Various books of scripture reflect the character and style of their respective authors: Paul's eloquent descriptions of the saving grace of Jesus Christ, John's great emphasis on love, and James's down-to-earth practical religion are all inspired, but each is unique in language and content. In studying the scriptures we should appreciate the contributions of both Deity and human writers.

There is much in scripture that is so beautiful, powerful, and rich in meaning that one can believe it is wholly of God. Examples are the Ten Commandments, the Beatitudes, Paul's eulogy on love (1 Corinthians 13), the twenty-third psalm, Doctrine and Covenants 121, and Micah 6:6-8. The authors certainly rise above their own capability under inspiration of Deity in these and many other passages. But they use the words of men and they reflect their own feeling as well as divine inspiration. . . . Other passages of scripture reflect the author's viewpoint or are conditioned markedly by the circumstances and comprehension of his audience. This is true particularly of some of the narrative and historical portions of the Old Testament, which are not always on the same high plane that characterizes the writings of the prophets. For example, 2 Kings 2:23-24 tells the story of Elisha as he was mocked by little children who said to him, "Go up, thou bald head." It says that when he cursed them in the name of the Lord, two "she bears" came out of the woods and attacked forty-two children, supposedly killing them. This implies divine retribution for their lack of respect for a prophet. I, however, am unable to imagine Jehovah, Jesus Christ in the meridian of time, the same Jesus Christ who loved little children, turning bears upon them in their innocent folly. In my judgment the author meant to show respect for the prophet Elisha, but lacked understanding of the character of God in ascribing such action to him.

The commandments in the law of Moses are, for the most part, just and humane and superior to the ethical standards of surrounding tribes and nations. Much of the law is on as high a plane as the teachings of Jesus. That is illustrated in the holiness code found in Leviticus, chapters 19-26. The Israelites were told not to reap the corners of their fields nor to glean their vineyards and grain fields, but to leave them for the poor and the stranger. (Leviticus 19:9-10.) This is also illustrated in the beautiful story of Ruth. Israelites were taught to be no respecters of persons but to respect the poor as much as the mighty and to love the stranger as one born among them. On the other hand, there are practices in the law of Moses that are related to the times and that we would consider unethical today. Hebrews as well as Gentiles were sold into slavery in ancient Israel, but within this practice, slave owners were admonished to release slaves after a given period of time and to send them away with a stock of goods from their master's storehouse.

Under the law of Moses there was no tolerance of the dissenter from Israel's faith. Anyone professing other gods and encouraging others to do so was to be stoned without pity. This is a far cry from our eleventh Article of Faith, which allows all men to worship what they will. It is understandable only if we remember that Israelites lived among peoples steeped in idolatry and that Israelites were sorely tempted to imitate their neighbors. (See Deuteronomy 13.)

According to the law of Moses, a rebellious son who refused to change his ways was to be brought before the elders and stoned to death. (Deuteronomy 21:18-21.) In this way serious problems in family life would be done away within Israel. Despite all the problems faced between parents and children today, I am glad that we are no longer commanded to kill sons who are beyond control.

The law of Moses is a complex, fascinating combination of just, considerate, and humane laws sprinkled here and there with laws that seem unduly harsh and even unjust. The only explanation I know for the limitations of this great effort to establish a righteous society in Israel is to ascribe them to men. In some instances, God may have accepted and condoned a lower law to meet human need, as he did in letting Israel have a king. In other instances, I believe writers of Israel's history gave credit or blame to God for actions and decrees that were unworthy of him under any circumstances.

Reading in Context

Shakespeare's remark in the preface to this book is worth repeating:

In religion, What damned error, but some sober brow Will bless it, and approve it with a text Hiding the grossness with fair ornament? —Merchant of Venice, Act 3, scene 2

Over the centuries men in various churches and sects quoted single verses or passages of the Bible to prove their particular beliefs. Sometimes these texts are used correctly; at other times they do violence to the author's meaning. Using a passage of scripture isolated from its large setting is called textproof method. It is often unfair.

A colleague of mine was asked to review a book of which he was extremely and justifiably critical. It lacked historical accuracy, logic, and substance. He did say in one sentence that it was well-written. The publishers then latched on to that one favorable comment. Ignoring his total review; they quoted it as propaganda to promote the sale of the book, a nonscriptural illustration of quoting out of context and dishonesty.

Context means with the text. There are three kinds of context: (1) the immediate setting of a passage, (2) its place in the book of which the passage is part, such as Amos, Job, or Galatians, and (3) its relationship to the gospel as a whole, especially the fundamentals.

In the Context of the Passage

It is perfectly proper to quote a single verse or two of scripture, but in doing so one should have read what precedes it and what follows it. Otherwise he may misrepresent the author's idea. The following story illustrates this.

One evening in a city in Switzerland a Mormon missionary gave a talk to non-Mormons on the nature of God. He endeavored to demonstrate that the Father was a real person—a Creator, Revelator, and Father in whose image man was made. Suddenly a minister in the back of the hall cried out, "God is a Spirit," quoting from John 4:24. In this verse, Jesus was not trying to describe the whole nature of God; he was emphasizing the role of spirit in God and man as part of a brief discourse on how to worship. He was trying to teach the Samaritan woman to worship "in spirit and in truth."

In that same meeting a few moments later, the minister spoke up again, saying, "God is love," quoting correctly from 1 John 4:8. He was using the verse to prove that God is love and nothing else. If we turn to this verse, however, and read the verses before and after that complete the thought (verses 7-12), we see again that the main interest was to inspire people to love one another. To achieve this, the author stressed God's great attribute of love. The Father's love for us is so great that he is the embodiment of love; this is one of his greatest attributes. But he is also more than love. The next verse says: "In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him." (1 John 4:9.) Love alone cannot send us a savior, cannot create worlds, cannot bring to pass the resurrection. Love is a quality that cannot exist except as a single attribute. It lives through those who exercise it.

In their missionary zeal, Latter-day Saints are sometimes guilty of quoting verses out of context. Isaiah 4:1 speaks of the day when seven women shall take hold of one man and ask to be called by his name. In the past, it was common for missionaries to defend the practice of plural marriage with this verse, which to them was a prophecy of the practice of plural marriage. We might well gather this notion by reading this verse alone. If, however, we begin reading in chapter 3, from verse 16 to the end, we readily see that 4:1 belongs to the same train of thought as Isaiah 3:16-26. Isaiah sees that war is coming to Judah, and that the proud women of Judea, who are more concerned with decorating their faces and bodies than they are with the affliction of the poor in Israel, have made their contribution to the downfall of the nation. Not only have they lived in vain and idle luxury, but they have encouraged their masters to cheat and lie to get gain, living lives offensive to God and destructive of national unity and strength. What happens to women in time of war? Their men fall in battle and they become widows. Marriage meant much to the women of Israel; hence, in the day of calamity (which was near at hand) there might be seven women to one man. Isaiah was depicting the consequences of war brought on by unrighteousness. His prediction applies widely in human experience and is not a prediction of plural marriage.

In the Context of the Book

Each of the standard works is a collection of many writings or books. The Old Testament has thirty-nine, the New Testament twenty-seven, for example. Each passage of scripture is part of a writing or book within one of the standard works. It should be interpreted as part of that writing or book.

Part of one verse in the beautiful twenty-third psalm reads: "Thou anointest my head with oil." In a Sunday School class one day a teacher used this statement to prove that the anointing of the sick was practiced in the Old Testament. It may have been, but this was not the verse to use to prove it. The entire twenty-third psalm is a song of thanksgiving and praise to the Lord. "Thou anointest my head with oil" is a symbolic way of acknowledging the bounteous blessings and goodness of the Lord—as the entire psalm attests. If you wish to prove that the anointing of the sick was used in biblical times, turn to the book of James, a work of forthright admonition and instruction, and there you will find this explicit teaching: "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him." (James 5:14-15.)

In Ezekiel 37, a vision of this prophet is recorded wherein he saw a valley full of dry bones and then saw flesh and sinews come upon them; "Breath came into them, and they lived." (Ezekiel 37:10.) Verses 1-14 of this passage have been used to prove the resurrection. It is probably not Ezekiel's purpose in this passage to establish the doctrine of individual resurrection. It is quite obvious, if one reads the entire book of Ezekiel, that the prophet is talking about the restoration of Israel as a nation, as a people, with dry bones as a symbol of their captivity. The resurrection can be established much more clearly and abundantly in the New Testament or Book of Mormon. (Note Alma 40, Luke 24, and 1 Corinthians 15.)

Latter-day Saints should also read the rest of chapter 37 with Ezekiel's purpose in mind. Verses 15-28 tell the oft-repeated account of the prophet being commanded to write upon two sticks, one for Judah and one for Joseph, Judah being interpreted as the Bible and Joseph as the Book of Mormon. If we read the entire passage in the context of the total book of Ezekiel, we find that the prophet is predicting not only the coming forth of two books or records, but also the restoration and reunion of the two nations—Israel and Judah. The Bible and the Book of Mormon are records of Judah and Joseph, respectively, and the coming forth of these two records heralds the eventual reunion of the two nations and should someday even contribute to Israel's unification. The coming forth of the Book of Mormon fits into this large hope and faith of the prophet Ezekiel. Latter-day Saints often ignore Ezekiel's great interest in unifying Israel and Judah.

To see how a great passage of scripture assumes even more meaning when read as part of an entire writing, refer to 1 Corinthians, one of Paul's most interesting epistles. Paul had learned that there were contentions among the Saints (1:10) and all manner of strife, divisions, and sins (3:1-3). Some of their strife was over the gifts of the gospel. Some could speak in tongues, some could not; some could interpret, others could not. In chapter 12 Paul explains the gifts of the gospel and how different gifts are enjoyed by different members but not all by all. In chapter 14 he explains that the gift of tongues is not the most important gift of the gospel nor is it a necessary one. [Between these two chapters], in the most meaningful eulogy of brotherly love ever written in scripture, Paul points out the supremacy of love over all other gifts. Without charity (meaning brotherly love and, in Moroni's words, "the pure love of Christ") we are nothing.

Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am becoming as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.

And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.

And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. (1 Corinthians 13:1-3.)

Chapter 13 can stand alone, but knowing chapters 12 and 14 adds rich meaning to it.

In the Context of the Gospel

A young architect once gave a group of students and me a choice insight into how to interpret scripture. He was talking about architecture, a highly complex field that embraces art, science, and mathematics. He said architects use three basic guides when planning a garage, house, or a cathedral: Is it sound? Is it functional? Is it beautiful or aesthetically pleasing? These wonderful guidelines are equally useful to the client who is building or buying a home.

Religion too is a vast, complex field. The scriptures, our best record of religion, are tremendously composite, varied in style and origin, written by scores of authors living over centuries. To interpret scripture fairly, intelligently, and meaningfully, we need some guidelines comparable to those of the architect. There is a logical, meaningful, conceptual structure to the gospel just as there is to architecture or any other discipline. Gospel principles belong together; they support and enrich one another. The gospel may be likened to a mosaic. It has a design, a set of ideas that are consistent with each other and that together give meaning to life. The person who would understand religion should not pulverize the gospel and think of it as an array of separate facts and ideas. Like architecture, the gospel has its fundamental concepts and principles. These need to be kept in mind as we read single verses or contemplate individual ideas in scripture. To illustrate, I suggest that there are some fundamental concepts regarding God and man that should always be remembered as we read the scriptures.

Our conception of God the Father:

Our conception of man:

These concepts concerning God and man represent only a partial listing to illustrate the value of interpreting scripture in the light of fundamentals.

A Case Study

In Alma 34, which is a profound and rich chapter, we read:

And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you, that you do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this, for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that eternal world.

For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance, even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked. (Alma 34:33-35.)

How do we interpret this passage? Is there no opportunity whatever for repentance in life beyond the grave? Some people think so, and that may be right with regard to those who are spiritually dead. Taking this passage by itself, with no reference to other gospel fundamentals, we could easily conclude this. But let us remember that God is our Father—a loving, merciful Father—and that his work and glory is to redeem his children. He is not likely to give up easily nor quickly. Judging by the attitude of his Son, the Father would, we believe, never close the door to repentance for his children.

Some, such as the sons of perdition, may sink so low that they lose the power to repent because they "die as to things pertaining unto righteousness." (Alma 12:16.) Perhaps others who have procrastinated their repentance may find the faith and power to repent in the eternal world. This is our faith when we do work for our kindred dead, some of whom, no doubt, were first-rate sinners. We are not discrediting Amulek's plea to repent now. It is the sensible thing to do, for happiness in this life as well as for our eternal welfare. And no one knows who will have the strength to repent hereafter.

The whole gospel cannot be taught in one sermon. However, as we interpret a sermon we can and should do so in the context of the gospel as a whole.

I learned long ago that single verses must be interpreted in the context of the gospel as a whole. A returned missionary said to me that he was in a hurry to get married in the temple because if he were—even though he might commit sin except murder and the shedding of innocent blood—he would still enter into his exaltation. He based his faith on Doctrine and Covenants 132:26, which says:

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man marry a wife according to my word, and they are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, according to mine appointment, and he or she shall commit any sin or transgression of the new and everlasting covenant whatever, and all manner of blasphemies, and if they commit no murder wherein they shed innocent blood, yet they shall come forth in the first resurrection, and enter into their exaltation; but they shall be destroyed in the flesh, and shall be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption, saith the Lord God.

We might agree with him if we consider this verse in a vacuum. But in the light of the gospel, no unclean thing will enter the presence of God. And no forgiveness is possible without repentance. No verse of scripture intends to give license to sin.

I do not accept any interpretation of scripture that denies the impartiality or love of God or the free agency and brotherhood of man. These concepts are too basic to the gospel to be denied by someone's interpretation of a verse of scripture.

No part of the gospel stands alone, any more than a part of a house does. And just as each part of a house derives its meaning and function in its relationship to the whole house, so it is in the gospel. Single gospel ideas must be viewed as part of a whole plan or perspective. We should try to see the gospel as a whole, not as a series of isolated concepts.

Standards of Evaluation

How do we decide which teachings in scripture are valid for us today? How do we distinguish between that which is universally and eternally valid and that which was meant for a particular time and place and which may not be applicable now? How do we determine that which is of God and that which may have crept into scripture through the errors or misinterpretation of well-meaning writers, scribes, or translators?

To answer these questions, we should employ all the guidelines thus far discussed in this work—the background, authorship, correctness of translation, context, and religious intent. But these are not enough. To avoid error or justifying our own desires, we need additional rational and spiritual helps. What are some of these?

Consistent with Gospel Fundamentals

If we study all scriptures, certain fundamentals emerge clearly. One is the character of God. Over and over again in all four scriptures Jesus and the prophets bear witness that God is our Father—just, impartial, merciful, forgiving, law-abiding, creative, and intelligent. If we believe the scriptures, we can depend on God's integrity and love.

Isolated passages may portray him as wrathful or jealous or capricious, but these attributes do not square with the above-named qualities of character. Therefore, passages that appear to portray him so negatively must be reviewed and interpreted carefully to preserve the integrity and consistency of his character. For example, the word jealous, as we use it, usually describes weakness in human character, based on a feeling of inadequacy and insecurity, and often nurturing envy and hate. Surely God is not of such a character. Actually, the word jealous in its scriptural usage may mean one cares. Webster gives an archaic meaning of jealousy as "earnest concern or solicitude; vigilant watchfulness or care." In the new Latter-day Saint edition of the Bible, the word jealous taken from the Hebrew "qannah" is interpreted as "possessing sensitive and deep feelings." (See Genesis 20:5, footnote b.) This makes sense. Likewise in human experience a person who knows wrath is usually out of his mind, beyond self-control. Our Father must experience righteous indignation as did Jesus when he drove money changers from the temple courtyard. Yet the Savior was always in control of himself.

I do not accept any interpretation of scriptural passages that portrays God as being partial, unforgiving, hateful, or revengeful. It is more important to uphold the character and will of God than it is to support every line of scripture.

Clearly portrayed in the scriptures are certain concepts of the nature of man. Taken as a whole they repeatedly teach or imply free agency, the brotherhood of man, God's concern for man, man's responsibility for his own behavior, and certain basic ethical requirements such as those that we find in the Decalogue. Certain isolated passages, if taken singly, may seem to deny some of these principles. For instance, in Ephesians Paul states, "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourself: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast." (Ephesians 2:8-9.) This passage seems to imply that salvation is wholly an act of grace. This kind of interpretation and logic may have led John Calvin, the great French Protestant reformer, to teach predestination. Many Protestant groups rely wholly on the grace of Christ. If we study all scriptures, including Ezekiel, James, the Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants—as well as Paul's writings—we will find that the grace of Christ plays a large role in our lives. But to make it efficacious in relation to our sins, we must also exercise faith unto repentance. To maintain that man has no role in his own salvation besides simple acceptance of Christ is to make free agency, repentance, and personal spiritual growth quite meaningless. I believe the scriptures strike a happy balance between the grace of Deity and the faith and works of the individual, both being essential to life and eternal salvation.

Consistent with Christ's Spirit and Teachings

Since Christ is the Son of God and unexcelled in his own character, mind, and close relationship to the Father, since he inherited all the rich background of the law and the prophets, and since we profess to be his disciples, he should be our ultimate standard as we interpret and use the scriptures in our own lives.

If any concerns, attitudes, and practices of the Israelites, Nephites, Lamanites, or Latter-day Saints contradict the Savior's teachings, we should study them further. First, we must be sure our interpretation is not at fault; then we should not accept and practice principles and policies that are contrary to Christ's spirit and example. Brigham Young stated this thought very well: "We have taken this book, called the Old and the New Testament for our standard. We believe this book and receive it as the word of the Lord. Not but there are many words in this book that are not the words of the Lord, but, that which came from the heavens, and which the Lord has delivered to us, we receive, and especially the sayings of the Savior." (Journal of Discourses 12:309.)

Continuous Revelation

Since men are not infallible, and since life is dynamic and characterized by change, continuous revelation is needed to correct errors of the past and to implement the basic, eternal principles of the gospel into the policies and practices of both individuals and the Church today. We need prophets—men called and inspired of God—to interpret the meaning of the gospel for our time.

Needed also in the Church's and our personal interpretation of scripture is the gift of discernment through the Holy Ghost and the light of Christ. The truths of scripture were inspired of the Holy Spirit. Therefore, their interpretation should be guided by the same spirit that produced them.

Common Sense

A fine German brother and former mission president said to me one day as he helped me build a room in our house, "I go to Sunday School and listen to all kinds of gospel interpretations. I have decided not to believe anything that doesn't make good 'horses senses.' "

Faith takes us beyond knowledge, but I don't see how any interpretation of the scripture can be enlightening if we don't understand it. I think too that we should question interpretations that contradict common sense, good judgment, verified experience, and the counsel of wise and good men and women. I believe reason should confirm what we believe to be the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and I believe we also should check our own thinking by the Holy Spirit.

Oliver Cowdery, in his failure to translate the Book of Mormon, learned the necessity of combining thinking with divine inspiration in the work of the Lord. (See D&C 9:7-10.) I believe the counsel given to him applies to the interpretation of scripture as well as to its translation.

In Christ's great summary of the religious life he said, repeating an ancient law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind." (Matthew 22:37. Italics added.)

An interpretation of scripture can be trusted when it (1) is consistent with gospel fundamentals and with the teachings and spirit of Christ, (2) is confirmed by the promptings of the Spirit, (3) appeals to our ethical judgment, and (4) has won agreement among persons of good will. Of such a nature as this is the memorable revelation received by President Spencer W. Kimball on June 8, 1978, in which the priesthood was made available to all worthy male members of the Church regardless of race. This revelation is wholly consistent with the impartiality of God, the love of Christ, and the free agency of man. It appeals to our ethical judgment, has been received by men and women of good will, and has been confirmed by the Holy Spirit in the minds and hearts of Church leaders and members overwhelmingly. It has been accepted by the Church and has become part of our modern scripture, the Doctrine and Covenants.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Work: A girl who works in an office said recently, "I hope I may have the privilege of working in an office for a few months with the man who proposes to me. You can't be with a person eight hours a day in the drudgery and opportunities of an office without learning to know the character, disposition, and mind of a person to a high degree, if you have eyes to see and ears to hear." How true! The One and Only. A generation or two ago quite a few of our parents and grandparents married the first and only person with whom they had ever dated. This experience is less common among young people today. Evaluate this type of association. What are its values and its limitations? This selection is taken from Today and Tomorrow (1942), a manual for fifteen- and sixteen-year-olds in the Young Women's Mutual Improvment Association that was used throughout the years of World War II.
