Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

25

The A, B, Cs of Dating

Wayne and Sally had been going together quite steadily for months. They were [^1] in college and had had a grand time at dances and other socials. Both were active in the Church, and much of their association had been in church meetings and socials. Their friendship had not been narrow, and certainly was not in the rut of affection discussed in our last lesson.

They liked each other so well that he quit going to his own M Men class and joined the M Men in her ward so they could be together more often. The M Men and Gleaners of her ward had classes, firesides, and other activities together. The fellows and girls were one big happy, sociable family.

At Christmas time the combined group decided to sponsor a lovely Christmas dance. The officers knew of the close friendship and also of the capabilities of Wayne and Sally and asked them to be a committee of two to plan and sponsor the dance. This they agreed to do with enthusiasm. The party turned out to be a grand success.

Two weeks later Wayne went for a ride with his M Men leader. In the course of the conversation, he said, "Brother Smith, if you had to choose between two girls, one who was very capable, positive, and efficient and one who was more retiring and whose possibilities were probably great but undeveloped, which would you choose?"

After a moment's reflection, Smith said, "Wayne, if this already-made girl were just what I wanted, I believe I would take her; if not, I'd rather take a chance on helping to develop this other girl into the kind of person she and I wanted her to become."

One year after the Christmas party Wayne married not Sally, but this other girl, this one who was more modest and less positive in her ways. His teacher-friend asked him why. He said, "Because I worked with Sally on a committee and discovered that she couldn't even take a suggestion from me." Do you see the connection between marriage and committee work? It is easier to learn about the total personality of an individual in one good committee project than it is in a year of going to shows and dances or in superficial talk. Serving on a committee, you find out who is dependable, who can give and take and is flexible enough to see and appreciate points of view other than their own. Initiative and imagination are revealed. "Pride and prejudice" are uncovered. Since learning of this and like experiences, we teach as a maxim: "Do not marry anyone with whom you have not worked on a committee."

Choosing a Roommate

Suppose you were going away to college or to work and you were given the privilege of choosing a roommate for the next four years. Once she was chosen, you two would have to see the thing through. What qualities would you ask for in this roommate? Make a list on the blackboard or on paper. Would you like the person you room with to be honest, dependable, trustworthy, a bit flexible? State and explain your wishes.

You will live with the person you marry, not for four years with periodic vacations in between, but for life and forever. Your association in marriage will be more intimate and more extensive. Surely, you would want the boy you marry to have the same basic qualities you would choose in a roommate, and others as well. How can you discover these qualities, besides serving on a committee? What kinds of things—activities, events, and associations—reveal character, the mind, disposition, ideals, attitudes, and the habits of a fellow? Let us make a list:

Attendance at shows and dances does not reveal personality extensively because such activities are prepared occasions in which boys and girls play the role of recipients. The entertainment is arranged for them. These other activities, listed above, call for more activity and varied responses. They are far more revealing. We shall illustrate one activity in each group.

There is a better way to get the same insight into a fellow's mind. Go to church with a group and casually develop a conversation afterwards about the things heard in the sermon. Immediately interests and attitudes on basic questions of life will be revealed. Go to a lovely concert or a good lecture and see how your friends respond. Engage in conversation for a few hours sometime and see what interests are present.

Present at the party was this fellow's girlfriend! His attitude, expressed while playing one game, opened her eyes as his good dancing, car rides, and handsome appearance had not done in a year's time. To see each other in one's home is to see a person in a situation most nearly like one's own marriage will be.

Boys and girls cannot travel together before marriage, except after they have become rather serious. Then a short trip, chaperoned by one of the families, is a good thing. Group hikes, outings, and canyon parties make a fine substitute for travel in the early days of friendship and courtship.

A group of college boys and girls went as a class to study the geology of the Southern Utah parks and the Grand Canyon of the Colorado. One of the boys on the trip reported that, through lengthy conversations and a great variety of activity, he had learned more about the character of some girlfriends than he had discovered all year at school in frequent association with them. He learned which were good sports, what their imaginative and intellectual powers were, and where their interests lay. It was a revelation to him to know girls in ways other than on dates of the routine type, such as at shows and dances.

A boy, just turned three, was visiting a dairy farm. Led on by the insatiable curiosity of a child, he climbed on a big new tractor. In the process he fell off and struck his head. After a little crying, he turned to the tractor, kicked it, and said, "I don't like you, Mr. Tractor." Some adults show the same kind of infantile behavior. Criticism reveals it. . . .

Most revealing is the manner in which a girl or a fellow reacts to such crises as loss of a loved one, sudden financial reverses in the family, unfair treatment shown toward her by someone, honors received, or any serious disappointment.

Types of Dating

Fellows and girls may be classified in their dating habits into one of four groups:

Childhood sweethearts who go on to a happy marriage must have quite smooth sailing compared with the waves of disappointment some people seem to ride. They certainly may have a long life together, one into which no one else has intruded, not even for a moment.

This "one and only" system also has its serious limitations. It limits one's circle of friends from which to choose a personality ideally matched to one's own. It does not provide for comparison of one friend with another. If a girl falls for a boy in the teens, would it not be better for her to go out with several boys, at least for a time? If she really loves number one, she should be all the more sure and confident after having compared him with the others.

In the early years of dating, dates are usually infrequent and this method is good experience. Later on, in college or elsewhere, fellows and girls who go out with many different acquaintances, once or twice each, run into some serious limitations, according to their own confessions. A girl can't really get to know fellows by just having a superficial acquaintance with a large number of them. Nor can a boy know girls in this way. They become fickle and shallow in their relations with the opposite sex if they continually skip from one to another in their dating.

It seems natural for a boy to be attracted by one girl at a time. Then too, we are creatures of habit. Having once mustered the courage to ask a girl out or to go with a boy, and having lived through the first date successfully, why not repeat the experience? It becomes convenient to go out with the same person repeatedly. One knows what is expected and what to expect. One can be a little more free and less formal.

On the negative side, this method has serious limitations. To go steady with a boyfriend takes a girl "out of circulation" and robs her of the rich experience of knowing several fellows well and of being known by them. Should the relationship break up, as it often does, it takes a girl a little while to get back into a circle of other friends who wish to step her out. Going steady with one person does not allow for comparison of that person with other boys at the same time and on equal basis. Finally, whenever a couple go together all the time, they naturally become involved; they become more serious. Often they fall into this state of seriousness quite unaware and unprepared. This bears illustration.

A boy and girl went with each other practically steady the last two years of high school. Their interest in and affection for each other grew gradually and steadily. They really enjoyed one another's company. The girl, with good reason to do so, began thinking seriously of the future. The boy found it out and broke off the association abruptly. Why? Not because anything had given him reason to change his opinion of her, but because he was not prepared to think of marriage. He had four or five years of schooling, a mission, and the possibility of military training ahead of him. He had no money and no assurance of success vocationally as yet. He was simply unprepared for the seriousness of the situation in which he found himself. His girlfriend was deeply hurt—and with good reason, for she was thinking one jump ahead of her boyfriend.

The only limitation ever presented by college students is that they don't have time and money to divide their association between two or among three girls. This objection is of doubtful merit and is offset by many favorable factors.

This method combines all the values of the other three methods and avoids their limitations. You have an opportunity to know people well as in (1) and (3). Your acquaintance is broad as in (2). On the other hand your acquaintance is not superficial and shallow as in (2), nor does it limit your choice and comparative values as in (1) and (3). You do not get involved, if you are sincere, so long as you have two or three boyfriends in the same season.

In short, the a, b, c system gives you many good friends whom you can come to know well and compare with one another at the same time. You will not become involved in a serious situation before you wish to and get caught in a trap, as it were. It will be easier for you to keep your association with fellows on a creative basis, to keep out of a rut of affection, if you have two or three good friends. You will gain a knowledge of "boy nature," and become a better judge of character and personality than you could be in the other three systems. You will have had a rich experience and background of friendship, out of which an intelligent and happy courtship can emerge and grow into a happy and successful marriage with the friend of your choice.

"From Friendship to Marriage"

As long ago as 1711, Joseph Addison wrote, "Those marriages generally abound most with love and constancy that are preceded by a long courtship." To which we might add, by a courtship which reveals character and personality most intelligently. There is something exciting, romantic, adventurous, and movie-like about falling in love with a fellow in a dazzling courtship of a few weeks' or months' time. All studies show that there is danger in this approach to marriage, which increases the divorce rate and the unhappiness record of marriages.

The ideal is to go from friendship to marriage, not from marriage to friendship. The difference may be illustrated below. (A) shows how top-heavy a marriage may be if it has no basis in friendship; (B) shows how well grounded and firm, like an Egyptian pyramid, a marriage is that has its basis in friendship—ideally in the a, b, c system.

The steps between friendship and marriage should not be too abrupt. Let the line below represent a continuation of the a, b, c system, (4) above.

A girl has already become well acquainted with a number of fine boy friends, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, and h. Out of this rich background she has learned to evaluate boys and to know what she wants. Boy (e) emerges as the choice of her mind and heart. She is already well acquainted with him before she goes steady. After going fairly steady, a private understanding is reached. The two become adjusted to the idea of a partnership without complicating it with public opinion. A pin or an engagement ring should not ordinarily be accepted until marriage is in sight a few months away. Announcement of the engagement is usually made four to six weeks before the marriage.

A girl who believes in and seeks the LDS ideal of an eternal marriage cannot go far wrong if she will realize that love is a part of life as a whole, that she must marry a fine fellow of good character and wholesome personality, and that to find such a person she ought to have years of creative and rich friendship with girls and boys through which she can learn to know human nature and "boy nature." Out of this rich, intelligent, and interesting background, she can then select a boy with whom she can realize the highest purposes of marriage.

Pray Over Your Choice

When you find yourself someday thinking and talking seriously about a fellow, and before you make any final promises, go to your Father in heaven in prayer and ask him to help you make a decision. Marriage is the most important step a girl who marries takes in life. Why pray about anything if not about marriage? Pray, and do not marry without a feeling of assurance inspired from on high.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Committee Study House parties Under criticism Dr. Bennion delivered this address at the baccalaureate services of the University of Utah, June 3, 1956.
