Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

VII

LEARNING HOW TO LOVE

Personality-Revealing Associations

I

II

lectures, concerts, shows

III

IV

l. Canyon outings

V

Seeing each other:

26

"But the Greatest of These . . . "

At the risk of being commonplace, I have chosen to speak with you tonight on an old theme. My justification is twofold: It is among the most [^1] important things in life, and it still goes largely unheeded.

Some nineteen hundred years ago Paul established a community of Christian believers in the seaport city of Corinth. After teaching them for about eighteen months, he continued on his way, leaving his Corinthian saints to develop their religious life without his guidance. And what a travesty of religion they made in his absence. Word came to Paul that one of their chief concerns lay in who among them possessed the greatest spiritual gifts. Paul was moved by this circumstance to write about what is important in religion:

"Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not [love], I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I can move mountains, and have not [love], I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not [love], it profiteth me nothing." (1 Corinthians 13:1-3.)

Paul's meaning is clear. He gave to morality, specifically love, a supreme place in the religious life. Without it everything else—faith, theology, ecstatic gifts, sacraments, authority, offerings, church activities—are as "sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal" and profit nothing.

This point of view did not originate with Paul, though he did give it eloquent expression. Jesus had said that everything in the Jewish canon of scripture—the Law and the Prophets—depends on the love of God and love of neighbor. Centuries before him a group of Hebrew prophets, especially Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, and Jeremiah, had utterly rejected the formal "religious" worship of ancient Israel because the people, in daily life, practiced neither justice nor mercy.

The words of Amos must have felt like the sting of a bee as he cried, in the name of Jehovah, "I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them. . . . Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let judgment [justice] run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream." (Amos 5:21-24.)

Even more impressive is Micah's characterization of the relative importance of things in religion: "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:6-8; emphasis added.)

In our Judeo-Christian tradition, a religion without love is a vain and futile thing. Before we seek to appraise the thinking of Paul, Amos, or Micah, let us reflect a moment on the meaning of love. As a word, written in a sacred book, it is only a symbol of reality. All words are but symbols of feelings, ideas, and things, as you well know. Let us try to suggest the reality which the word love symbolizes.

The Meaning of Love

Some of you graduates are being married this week. Paul was not talking about the romantic feeling which you have for one another. As a matter of fact, he seems to have had mixed feelings on the subject of love in marriage. Brotherly love is not the kind of emotion one feels for his girlfriend on a moonlight night. If he does have brotherly love for her on such an occasion, it is not inspired by the moon. Romantic feeling, taken by itself, is far too selfish and possessive, and at times fickle, to be identical with brotherly love. Nor is love of neighbor synonymous with friendship, though it usually is a rich ingredient thereof. The unique essence of friendship lies in its mutuality, in the sheer delight two people have in each other because of the richness of their common interests and values. Friendship also includes admiration, which need play no role in brotherly love.

Brotherly love has some essential and distinctive features. (1) It is utterly selfless, consisting of a warm, outgoing, unselfish desire for the welfare and happiness of another person. In Paul's language, love "envieth not, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own." Hence, in love of neighbor there is no thought of reciprocation, no calculating for a reward either here or in heaven, but simply the spontaneous, whole-souled interest in the other person's good. (2) It follows that brotherly love is not something that has to be earned or merited on good behavior by the recipient. I heard a man say once, "I will not forgive that man his wrong until he gets down on his knees and pays me double for all my losses because of him." If forgiveness must be earned or doubly earned, the word give should be removed from the center of it. Forgiveness is an expression of love, and love is a gift. If it were earned, it would have to be called justice, reciprocity, or recompense. (3) Since love is both unselfish and unmerited, it is impartial. A real test of Christian love lies in its impartiality. This Jesus well knew when he told his disciples to love their enemies that they might be children of their Father in heaven: "for he maketh his sun to shine on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust." (Matthew 5:45.)

Brotherly love impels us, with equal desire, to seek the good of sinner and saint, of the stranger as well as of our own kin, of Jew and Gentile, of white and colored, of the common man and those in places of honor. Therefore, love knows no geographical boundaries, no racial barriers, no cultural prejudices, for it recognizes the intrinsic worth of every human being.

Several reasons should inspire in us this impartial feeling of good will toward men. Many of us believe in the Fatherhood of God and that he "hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth." (Acts 17:26.) Others may agree with Bertrand Russell, the distinguished British philosopher, who bids us "not weigh in grudging scales [people's] merits and de-merits, but let us think only of their need," because we face a common doom and need one another's faith and courage.

I believe there is an even better reason than either of these to love people impartially. It is this: Love needs no motivation, no justification, no reason. By its very nature, love fills one with good will toward all men. As Shakespeare said of mercy, one of love's offspring, "The quality of mercy is not strain'd; / It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath." (The Merchant of Venice, Act IV, scene 1.)

There is one more characteristic of love which I wish to mention this evening. Love impels one to action. It is doing, giving, helping, serving. And love is fruitful, "like a tree with blossoms in the spring," in the words of Romain Rolland. "Love aims to satisfy human needs. It looks beyond differences of race, class, capacity, talent and appearance, and sees men in their likeness one with another; for they are all subject to pain, suffering and death; and all hunger for food, water, shelter, companionship, freedom, creative self-expression, and self-esteem."

Knowledge Without Love

Paul said that without this kind of love, which we have tried to characterize briefly, other things profit nothing. Not only is the religious life without love a "tinkling cymbal," but this is true also of the educated life. I would go further and maintain that education, unaccompanied by love of men, is worse than nothing. My reason for making such an assertion is this: Among other things on earth, people are supreme. (You will readily recognize my bias here, since I am one. Since you are also, I hope you will agree.) And I believe that one human is as precious as another. I believe that we should strive above everything else to help people realize their basic and common needs.

Knowledge is a power which can be used for good or ill. A psychologist may employ his skill to help a person come back to reality and to find happiness in it; or he may use his skill to sell people something they can't afford to buy and don't need, or to hate the Jews, or to love war. The educated man without love is a constant threat to his fellowmen. He is brother to dictators, authoritarians, and the unscrupulous. Those who live for selfish interests, without concern for human values, are aptly described by an ancient Taoist writer: "Those who make wealth their all in all cannot bear loss of money. Those who make distinction their all in all cannot bear loss of fame. Those who affect power will not place authority in the hands of others. Anxious while holding, distressed if losing, yet never taking warning from the past and seeing the folly of their pursuit—such men are the accursed of God." (Ballou, Bible of the World, p. 532.)

And, may I add, a curse to people.

An educated life without love is not only a curse to others, but is deficient in itself. Through the mind alone, to quote Paul, "we know in part," and "see through a glass darkly." Rationally we cannot know life fully or intimately. Our intellectual view is partial, restricted, complex, and leaves us quite dissatisfied. One who is guided by reason alone is likely to come to cynicism and despair. The way of reason needs to be supplemented by a rich life of feeling. For it is in affective states, such as aesthetic experience, worship, and love, that we enjoy moments of complete self-fulfillment, moments which are wholly meaningful in and of themselves.

Love Without Knowledge

If knowledge without love is inadequate and even harmful, the opposite is also true. Love without knowledge and wisdom may bring futile and injurious results. We have no desire to disparage either reason or love. Together they give promise of a perfect marriage. Either alone is like a marriage without a mate. I would like to suggest a few reasons why love needs the guidance of knowledge.

Life is more than subjective, more than feeling. We live in a world of objective reality wherein we must cope with the forces of nature and of human nature. The history of mankind has taught us that a satisfactory relationship to much of this world of reality is best established through the scientific method—by methodical, rational, controlled experimentation and observation. The germ theory of disease, wonder drugs, the principle of gravitation, a knowledge of the essential elements of soil fertility have come to us not through prophet or poet, but through science.

Suppose I had a loving heart. Even so, none of you who know me would come to me to have your appendix removed, your teeth filled, your house built or decorated, or your auto repaired. If you should, even love would diminish in the world.

Not only do surgical operations deal with reality, but every human problem is equally grounded in tangible reality. Without knowledge we can blunder in economic, social, political, and other human problems even as I would in surgery.

Love and Knowledge

Love, allied with knowledge, is our need. When these two work together, "all is well, all is well." This is illustrated in the life of that loving genius of our time, Albert Schweitzer. While but a youth, he recognized the tragedy of life. Instead of succumbing to despair, he assumed an obligation to give back to life its precious gifts to him. Reverence for life became his all-consuming passion. To heal men's souls, he first became an organist, an interpreter of Bach. This was not enough, so he became a minister, serving the poor of Paris. Still sensing his lack to fulfill men's needs, he returned to his alma mater, the University of Strasbourg, and studied medicine. Upon graduation, he took with him his wife—a nurse trained in the treatment of tropical illnesses—and went to the heart of Africa to serve "the least of Christ's brethren." The brilliant mind, loving heart, and skilled hands of Albert Schweitzer have been healing men's bodies and souls for over forty years. We are not Albert Schweitzers, but we have knowledge and two hands, and we can increase in love. And each of us in his own way can be inspired of love and guided by knowledge.

May I conclude these reflections by suggesting to you a few areas and situations which are crying to us for the application of both love and knowledge.

Opportunities for "Intelligent" Love

A generation or two ago marriages were held together in good measure by social forces such as the economic dependency of women, the interdependency of husband and wife, and the disgrace of divorce. Today these social forces exert diminished control. Marriages succeed in America if they satisfy the personal desires for happiness of husband and wife. . . . If marriage is to be the source of such completely satisfying personal values, then certainly those who enter therein must bring to it the fine qualities of friendship and brotherly love, as well as romance.

The modern family has been robbed of many of its former functions—economic, recreational, cultural, educational, and religious. What is left to the family? The most important function of all: the satisfaction of the basic emotional and spiritual needs of its members. Only in the home can children be assured of love and self-respect born of self-discipline. And only parents with genuine love can satisfy these needs. Knowledge helps, and so does patience.

Our modern urban life has estranged man from man. Too often we know each other only as functions—as someone who delivers the paper, sells us the meat, or as kids who run across the flowerbeds. We need to take the time to visit with our neighbors, to guide our neighbors' children into rich experiences of friendship and learning, play and creativity. These things are of greater worth than the accumulation of goods "where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal." (Matthew 6:19.) Love dictates that we know each other as persons, not simply as names and functions.

Our community and social problems become increasingly complex. They cannot be resolved by love alone, nor by knowledge alone, nor by men individually. There is a need for men and women, inspired by a loving concern for human values, to meet together and pool their wisdom and experience for the common good. To be sure, every man should take care of his own family and work in his own church. Let everyone retain his individual taste in clothing, literature, music, matrimony, and theology, and let him take pride in his own genealogy and heritage; but let him also be a citizen of the community and of the world.

It is a deeply rewarding and spiritual experience to meet around the table with associates from other disciplines and with men and women of Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, and a humanist faith, there to plan and work for some need common to all men. "No man is an island." (Donne.)

Nothing in the world is single; All things by a law divine In one another's being mingle:— Why not I with thine? —Percy Bysshe Shelley

The world is our stage.

All the problems of mankind are, in the last analysis, human problems, caused by human beings who are frustrated and confused in their search for self-fulfillment. They will not be solved by military strength, economic aid, or legislative statutes alone, though these are necessary along the way. Peace and happiness will come to the world when we learn to love our fellowmen and learn how to express that love in a manner that will be acceptable to them, consistent with their need for freedom, creativity, and self-respect. Ignorance and selfishness are our chief enemies; love allied with knowledge and wisdom, our chief hope.

The Ideal and the Real

When I was graduated from this university in 1928, we had a way of separating the ideal and the real. Earning a living was the real world, and love of men the ideal. We have come to believe differently. The ideal is the real. Love is not in the clouds, but is the deepest of human needs. As Dostoevski has one of his characters say, "Fathers and teachers, I ponder What is Hell? I maintain that it is the suffering of a being unable to love."

The individual's fate on earth has always been uncertain, as Job so beautifully attests: "Man that is born of woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not." (Job 14:1-2.)

But whether life be long or short, kind or unkind to us, we will not have spent it in vain nor without meaning and joy if we learn to love our neighbor as ourselves.

As you well know, the fate of the nation and of humanity has become quite as uncertain as the life of the individual. Here, too, our hope lies in love that is allied with knowledge.

We began with Paul; let us end with him: "And now abideth faith, hope, and [love], but the greatest of these is [love]."

God bless each of us to believe and practice love, I pray in the name of One who did, even Jesus Christ. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] In April 1958, Lowell Bennion gave this address at the priesthood session of the LDS general conference. It was subsequently printed in The Instructor (June 1958) as well as in the official Conference Report.
