Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

27

Toward a Happier Marriage

Since early childhood, in the Mormon church two ideals have been constantly placed before us: a good marriage and chastity. We have tonight heard beautiful, [^1] inspiring talks by President David O. McKay and President Joseph Fielding Smith on this same subject.

There is nothing that I would wish for young men, there is nothing I would ask for my own sons, more than that each of them might find happiness in a good marriage—the kind of happiness which their father has found with their mother—and for them to know the joy of having sons as fine as they are.

My young brethren, there is nothing on earth that can satisfy the whole man and make the struggle and the adventure of living so worthwhile as a good marriage. And chastity is so important because it is the foundation of personal happiness, of making a girl happy, and of a happy marriage.

We have the feeling, my brethren, that we are not succeeding too well in the Church today in regard to marriage and chastity. I do not mean to imply that we are not doing pretty well and that we do not have wonderful marriages and virtuous, clean young people in the Church. But I am told that the divorce rate in Utah a year or two ago was higher than the national average.

I know from personal consultation the tragedy that comes into the lives of boys and girls when they break down their moral standards before marriage. I have the deepest sympathy for people who fail in marriage and who fail to live up to this great ideal of chastity. I believe in repentance and forgiveness, but I would like to try to say in a practical way something on the positive side to bring about happier marriages and finer moral living.

What is causing so much divorce and the breaking down of our moral standards? This is a complex subject; let me suggest only one possible explanation of it.

One day a girl came into my office—a fine Latter-day Saint girl—with tear-filled eyes.

I said, "What's the trouble?"

She replied, "I want to get married."

I said, "That's a worthy goal."

"But," she continued, "my father doesn't want me to marry the boy I'm in love with."

"Why not?"

"Father says he is spineless. My mother doesn't want me to marry him either."

"Why not?"

"She says that after the marriage, he will not be as polite and courteous as he is now."

I said, "What do you think of this boy? Is he spineless? Will he be courteous to you after marriage?"

"I don't know," she replied. "But I love him, and isn't that all that matters?"

I said to her, "It's all that matters, if you have the right kind of love; but the kind of love that people know in a typical courtship in our society is not big enough for marriage."

It is so common for very young boys and girls to become interested in each other; to date repeatedly, steadily, and frequently; to exchange affection increasingly; and then, after a period of what I would like to call "romanticized recreation," they get married and expect happiness.

Let me tell the unmarried that marriage is more than romanticized recreation. Marriage is more than dates and affection. True, romantic love is part of marriage, a very beautiful part. But in addition, marriage is a business and financial partnership. Moreover, marriage is especially a human relationship—an everyday and all-day and continuous companionship between husband and wife. This is one of the beautiful aspects of it. It is also the realistic part.

The big thing in marriage is to know how to live together, to understand each other, to be congenial and cooperative. Then, after the children come, the very difficult and interesting task is to have a congenial relationship between parent and child, and in the family as a whole.

Recreation and romance alone are not the right kinds of relationships to prepare people for a business partnership and for the human relationships which we find in marriage and family life. I was told that of boys and girls who were married while in one high school in this valley, within one year 50 percent of them were divorced. I cannot say that this is true for sure, but I can believe that it might be.

I would like to suggest to you unmarried young men, who, in this land of America, have all the freedom in the world, who have all the leisure, the money, automobiles, and opportunities to help you choose your companions for life, how to prepare for marriage.

In this wonderful period from about the age of twelve to whenever you are married—twenty-one, twenty-three, or twenty-five, or what age it might be—instead of plunging right into a courtship relationship in your young high school years and being so terribly concerned about the romantic aspect of life, why not think ahead and take a long view? Think in terms of preparing yourself for marriage.

I have three suggestions to make in this connection:

First of all, use these years to prepare yourself to be a good husband and father. Learn how to work, because after you are married, you must work to be happy. Learn a vocation which will satisfy your mind, your soul, and your creative urges. Learn how to live with other people: first in your own home and in your neighborhood. Learn to love to work in the Church—something you can do all the days of your life. Learn to read good books, to listen to beautiful music, to serve your neighbor. Build within yourself resources that will make of you a mature, manly adult by the time of your marriage.

And secondly, in your relations with girls during these wonderful years—these promising years—do not settle down to a steady relationship in your early teens, when you have had little experience in understanding yourself and girls. Rather, build friendships—many friendships. Do not take yourself quite so seriously in courtship in the early years. Make friends with several girls. Take out two or three over the same period of time. There you will have comparative value. You will get to understand girls and to know them as friends. You will understand your relationship to them and learn how to communicate with them. You will lay the foundations of fine human relations with the opposite sex. Associate on a group basis a great deal.

And third, brethren: After you have proved yourself to be a man, after you are ready to earn a living for your family in good measure, after you have much to offer to your prospective wife, then I suggest that you look around to find a girl who has much to offer to you and to your great purpose in building a good family life. Choose from among all the fine girls that you have known, or find another girl with whom you may build an enduring friendship. And go slowly with this girl, building a broad, deep friendship with her.

After you are friends; when you know that you can be business partners; when you know that you can enjoy each other's companionship; when you know you have common ideals, purposes, and desires for life, and that you can help each other to fulfill your very beings, then let romantic interest develop gradually, may I say, and find its fulfillment after marriage. I know that if a young man will build his marriage on the foundation of friendships first, culminating in a single friendship with a wonderful girl, and will let romance come last, his marriage will be as solid as a pyramid. People who become romantic first and then get married will have to wait until after the wedding to see if they can be friends. Some of them find they cannot be friends.

Every year, except when we have a bad frost, I go out to my little peach orchard around the first of September, and there I pick beautiful tree-ripened peaches—peaches with that golden color which drop into your hand with a slight turn of the peach. The youngest boy in our family cannot wait until the first of September. He dashes out into the orchard the end of July, when the first red comes on the peach. Eagerly he picks the peach and bites into it. Finding it hard and bitter, he throws it, and often a peck of other green peaches, on the ground. What is the difference between his approach and mine? In February I prune the trees. In May I start to thin the peaches, to cultivate the soil, and to irrigate once a week in the night. With great love and affection, I watch the peaches grow and I wait, with self-control, until the peach is ripe. My little boy cannot wait.

So it is with love, my young friends. Those who will build friendship, who will build Latter-day Saint ideals of character into their own lives and prepare themselves for marriage, and who will wait and practice self-control until they are mature and until they earn the right to a deep love, will know what real love is—the kind of love that is part of life—the fruit of a good life together. Those who are interested only in the taste and the flavor, and who rush into a romantic relationship, often taste a bitter fruit.

Now, my dear brethren—you who are fathers, teachers, leaders, and bishops—our young people live in an age of great temptation. They need help and guidance. I would like to make five specific, concrete suggestions on how we can help them to court and prepare for marriage more wisely.

The first one is this: I think we should discourage and not promote too early dating between the sexes. The other night a mother came to me and said that her eleven-year-old daughter, who is in the sixth grade, insists upon using rouge and cosmetics and wants a date every week with a boy in the same class.

The other Saturday I came home and found our twelve-year-old son preparing to go on a date with an eleven-year-old neighbor girl to a private dancing party two blocks away, at a home in which we were not acquainted. I took the liberty of breaking up the date with as much grace as I could.

Brethren, if our young men must wait until they are twenty, twenty-three, twenty-five, or even twenty-nine, until they are married, why should we rush this boy-girl dating relationship? Why should we encourage it too much through the schools and through our Church groups? I would say let us be careful.

Secondly: You cannot just dam off human nature, any more than you dam off water. If you dam off water, it will break out in another place. If you dam off human nature, it too will break out in some unwholesome way. So, while we are discouraging early dating, I think we must substitute something in its place. My second thought, then, is this: Make life meaningful and rich for the boy as a boy, and for the girl as a girl, during these early teen years; in fact, all through adolescence.

If a boy can find himself through work, through gaining skill, through learning, through fulfilling responsibility, and can get basic satisfactions within himself during these years, he will not be overly dependent upon his relationships with girls. He will not hunger for a steady relationship nor for a deep affectional relationship with a girl to prove his own worth or to find security within himself or self-esteem.

Can we make priesthood work so interesting in itself for our young men that it will satisfy their souls? Boys must have satisfaction!

Can we train a girl to develop her talent, her music, her household skills, even to have experiences in service, in worship, in responsibilities, so that she is not looking at a boy all the time—maybe only half of the time?

Just think of all the stimulation which comes to them to be romantic and to have romantic interests, from movies, advertising, and from their own biological natures. Let us make activities for boys meaningful to boys and activities for girls meaningful and rewarding to girls. Let their social activity be just part of their lives during these adolescent years.

The third suggestion I have to make is this: You bishops, teachers, and leaders do not know how much fathers need you. An adolescent boy is seeking to become an adult and to be independent, and he is seeking the companionship of those his own age. Many a wonderful boy, unconsciously, has to almost rebel against his father during these middle teens in order to feel himself a man and to be independent. But this boy still needs friendship and companionship of men, of adults. He does not have the same feelings of rebellion toward you men that he would feel, perhaps unconsciously, toward his father. Let me illustrate.

The other night, at a wedding reception, a lovely girl of fine parents in our community was the bride, married in the temple. As her Mutual Improvement Association teacher came through the line, the bride threw her arms around her teacher and said, "Oh, thank you for helping me to have this experience today. You did so much for me." Here is a girl with a wonderful mother, but she needed also the help of this extra person to keep her ideals and goals high; to give her strength during these critical years.

I plead with you, brethren, and with myself, that we not think of our young men in terms of numbers or statistics, that we do not think of our work in terms of activities or even in terms of groups; but that we think of these young men individually and think only of the nearness that we have to them, of our understanding and our love for them. If we can stay close to them, then we can talk to them about these personal things.

My fourth suggestion concerns itself with this problem of dancing all evening with the same girl and of going steady so young. Sometimes we can use young people to help us help other young people. Let me give an illustration.

Down at the institute of religion in Tucson, Arizona, twenty years ago, we had forty boys and forty-five girls who came to Mutual. The boys were prone to dance after Mutual with the same girls each night. Four or five girls sat on the sidelines.

One day I said to a returned missionary, who was professing his great faith in the gospel of Jesus Christ, "Do you love your fellowmen?"

He said, "I do."

"Does that include your fellow sisters too?"

He said, "Of course."

I said, "I doubt that. Every Tuesday night you find a little girl here and dance with her for a half hour. You are not concerned with what other girls are doing. Why don't you find another returned missionary and you two see to it that every girl here has at least two dances every Tuesday night?"

He said, "I will. I had never thought of applying the gospel to my social life before."

Well, these two young men soon had those girls happy and everybody dancing. It worked beautifully.

I believe you should speak to a group of the finest, most popular young leaders of your wards, of your MIA groups, about this problem of dancing all night with the same girl. They do not like to do it. They do it because it is the socially acceptable thing to do. They are afraid, as individuals, to break down the custom. If you put the problem to them, brethren, and suggest that a few of them trade partners and then remind them of it once a month and watch it, I believe it would work.

I think we need to use our imaginations and have meaningful associations between our young men and young women other than dancing. Try a "work party" sometime where you have M Men and Gleaners, broken into committees, helping the widows of the ward—serving with their hands and then coming together afterward for an old-fashioned supper, for singing, for prayer. It gives young people a chance to know each other in a marriage-like way and tends to break up narrow romantic relationships among them.

My last thought is this: Try an indirect approach. A man does not overcome the habit of drinking by talking about drinking or thinking about drinking. A person does not avoid unchastity by fighting himself. There is only one way to rise above our selfish, narrow interests. That is the way that has been pointed out to us repeatedly by the General Authorities.

I heard Elder Harold B. Lee say, ten years ago and again at our seminary convention two months ago, "I don't care much what you teachers do, if you will only create a love for God in the hearts of these young people you teach." I believe that this is very sound advice. If we could teach a boy to love God, really love God with all his heart, other things would fall into their places. If we could teach a boy to be a true disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ, other things would fall in their proper places. If we could just teach a boy to have respect for every other human being, these courtship problems would fall into their proper places. If we could teach a boy to have self-respect, his behavior would be good and ideal.

A Presbyterian boy, a medical student, said to me in a personal conversation, "Some of the Mormon boys at the dorm smoke and drink. They are good fellows, too." Then he said, "I don't smoke and drink."

I said, "Why not?'

He said, "I used to be tempted, but now I have found a kind of spiritual feeling for life that is based on my faith in God. And smoking and drinking just don't seem to fit into that feeling which I have."

Can we, fellow workers, do as well by our young people?

My young brethren, I pray with all my heart that you will use wisdom in your youth and lay the foundations for happiness in marriage by building friendships, by being chaste.

We older men—we teachers and leaders—God help us to help them to this end, I pray in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Youth need love. Each needs to be accepted just as he is—not for what he can become or for what he ought to be, but for what he is now. Somehow, he must feel his own goodness and strength before he can become good and strong. Young people need friends, wholesome friends. They need to belong to a group of peers who like them for what they are. They need to be active participants in such a group, feeling and doing things together. It is not enough to be simply in the same seminary, Explorer, or Sunday School class with others. They must have rich and meaningful social, spiritual, play, and work experiences in common, regularly and repeatedly. This essay was published in the April 1962 issue of the Instructor.
