Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

28

"Thou Shalt Love . . . Thyself"

Ten young people were called up before their stake M Men-Gleaner class, and each was asked to name one thing in his or her character or personality [^1] which needed to be eliminated or improved. With little hesitation they began to report their habits of procrastination, degree of envy, lack of patience, withdrawal in social situations, lack of self-confidence, quickness of temper, or sharpness of tongue.

The same group was then asked to name one thing in their personality of which they were proud, one quality in which they rejoiced. They immediately became quite flustered and rather apologetic. It took time and prodding to get them to think of their good qualities.

This experiment has been repeated with a number of groups and with much the same reaction. People are conscious of their limitations. They live with their failures and sins but seldom consider their strengths and their virtues. Recently in another MIA meeting several boys and girls were asked: "Each of you give one reason why you are glad to be a human being." One replied: "The idea has never occurred to me."

Again it took something equivalent to a block and tackle to draw from these young people the reasons they had for rejoicing over their capacities for life; their capacities of mind, heart, hands, senses, and soul—of a human being.

Anyone who counsels with young people knows how many there are who reject themselves, who feel they are little better than the dust of the earth, who hang their heads low. Self-rejection seems to be at the core of so many people's troubles, either as the cause or the concomitant.

Even the loud, boisterous, and rude braggart or show-off, who appears to be an egotist of the first order, is often found, on closer acquaintance, to be a person who feels quite as inferior as the shy person who withdraws into his corner. This phenomenon is so common that it leads one to believe there are no egotists in this world, but only people who appear to be.

Students of human nature believe self-acceptance or a feeling of one's own worth to be one of the most basic psychological or spiritual needs of every human being. The other need, which has priority, is the need to belong to others, to be wanted and loved. These two needs seem to be inseparably linked in the life of each individual. Man, conscious of himself and others, must feel accepted by them and by himself to enjoy life. One is quite as important as the other.

There is no escape from oneself. One can ignore God and refrain from speaking to fellowmen; but who can escape himself except the mentally ill person who withdraws from reality and lives in a world of unreality—the schizophrenic. One can and does, of course, greatly distort one's self-image, but live with this self-image, whatever it be, he must.

Jesus, with his profound insight into human nature, indicates that he understood the worth of every human being in the sight of God and also the need for men to feel one another's worth and their own as well. He had a wonderful way of drawing both publicans and sinners to him. They were searching for their own worth and redemption from guilt and rejection, and Christ knew how to help them recover their self-respect. Many heard him say, and doubtless believed his words, "Go thy way and sin no more," or "Thy sins be forgiven thee; thy faith hath made thee whole."

Self-acceptance is not only a joy in itself and a prerequisite to the spiritual health of the individual, but it is also a prerequisite to living other gospel principles of great worth. A person, for example, who hates himself is not free to love his neighbor. He is afraid to give of himself and will likely use his neighbor and his faults to build up his own ego. And since he feels that he cannot elevate himself, he is likely to seek to bring his neighbor down to his own level through criticism and gossip. Starved egos are inclined to feed on others as parasites, or cling to them as leeches. This they do quite innocently and unconsciously.

If one cannot accept himself, he is self-involved. This precludes the maturity of meekness and the open, inquisitive, teachable attitude of humility. A person so concerned with himself has great difficulty in being objective, in concentrating on his studies, in pursuing a knowledge of the reality about him.

Similarly and tragically, the person without self-love often feels estranged from God. How can he be beloved of God, he reasons, when he hates himself? And even though it can be explained to him that God's love is constant, impartial, and unmerited, this he cannot feel.

In the Savior's memorable summary of the Law, he spoke of two commandments, the one like unto the other—love of God and love of neighbor. He also recognized a third person to love when he repeated the Mosaic admonition, "love thy neighbour as thyself." Just what his thinking was toward love of self, he did not, to our knowledge, elucidate. However, he obviously either took it for granted or affirmed it when he told us to love one another as ourselves.

With the need and desire for self-acceptance so great, it is tragic indeed that so many people depreciate themselves. One may well ask, why? Human nature is extremely complex and little understood, and the suggestions which follow are tentative, even though written with conviction.

Man is moral by nature. He not only acts but also continually evaluates his behavior in terms of good and bad. Man is a dreamer, an idealist, and sometimes is discontent with what he has and is. He is inclined to measure himself by that which he would like to be. As an idealist, he always falls short of the ideal. Failure, sin, and accompanying guilt haunt his introspective path as a tiger stalks its prey. Heavy is the burden of guilt which such men carry.

A second reason for self-rejection may be the inability of many people in our complex age to find adequate and meaningful ways to express themselves. Life is meaningful to the extent that it is purposeful. If people cannot define and pursue goals which satisfy their human needs and aspirations, their lives remain unfulfilled. They may feel useless to themselves and, to that degree, worthless.

Third, some people confuse humility with self-depreciation. They apologize, feel themselves unworthy, incapable, and "meek" in order to give evidence to themselves that they are religious. The Savior's remarks that the last in his kingdom shall be first and the least shall be greatest are interpreted by some to mean that one must reject himself to be acceptable to God. This point of view certainly is a distortion of the meaning of meekness and humility. Meekness means self-control at its highest, a freedom from feelings of self-pity, self-concern, and futility. Humility includes self-acceptance so that one is free to learn and to relate oneself to fellowmen and Deity. True humility and meekness are not incompatible with a feeling of one's own worth but are, in part, the fruits of such a feeling.

So great is the need to feel one's worth that we grasp, often unconsciously, at every possible means of attaining it. One common way is the acquisition of material possessions far beyond physical needs. Women fill their closets with "changeable suits of apparel." Why? Not primarily to keep warm or comfortable but to give their egos a lift through the eyes of others. Men buy new and big cars. Why? Not for safety and comfort alone, but also to "be seen of men." Men and women together build homes far beyond the necessities of shelter and comfort. Why? May it not be because it is so easy to identify themselves with that which is tangible and visible? May it not also be that our very lust for luxuries bears witness of our inner poverty of soul?

A quick, momentary, and illusory way of lifting one's self-image is to depreciate others, especially those whom we envy and in whom we recognize some superior quality or position. Much gossip and criticism of other persons has its root in our desire to pull people down to our level. It is easier to pull down another person than to build up oneself, and so, in our desperate need to feel our own worth, we are prone to do this. Likewise, a person who cannot see or face his own limitations is quick to shift the cause of his deficiency from himself to those with whom he associates. The failing student may blame his failure on his teachers, "none of whom are competent." The lost son blames his mother.

Authoritarianism, this habit of exercising "unrighteous dominion," so beautifully described in D&C 121:34-46, has part of its foundation in the conscious feeling of insufficiency on the part of the possessor of a little authority. It is a characteristic of small persons who do not feel comfortable nor secure in their positions. To convince themselves of their worth, they must strut, give orders, and harass their fellowmen. By contrast, a person who feels creative within himself, who loves his fellowmen, who is genuinely humble, has no need to hurt others or to ride rough-shod over his subordinates or colleagues.

Thus far we have observed how common it is for people to reject themselves, and yet how great is the need to feel their own worth as human beings. We noted that man, as a child of God and disciple of Christ, has every reason to accept himself, but this he seldom does. Burdened with failure, sin, and their accompanying despair and guilt, he rejects himself. But, finding it impossible to live in complete self-rejection, he grasps at every straw to build up his self-image. He accumulates goods to "be seen of men"; he gossips and debunks others; he imitates Hitler and Napoleon—all to little or no permanent avail.

How then, may we ask, can a person build his feeling of worth on solid foundations? And how can we, as Church workers, teachers, and leaders, help youth to find their own worth so that they will not destroy themselves in such vain attempts to act important? Drinking, smoking, carousing, reckless driving, and stealing are essentially futile efforts on the part of youth to make themselves feel important.

Man is more than animal. His self is not fully realized merely through these procedures. He must be engaged in distinctly human endeavors. He has a mind which craves use and satisfaction. His capacity for emotional life is great. He needs to love and be loved. Man is an idealist; his eyes look to the stars. He is a dreamer; he beholds the moon. He has a memory, imagination, and the power of reason.

He who would know his own worth must live a distinctly human life—he must think, serve, imagine, belong, create, laugh, and weep. What does this mean to the leader of youth who would help them find themselves? Let us suggest some needs of youth which must be fulfilled if they are to know their own worth.

Youth need not to be pampered and coddled and protected from the struggles of life as much as they need hardship and big tasks to accomplish. A boy is eagerly and quite naturally trying to be an adult. He has qualities of body, mind, and soul which need fulfillment. They make up the self he is seeking to find.

Repentance is not easily achieved. Much thought should be given to ways of helping youth to repent. The following suggestions may help: We should not try to minimize the evil of their sin and attempt to make it unimportant. On the other hand, we should distinguish between the sinner and the sin, letting the youth know that we respect and accept him even if he has done wrong. This we cannot do unless we truly love him. Young people usually measure up to our expectations of them, so we should put faith and trust in them. When we preach repentance, we should also speak of forgiveness and let people know that these two principles go hand-in-hand. And finally, we must help a boy who is dejected in spirit by leading him to life's genuine satisfactions—opportunities to be creative, to serve, to succeed, and to find fellowship with his peers.

Somehow, leaders of youth must restore individuality to life, helping each young person rejoice in his own uniqueness. Each young person needs to learn to think his own thoughts, to create with his own hands, and to sense his own sonship of God. Leaders must help a youth to help himself, to know himself, to rejoice in himself.

A boy who respects his body will not destroy it with alcohol, tobacco, and lust. A boy who respects his mind will not dissipate it in idleness or ugliness. A boy who respects his Father in heaven will not profane His holy name.

Somehow, we must help every youth find his own worth as a human being and a beloved child of God. When he finds it, he will find it much easier to do that which becomes a human being and a child of God.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This unpublished essay, written in the early 1970s, focuses on racial prejudice, which Lowell Bennion saw as his own and others' chief failing, along with neglect of the poor.
