Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

29

Overcoming Prejudice

A dark-skinned girl from India enrolled in a college in America and was given a room to share in a dormitory. When two roommates, previously assigned [^1] to the same room, returned Sunday evening, they refused to stay and went to a hotel.

The next day when the Indian girl took a seat near the front of the class, two other students stood up and walked to the rear of the classroom. Such were her initial experiences in America.

A year before, I had sat in the stadium watching a football squad practice. A man from downtown, sitting behind me, said to his neighbor, "I wouldn't mind seeing one or two 'niggers' on the team, but I don't care to see so damn many of them."

These college incidents occurred nearly a decade ago. Things have since changed on campuses where, I believe, there is less racial prejudice than in any other community in the land. But prejudice does persist. Eighteen months ago, a bright, handsome, Ph.D. research professor of chemistry came to our home before returning to India. He was courteous, gentle, and a gracious guest. During the evening, when asked to give his impressions of America, he said he loved the friendliness and hospitality of our people and the wide open spaces which symbolized freedom and largeness of spirit. I asked him if there was anything he disliked. With hesitancy he said, "The only thing I don't like is that color seems to make a difference. I do not feel fully accepted because I am black."

A Confession

Let me make a confession. I grew up with considerable prejudice toward people of other races and countries. I recall neither malice nor hatred, but only insensitivity to their feelings. My childhood friends and I called Negroes "niggers" in rhymes and songs. We blackened our faces and mimicked them in minstrel shows. One of our favorite eating places was the Coon Chicken Inn, where we went completely insensitive to how the name and sign made black people feel. We also called Italians "Dagos"; Japanese "Japs"; and Germans "Huns."

Such attitudes entertained by a Caucasian Mormon youth half a century ago are understandable. Negroes had been slaves in America for over two centuries and since then had been observed primarily in their enforced menial tasks as shoe-shiners, waiters, maids, and porters. Western European powers with superior technological knowledge had conquered and exploited Asiatic and African peoples for generations. Oceans and deserts separated us from day-to-day relations with them and their cultures.

I suspect too that subtle psychological forces were at work. Everyone must think well of himself. This is not easy for youth or even immature adults who have not yet cultivated the kingdom of God within them. It is so much easier to feel superior by imputing inferiority to others. If one cannot grow tall, he can knock others down below his level to see over and beyond them. Nations as well as individuals are capable of this pseudo, illusory path to greatness. Under Naziism in Germany, some fanatical leaders used hatred of Jews to reinforce the notion of Aryan superiority. (Erich Voegelin describes this evil in his book Rasse und Staat.)

A New World

A church mission call took me to the Germans whom I had feared and hated during World War I. Once there I learned to love these hospitable, industrious, idealistic, honest, and interesting people who did so much to help me enjoy the simple pleasures of life, including sauerkraut, yoghurt, a dry roll with cheese, a walk in the woods, and such magnificent works as Beethoven symphonies, Wagnerian operas, Kant's thinking, Luther's Bible, and Goethe's poetry. I was able to love them in part because they first loved me as the bearer of good news.

Later, missionary work, study, and travel took us to Austria, Switzerland, Holland, Denmark, France, Italy, and the British Isles. In each country nature was beautiful, people friendly and interesting, culture unique and magnificent. I began to feel like a world citizen.

At the University of Strasbourg I became fast friends with a Hindu from Calcutta, who taught me unwittingly of the moral and spiritual implications of the Word of Wisdom. I shall never forget also a beautiful Negress from Morocco, who with her husband came to our modest apartment in Strasbourg. I can still see her smile through tears as she beheld our blue-eyed, red-haired, pink-cheeked daughter lying in a crib. (She had no children of her own.)

Since student days contacts with individuals of minority groups continue to instruct and inspire me. A Negro lady of fifty came to a Mormon Doctrine class at the Institute of Religion years ago. Learning that she was a daughter of a Protestant minister and devout in her own faith, I asked her why she had come to us. Her answer I shall never forget:

"In the summer I am a recreation worker on a playground in Ogden. White as well as black children come to me with questions and problems. Many are Latter-day Saints. I have come here to learn your teachings so my answers will be right and not hurt their faith in any way."

Gospel Fundamentals

One reason I did not recognize my racial prejudice in the days of my youth, I believe, was because my view of the Gospel must have been fragmented if not pulverized. I must not have seen it in one piece, in a framework of fundamental concepts, as I am beginning to now. Nor was I particularly interested in the implications of the Gospel for the social issues of the day. High walls separated religion from daily life except in some areas.

Today the fundamental principles of the Gospel have come to have relevance in my mind for every dimension of our existence, for social as well as personal morality. Consider, for example, only three, along with their implications for our regard for fellowmen. (1) God is the Father of the spirits of all men. Every human being is a child of God, in his image, and with the potentiality to grow in his likeness. And our Father loves his children impartially, no matter what their character or circumstance, because love is not merited necessarily but flows from a loving person. (2) If God is our Father, then all men are brothers, created by the same Being and born of the same earth and humanity. (3) Jesus Christ is the elder brother and the Redeemer of all men. He lived and died not just for Israel, and not just for white men, but equally so for black people and those of any and every hue of color. Christ's redeeming grace knows no restriction, no differentiation among men—except the unwillingness of some to receive it. Nephi bears witness to God's concern and impartiality in these meaningful words:

For behold, my beloved brethren, I say unto you that the Lord God worketh not in darkness.

He doeth not anything save it be for the benefit of the world; for he loveth the world even that he layeth down his own life that he may draw all men unto him. Wherefore, he commandeth none that they shall not partake of his salvation.

Behold, doth he cry unto any, saying: Depart from me?

Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but he saith: Come unto me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey, without money and without price.

Behold, hath he commanded any that they should depart out of the synagogues, or out of the houses of worship? Behold, I say unto you, Nay.

Hath he commanded any that they should not partake of his salvation? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but he hath given it free for all men; and he hath commanded his people that they should persuade all men to repentance.

Behold, hath the Lord commanded any that they should not partake of his goodness? Behold I say unto you, Nay; but all men are privileged the one like unto the other, and none are forbidden. . . . For none of these iniquities come of the Lord; for he doeth that which is good among the children of men; and he doeth nothing save it be plain unto the children of men; and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile. (2 Nephi 26:23-33.)

And Paul, living in that ancient melting pot of the world, the Mediterranean, knew no distinctions within the bonds of faith: "For ye are all children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized unto Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise." (Galatians 3:26-29.)

Differences Among Men

There are distinctions among men. Some are more intelligent, literate, smaller or larger than others; some are blue-eyed, others black-eyed. But I see no differences of quality among peoples and races which cannot be explained by diverse environments and cultural heritages. Chinese and Japanese are among our most brilliant students. I meet Negroes in the community and at conference tables who are superior in intellectual performance and committed to justice and integrity.

Even if peoples of other races were inferior to Caucasians—an assertion made which I do not believe is fact—my obligation would still be to treat them with full respect and do what is possible to help them realize their full potential. Christ admonished us to care for those in any kind of need, because "when ye have done it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." (Matthew 25.)

If we look beyond the visible differences among men—differences of language, education, color, size, and culture—we find so much that is common. No matter what the color of his skin, every man has the same need for food, clothing, and shelter. When President Eisenhower visited Korea, the story is told that he found lieutenants sleeping under one more blanket than privates. He asked, "Does it take any less to keep a private warm than it does a lieutenant?" Substitute Negro and Caucasian for Jew and Christian in Shakespeare's words [given to Shylock] and we have Eisenhower's idea expanded:

"I am a Jew. Hath not a Jew eyes? Hath not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions. Fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer a Christian is?" (Merchant of Venice, Act III, scene 1.)

No matter what color a man's skin may be, he has the same spiritual hungers as all men: He needs self-respect, the opportunity to be creative, to enjoy freedom, to belong to other human beings. He needs faith in the Gospel to see him through the vicissitudes of mortality and to qualify him for celestial life.

Minority groups among us need jobs, a chance to succeed in educational and vocational training, the freedom to live in decent housing of their choice. They need and deserve the same access to all of the bounties of life which we or anyone else enjoys. As Christians and Latter-day Saints it is our responsibility and privilege to help them gain these things.

We are not suggesting that affluent white people give away their wealth to the impoverished. This would not enhance the latter's self-respect. "Man does not live by bread alone." Our task is to find effective ways of helping our minority brothers to help themselves. They cannot lift themselves by their own bootstraps. We do not live in a land of equal opportunity for all because in today's world opportunity depends on resources, on health, money, education, and self-respect—which are not equally available in America or in the world.

One World

Today is not a half-century ago. No deserts nor oceans separate men and nations. Technology has obliterated time and space as barriers between us. Nor is there any Shangri-la or Zion to which men can flee from Babylon.

The reality of living in one world brings us face to face with Gospel principles. In former isolation, we could call them ideals in our international relations. We could try to love our neighbors in our homes, wards, and communities and remain coldly indifferent, if we wished, to men across the desert and overseas. That day is past. Either we apply the Gospel to our relations with all men or we perish both spiritually and perhaps mortally. Respect, love, and mercy for our neighbors are laws of life and cannot be ignored with impunity.

Latter-day Saints should be in the forefront of the battle for equal civil rights for all groups in society. Latter-day Saints should give freely of their time and means to help the disadvantaged in our society and in the world to gain sufficient food, clothing, shelter, medical care, and self-respect. There is no other way ultimately to peace and good will among men.

Indeed all other efforts in the name of the Gospel—missionary work, ordinances, payment of tithes and offerings, genealogical and temple work, prayers and singing—all are vain unless we remember "to do justly and love mercy." For this we have the witness of Micah, Amulek, Jesus, and our own hearts. (See Alma 34:28; Micah 6:6-8; Matthew 22:37-40.)

A Negro friend of mine once told me that he believed that God being the source of life and all creation implies an essential kinship of all the people in the world, "and if that kinship is true, is genuine, then I can never be the kind of person that I ought until you are the kind of person you ought to be."

I am so glad to hear of Latter-day Saints in Arlington, Virginia, in New York and Pennsylvania, San Diego, and in Salt Lake City who are reaching out to establish meaningful relationships with black people and other minority groups. I am looking to the day when our concern for all minority groups will match our present praiseworthy interest in the American Indian.

Remember, the worth of souls is great.

Prejudice is not easy to overcome. Even after one has restructured his thinking to cast it out, feelings and attitudes of bygone years may remain. Perhaps our only hope to be able to conquer negative feelings is by finding ways to express positive feelings of good will toward our brethren of all races and cultures.

I ask God and my brothers of another color to forgive me the folly of my youth, my pride, and my insensitivity in the past to their feelings, their innermost needs. And I promise to never again prejudge a man because of the color of his skin and I would hope for no other reason either. We are all children of the same God and we are all brothers. God hasten the day when we may know and feel this to a degree that we free ourselves from prejudice.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] On February 4, 1959, Dr. Bennion gave this address, one of four devotional addresses he was invited to give at Brigham Young University during the 1950s.
