Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

30

What It Means to Be a Latter-day Saint

I am grateful to hear this prayer and music and to be with you. When Brother Herald R. Clark called me early last week and gave me a gracious [^1] invitation to come to speak to you, he said, "Talk to them as you would at a fireside chat." This I intend to do. I am going to leave profundity and scholarship to your classrooms and tell you about a fireside chat.

I go to a lot of them. Weary of talking one evening, I decided to do something different. We had a small group of young people in attendance seated in a circle, and, starting from the left side of the circle, I said to the first person, "I would like each one of you in turn to tell us one thing you do not do because you are a Latter-day Saint."

The first person said, "I don't smoke."

The second one said, "I don't drink."

The third one said, "I don't drink coffee."

The fourth one said, "I don't drink tea."

And then there was a long pause before the fifth one thought of something. He finally said, "I don't go to shows on Sunday."

And the sixth one said, "I don't swear."

And then there was a still longer pause and I turned to the other end of the circle and said, "Please tell us each in turn what you do do because you are a Latter-day Saint."

The first one said, "I go to church." The second one said, "I go to priesthood meeting."

The third one said, "I go to Sunday School."

The fourth one said, "I go to choir practice."

There was a long pause before the fifth one could say, "I pay tithing." And they thought of one or two other things, and then there was another pause. I used block and tackle and couldn't draw anything else out of this group. I thought perhaps I had caught them off guard. So a few weeks later I went to another fireside and tried the same method and got roughly the same answers. Once in doing this with a younger group of Explorers, I obtained a new answer. One of them said on the positive side, "Because I am a Latter-day Saint, I collect fast offerings."

Brothers and sisters, I have nothing against the things that were said. I am deeply grateful for the Word of Wisdom. I pay tithing, and I do it gladly. And I believe in going to church and worshipping God there and enjoying the fellowship of my brothers and sisters. I delight in church service. The thing that grieves me about these answers is not what was mentioned but what was unmentioned. I do not know how you folks feel here, but in Salt Lake under the shadow of the temple and where I teach, I find that many students and many young people have reduced our religious life to a pattern of performances and of obedience to a few rather unique things in our gospel.

I fear that we Latter-day Saints, modern Israel, may fall into the same sin into which former dispensations of the house of Israel fell. Back in the days of Isaiah and Amos, the Israelites were "religious." They had their new moons and their Sabbath days; they sang hymns and offered prayers and burnt offerings. They probably felt deeply religious, I am sure. But their kind of limited pattern of religious living was not pleasing to God nor to his prophets. The prophet Amos went from the hills of Judea down into Israel and, speaking for God, said: "I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let judgment [or justice] run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream." (Amos 5:21-24.)

The prophet Hosea, in most beautiful words, said: "O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away. Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth. For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings." (Hosea 6:4-6.)

And then this very familiar but unsurpassed passage in the Old Testament, wherein Micah calls the mountains to witness when he says: "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?" Here is the answer: "He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." (Micah 6:6-8.) Mere performance and attention to some particular and important things in the religious life are not enough, according to these prophets; we must also remember justice and mercy and humility.

Jesus ran into the same type of restricted religious interpretation in his day. Not all of the Pharisees, but some of them, were devoted to the letter of the law and to certain performances. And Jesus said unto them: "Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone." (Matthew 23:23.)

Wherewith should a Latter-day Saint come before the Lord and bow himself before the high God? How should a Latter-day Saint think of his religious life? If I mistake not, the foundation of our faith, the first principle of our religion, is "faith in the Lord, Jesus Christ." And if our religious life is genuine and deep and meaningful as Latter-day Saints, it will be because we believe in and practice the things which Jesus taught and, as much as we can, the things which he did.

As disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, how shall we bow ourselves before our God? What does it mean to be a disciple of him? It would take several volumes to try to say, but let me merely suggest a thought or two in a few moments.

It seems to me that the moral teachings of Christ might be summarized under two great ideas. The first is integrity and the second is love. There are many virtues which he taught which are aspects of integrity, of wholeness. The first of these, which he taught over and over again, is humility—to hunger and thirst after knowledge; to have the curiosity of a child; to be uninhibited in one's search for truth by pride and vanity; to be open-minded; to learn from one's enemy, from one's colleagues, from one's students, from one's children, as well as from one's teacher; to feel one's dependence upon God; to feel one's spiritual need—all these things are expressions of humility.

Another virtue he taught so powerfully is that of sincerity, which Confucius called the mother of all virtues. Without sincerity, one cannot love, one cannot have mercy, one cannot forgive, one cannot be honest. Jesus told us that when we pray, we should not pray to be heard of men, but with singleness of purpose, that we should go into our closets and shut the door and pray to our Father in heaven in secret. And when we give, we ought not to let our "left hand know what the right hand doeth."

He taught us to live our religion because we believe in it, because we are born again. We build churches to worship God, not to be counted. We should do our ward teaching because we love to teach the gospel and are concerned for the welfare of our fellowmen—not for any record, not out of fear, but out of the righteous desires of our heart.

Meekness is another wonderful virtue which Christ taught as part of integrity. It means to have no false pride to protect, not to be arrogant, and to have one's life under self-control so that one is free to love God and man.

The other great virtue which Christ taught, of course, is love. I don't think we know much about it, but love means certainly to have an unselfish interest in the happiness and welfare of others. It means to have a deep interest in the well-being of every human being whether he merits it or not, whether he is friend or enemy, stranger or kin.

When we talk this way and say that a Latter-day Saint is a disciple of Christ and that he is to cultivate above all things integrity and love, the reply often comes back that these things are not distinctively Latter-day Saint. Any Christian, says the critic, can be honest and concerned with his fellowmen. In fact, one needn't be a Christian. One could be Buddhist or a Taoist or any other thoughtful person, a philosopher, a humanist, and practice integrity and love of man, and what we want to be is a Latter-day Saint.

I was in a stake officers' meeting one evening when we were replacing stake board members. A certain person was nominated for a position, and the presiding officer turned to me because I knew this person and said, "Is he a good Latter-day Saint?" A lot of ideas flashed through my mind and I said to him, "He is a good neighbor. He is honest. He is hospitable. He is merciful." And I named other Christian virtues.

The presiding officer said quickly,"That isn't what I want to know. Anybody can be a good Christian. I want to know if he is a good Latter-day Saint."

I knew what he meant and I quite agreed with him in part. He wanted to know if the candidate for office paid his tithing and if he were orthodox in his faith. And these things a person ought to do to be a good Latter-day Saint. The thing that hurt me was his remark that anybody can be honest and loving, as though the emphasis were only on the peculiar things in our faith and not also the fundamental aspect of our religion.

I would like to bear you my witness that unless the priesthood which we bear, and the Holy Ghost which has been conferred upon us, and our theological beliefs in God, in mortality, and in the Son of God—unless these things create in us meekness and humility of heart, integrity of mind and heart, and a deep love for our fellowmen, they are vain to us individually. This I believe with all my soul. The priesthood and the Holy Ghost were not given to honor us. They were given to us to make us men and to create in us the power to serve our fellowmen, to make us hungry for righteousness and for truth.

Two years ago a lady in Germany sitting before her television station saw and heard a little discussion on Mormonism and Utah. And in this discussion a Mormon elder said, among other things, "We believe that men are children of God. We believe in eternal progression. We believe that men are that they might have joy." These things, so familiar to us, rang a new bell in her mind and heart, and she rushed to investigate our faith. She came to Utah, wanted to know firsthand what kind of a people we were who had these wonderful beliefs.

It was my pleasure to get acquainted with her and to listen to her. She said to me one day, "I am not disappointed in your theology. I'm going to be baptized soon. The thing that has disappointed me here is that I don't think you people believe your own doctrine." She said, "Your movie houses are full, your libraries are empty. I go to your Sunday School classes and there isn't this eager desire to know, to understand. I don't see much reverence and the humility as you partake of the sacrament. Young people love pleasure more than learning." I don't know that she was right, but she woke me up for a day with her well-meant criticism.

Another thing that Jesus taught us, besides integrity and love, was that we are indeed children of God. "Our Father who art in heaven," he prayed. He told us to trust God. May I remind us that we Latter-day Saints believe that we were created in the image of God. Sometimes we think only in terms of his form, of physical image. Let us not forget that we were also created in his spiritual image. And if we are children of our Father in heaven, we have partaken of his intelligence, his freedom, his immortality, his integrity, his love, his creativity. And if we are to fulfill our own natures as children of God, we must hunger and thirst after knowledge and after righteousness and be deeply concerned with our fellowmen. We must learn to love the attributes and purpose of God.

I would like to go to another fireside someday and get the group in a circle and start at one end and say, "Each of you, because you are a Latter-day Saint, tell us one thing that you do not do." And I would love to hear answers like this: "I don't smoke; I don't drink; I don't swear." But I would also like to hear the circle continue by saying, "Because I am a Latter-day Saint I don't cheat. I don't plagiarize. I don't think of a girl as a means to my own selfish gratification. I don't hurt, if I can, any human being."

More especially would I like to turn to the same group and start at the other end and hear someone say, "Because I'm a Latter-day Saint I go to church, I pay tithing, and I keep the Sabbath day holy." And then I would love to hear somebody say, "Because I am a Latter-day Saint I am kind to my neighbor. I am patient with my husband. I pay my bills. I speak the truth. I hunger and thirst after knowledge. I am going to learn something about the laws of the universe and the nature of human nature so that I might help God bring to pass the immortality and godlike life of man."

"Because I'm a Latter-day Saint I believe in living in simplicity, not in idle luxury, and in using my time and means to remove suffering in this world. Because I'm a Latter-day Saint I will be chaste. Because I'm a Latter-day Saint I love criticism. I will not be defeated by my past failures, for I believe in repentance and forgiveness."

God help us, my brethren and sisters, not to reduce religion to a formula nor to a pattern, but to be true Latter-day Saints, disciples of Christ, I pray in his name. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Every Latter-day Saint should serve his community as well as his church. Often active Latter-day Saints give all of their free time to the Church. This is admirable and likely necessary for the bishopric, stake presidency, and perhaps others, but the rest of us should always do one job, and do it well, in the Church, and then also assume another responsibility in the community. We live in the larger society. Our children go to school there. We need to rub shoulders and share thought and effort with our non-Mormon neighbors to resolve social problems and to achieve social purposes. This essay was published in the Summer 1969 issue of an independent Mormon journal, The Carpenter, founded in 1968 at the University of Wisconsin.
