Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

VIII

LEARNING HOW TO DO

31

The Church and the Larger Society

Religion is a complex phenomenon embracing a multitude of things—doctrines, beliefs, history and tradition, scriptures, rituals and ordinances, [^1] meetings and activities, leadership and authority, organization and priesthood. But the heart of religion which gives meaning to all of these facets is twofold: man's relationship to Deity and his relationship to fellowman. In the last analysis, all else in religion must be measured by the quality of these two relationships. Jesus bore witness of this so emphatically when he said that everything written in the Law and the Prophets—the accepted scripture of his day—hung or depended on the love of God and the love of man. And Micah expressed the same thought so eloquently when he said:

"He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" (Micah 6:8.)

These two relationships might be called the vertical and the horizontal. The former might also be called spirituality—man's humility, reverence, awe, and worship before the holiness of God and also his faith and trust in and love and gratitude toward the Father and His Son. The horizontal relationship stands for social morality, a man's practice of honesty, sincerity, justice and mercy, understanding, and love in his dealings with his fellowmen. There is, of course, great overlapping between the spiritual and the moral aspects of religion, as Jesus clearly perceived when he said that the second commandment was like unto the first. It is fascinating to trace the relationship of the spiritual and moral aspects of religion in history. We shall confine ourselves to the Judeo-Christian / Latter-day Saint tradition, which is no small territory.

But let us begin our review with ancient Israel. In the law of Moses and the writings of the Old Testament prophets, man's relation both to Deity and to fellowman are given due emphasis. The Decalogue illustrates this in that the first three commandments point to God and the last six to man. The fourth is a transition principle involving both. This classic summary of religion illustrates well the emphasis in the faith of Israel. Religion was grounded in God: "Ye shall be holy: for I the Lord your God am holy." (Leviticus 19:2.) But the greater emphasis is placed on man's obligation to fellowman.

Ancient Israel, God's peculiar (or very own) people made a fatal mistake. They thought they could sing praises, say prayers, burn offerings, and keep the new moon and the Sabbath and the passover to honor God and yet ignore "the affliction of Joseph." They did more than ignore their fellowman—they took bribes in the court, falsified their weights and measures, mixed refuse with the wheat, foreclosed on widows and orphans, sold men into slavery for the price of a pair of shoes, and could hardly wait for the Sabbath to pass so they could begin their round of exploitation again.

Amos, Hosea, Isaiah, Micah, and Jeremiah saw through the sham and hypocrisy of their people and, in poetic, colorful, and courageous words, spoke the mind of God against Israel.

In the entire history of religion and in all of scripture no one has excelled these Hebrew prophets in their emphasis on the moral or social dimension of religion. In fact, none have equaled them in their effort to save a nation by leading their people to practice justice and mercy in all walks of life on a social scale.

The Savior was a true follower of the Hebrew prophets as well as a spokesman in his own right. (This is not surprising since we believe that [as Jehovah] he was a revelator in Old Testament times.) Read the Sermon on the Mount. It too is grounded in faith in God, but so much of it has to do with man's responsibility to fellowman; likewise his parables. Christ had a twofold loyalty inseparably linked: to God and to man. Often he turned to the Father for strength that he might return to heal the bodies and souls of men.

There is one difference between the Hebrew prophets and Jesus in moral emphasis. The former were trying to save the nation; Jesus seems to have focused on the individual's morality. The reason for this difference in emphasis may have been that in the days of the prophets there was a nation yet to be saved, whereas in Jesus' day Israel was under the iron yoke of Rome. To have rebelled as a nation would have been vain and suicidal, so Jesus taught a religiously founded morality for all men—men of any nation and "for all seasons."

After this all too brief review of Jewish-Christian teaching, let us turn to the relationship of religion and morality in Mormon history. The restoration of the gospel and Church of Jesus Christ began with a spiritual and theological emphasis: which is the true Christian religion and church was the burning question in the mind of the boy Joseph Smith. His remarkable revelations—the first vision and the visitations of Moroni and ancient apostles and prophets—intensified the spiritual dimension of religion. A man who had spoken with Deity and angels might well have turned to mysticism and theological and ecclesiastical interests exclusively. But this was not to be. Within a year of the Church's organization, Saints went to Independence, Missouri, and there established a City of Zion and consecrated all their earthly possessions to the Lord and henceforth became stewards of his property to live for the building of Zion in anticipation of the coming of Christ.

In the Joseph Smith period of history, our people tried to practice Christian social morality in the presence of their neighbors in Kirtland, in Missouri, and in Nauvoo. Their efforts were heroic in many instances but not without failure because of their own weaknesses and because of interference by enemies.

The second period of Mormon history was one of relative isolation. We went west because we had to, and there with each other and under God we established Zion—in our own self-consciousness and quite distinctive patterns of thought and behavior. Converts from the many nations sang:

O Babylon, O Babylon We bid thee farewell, We're going to the mountains Of Ephraim to dwell.

Bypassing more productive lands, we forged our character and strengthened our faith in the hard task of cultivation of desert lands.

Gentiles agreed with us that we were a peculiar people but in a different vein. (Peculiar means eccentric as well as God's very own.) From 1846 until into the twentieth century, our sense of separateness from the nation and the world was strengthened by many factors—the original exodus from Nauvoo, the gathering, Johnston's army, antipolygamy laws and their enforcement. We became a people within a nation, a subculture of the larger American society.

This separate state was never absolute. Jew and Gentile came early to the Salt Lake Valley. The railroad opened the door wide in 1869. Mormon youths in the latter part of the century began the trek eastward to school. The tempo of interchange between Mormonism and the world gradually increased politically, economically, and culturally.

Beginning especially in the 1920s, immigration sharply curtailed the gathering, and Mormon youth and others went east and west to find employment and to learn the thought and culture of the world. I was on a mission in Germany (1928-1931) when word came from John A. Widtsoe to keep the Saints in Europe, to build up local leadership, that the time had come when Zion was to be established in all the world, wherever the pure in heart dwelt. Our religion was to become what it was originally intended to be—not an American religion, but a world religion.

Separateness is a thing of the past for Latter-day Saints. Our children can escape neither the evil nor the good of the world. Radio, TV, movies, and the press bring all things to their attention. There is no Zion to which one can flee. We tried unsuccessfully in the Joseph Smith period to establish our own Zion alongside the Gentiles. Then we tried with considerable success to build our own kingdom in relative isolation, but that kingdom is no longer possible in any territorial sense, which leaves us with the task of how to live as part and parcel of the world.

Since we cannot escape the world, my basic position is that we should pitch in and help to shape it by making our contribution to it. We have much to gain and, hopefully, much to contribute. The following are a few suggestions on what we might do.

You need not fear, in my judgment, the incompatibility of gospel ideals with the learning of men. I find a very genuine compatibility of what most behavioral scientists are saying about human nature and my understanding of Jesus' view of man. The gospel gives men faith and ideal goals and brotherhood; and the sciences are filling in the details and helping us to achieve the ideals through effective means.

Recent attacks by some of the brethren on sex education, sensitivity training, and group counseling should not be taken—in my view—as a total rejection of education or of education even in these areas named. The wrong kind of sex education or sensitivity training in the hands of untrained or persons of immoral values can be disastrous to personality. I have seen instances of this. On the other hand, there is a place for the right kind of sex education and group counseling in appropriate hands. This I have seen too.

In the days of our isolation we could be ignorant or prejudiced toward men of other races, as I was; but now, with the world as intimate as it is, we can no longer afford the luxury of ethnocentricism. We shall have to learn to respect and to love all men as brothers, as the gospel teaches us, or we shall perish.

Now it is easy to love all men in general and in the abstract; the difficulty comes when we specialize. We must become interested in the minority groups in our own communities, building relationships of trust with blacks, Mexican-Americans, Indians, and any other minority or disadvantaged groups. Their problems are real. I was told that 39 percent of Mexican-Americans do not complete high school in the USA. In Salt Lake, about 50 percent of Negroes do not, and you know what this means in today's world.

I have some appreciation for part of this philosophy. I believe that moral precepts and rules do sometimes become obsolete because they were born under different circumstances or of sincere but shortsighted minds. Some of the Old Testament morality on things clean and unclean, regarding the eating of pork or pertaining to menstruation and childbirth, are not valid in our time. Certainly the proliferation of the legalism of the Pharisees regarding the Sabbath and other things—which gave Jesus so much difficulty—is a development of religion and morality which one must guard against.

On the other hand, the author of gospel ideals did not teach a lot of rules which were soon to be outdated. He taught rather a few core principles—faith, humility, sincerity, love, and purity of heart. These he illustrated in parable, in conversation, and in his personal life. These he never taught as a rigid system of ethics, a catechism, but always in relation to life.

The challenge to Latter-day Saints in the area of personal morality, I believe, is to follow the example of the Savior, to think and live fundamental concepts of life. [Each] situation should be considered and direct us in the application of the gospel to life. Situations, however, do not indicate their own solutions. One does not resolve a problem by talking about the problem. Problems are resolved in the light of principles, and principles get their meaning from life itself—a qualitative, ideal life.

It is my experience and observation that the ideals of Christ, including chastity, hold up very well. Sex is only part of love, and love is only part of life. And the good life was exemplified in the life of Jesus.

It is my prayer that we will have the wisdom and courage to follow him and that we shall try to realize his ideals in the larger society in which we are both compelled and privileged to live. This, in my judgment, is a great challenge to the Church in the twentieth century.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] This address was given at the Sunstone Theological Symposium in Washington, D.C., in May 1987 and published in Sunstone, July 1987.
