Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

32

What It Means to Be a Christian

Latter-day Saints are accused by some critics of being un-Christian. [^1] This doesn't concern me. What is of real concern is whether we Latter-day Saints believe and act like disciples of Jesus. Hence I welcome this opportunity to meditate with you on what it means to be a Christian.

Grace

A Christian acknowledges and is profoundly grateful for the grace of Deity. By grace, I mean unmerited gifts freely given to mankind. Not enough is said in our church about grace, but the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, in my judgment, is full of grace. We do not earn all of our blessings by faith and works. Not all of our blessings come by obedience to law, I believe.

Three great acts of creation are wrought by Deity on our behalf—the spiritual creation in the pre-earth life, the mortal creation, and the resurrection. Christ is playing a leading role in the latter two. Life in all three of its stages is a gift. I hope you believe that—that life is a gift. You and I were incapable of creating ourselves either on earth or in the resurrection.

The gift of the Holy Ghost, the light of Christ, and the spirit of God come to us freely. We have to open our minds and hearts to receive them, but they are gifts of love nonetheless. The priesthood, the very power of God, is also a precious gift. It is Deity's to give.

One of the greatest gifts of grace is forgiveness of sins. True, we must repent to be in a frame of mind to receive and to be healed by forgiveness. But as the word itself illustrates, giving is always involved in forgiveness, whether between persons or between Deity and human beings.

The whole gospel teaching has come to us as a gift of Deity through Jesus and the prophets. I didn't create or originate faith, repentance, meekness, humility, integrity, or love, and neither did you.

Grace plays a large role in both Catholic and Protestant faiths. In Catholicism, it comes to the Christian through the sacraments of the Church, which have been called vehicles of divine grace. I love that definition of an ordinance—a vehicle of divine grace. In some Protestant faiths, salvation is entirely a matter of grace. When salvation is conceived in terms of redemption from death and sin, it is natural and quite logical to give Christ full credit for it, following the lead of the Apostle Paul: "For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast." (Ephesians 2:8-9.)

Salvation for Latter-day Saints includes redemption from sin and death, but it also has a very positive meaning: It is a process of self realization of one's full potential as a human being and a child of God. It is to increase in knowledge and wisdom, in integrity and love, in the divine attributes of Deity. Life is a gift of grace, but what we do with that gift is our responsibility and opportunity. Grace precedes, accompanies, and follows the faith and works of the individual, but human growth is unthinkable without human effort, I believe.

Atonement

A Christian recognizes and accepts Christ's central role in the atonement. I like the literal meaning of the word "atonement," namely "at/one/ment." Man's goal is to become one with the Father and the Son, to bring his life in agreement with that of Deity. It begins with knowledge: "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.)

To become one with the Father and the Son, we must overcome three things: mortality, sin, and ignorance, because the Father and Son are immortal, sinless, and intelligent. Christ is the great mediator lifting us toward the Father. He died to bring to pass the resurrection.

There is a wonderful saying in Alma, chapter 34, in the talk by Amulek. He said the whole meaning of Christ's sacrifice was to bring about the means unto men that they might have faith unto repentance. . . .

Jesus taught and exemplified the real values of life as no other person has done. He revealed the character and will of God. He came that we might have life and have it more abundantly. Now I suggest that we as Christians should be grateful for the grace of Christ and for his atonement, but I think we ought to concentrate on overcoming ignorance and living as he would have us live.

Concern for People

Jesus had two supreme loyalties in life: to his Father in heaven and to human beings. He turned to his Father for direction and to renew his strength so that he could continue his teaching and healing and eventually die for his fellow human beings. He was particularly interested in the alienated of society: the poor, the blind, the deaf and dumb, the lame, and the sinner. He comforted the poor, fed the hungry, healed the leper, liberated the possessed, even raised the dead to comfort the bereaved.

Much to the consternation of scribes and Pharisees, he dined with publicans and sinners. In so doing, he placed the well being of persons even above the sacred law of Moses. To the woman caught in adultery, who according to the law should be stoned, Jesus said, "Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more." (John 8:11.) Jesus came not to destroy the law but to make it serve life. In the Prodigal Son parable, he has the father (I think representing the Heavenly Father) run out to meet the wayward son, fall on his neck, and kiss him and celebrate his homecoming, because "It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found." (Luke 15:32.)

For Jesus, the sacred Sabbath was not an end in itself. Man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath was made for man. It is a day to do good, to heal, to save life. I think it is safe to say that man was not made for the gospel, but the gospel was made for man. Faith, repentance, humility, and love derive their meaning and value because they build life—the lives of individuals and society.

A person, to be a Christian, must place the highest value on persons, I believe, and his or her relationship to them. Nothing matters ultimately in any setting—in marriage, the family, school, the church, the community, the world—except what happens to persons. Even the Church is an instrument to bless people. It is not an end in itself. Man was not made for the Church, but the Church was made for people. We should not serve the Church, but rather serve people through the Church. We don't teach lessons; we teach people. . . .

A Christian's loyalty is to persons: to Deity and to human beings. His loyalty goes beyond his own family and church community. Like Jesus, he is concerned with Jew and Gentile, with people in the larger community and in the third world. He is willing to share his time and means with people anywhere who need his interest and help. He is interested in the retarded, the mentally ill, the elderly, the poor, the lonely, the "sinner." He does not judge others. He will serve some of these people as his strength permits.

Alma understood the humane emphasis in the Christian gospel when he stated one's readiness to follow Christ in this way: "And now, as ye are desirous to come into the fold of God, and to be called his people, and are willing to bear one another's burdens, that they may be light; yea, and are willing to mourn with those that mourn; yea, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort, . . . what have you against being baptized . . . ?" (Mosiah 18:8-10.)

A Sense of Values

Human life has an economic base. Food, clothing, and shelter are essential to survival. Humans are creatures of desire and wants and crave comfort, health care, and the amenities of life. We must come to terms with the economic aspects of our existence. This is a problem of all people in all cultures. It was obviously a thing of great interest to Jesus, who had things to say about it:

Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. . . . No man can serve two masters. . . . Ye cannot serve God and mammon. (Matthew 6:19-24.)

Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat and what you shall drink? Don't store up in your basements welfare supplies? Take no thought of what Jesus is saying here? But you know that the interpretation and more accurate, up-to-date English interpretation of that passage is: Be not anxious about your life, what you shall eat and what you shall drink and wherewithal you shall be clothed, but seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness. That makes a lot of sense. Don't spend your nervous and soul energy on material things. "Take heed," Jesus said, "and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesses." (Luke 12:15.) Jesus also commented on how hard it was for a rich man to enter heaven and the folly of building bigger and bigger barns to accommodate one's possessions. (See Luke 12:16-21.)

A Christian's highest ambition and first love will not be the amassing of a fortune or the making of money. He will know that the kingdom of God lies within a person's feelings and thoughts and in relations to Deity and to human beings. He will place human and spiritual values above material ones. He will not, for example, live in luxury while a third of mankind go to bed hungry. He will not be wasteful nor extravagant when he could be helping people with work or otherwise. He will not buy luxury cars or a home for show or to feed his vanity. Plain living and high thinking are becoming to a Christian.

A Christian will not make money by injuring others. He will not deceive people about investments, promote tobacco, liquor, and drug sales, encourage gambling, or misrepresent a car, house, or a sale. A Christian will heed Jesus' words: "For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?" (Mark 8:36.)

Humility

There are four virtues that Jesus stressed repeatedly, and I think they are the very essence of Christian living: humility, faith in God, integrity, and love. A Christian will cultivate them all the days of his or her life.

The first Beatitude, "Blessed are the poor in spirit," means humility. How appropriate that this should be the first because it signifies teachability, a sense of a person's spiritual need, a dependence on God, a hunger and thirst after righteousness and truth. Humility leads to a recognition of sin and error, a desire to repent—which is the second Beatitude: "Blessed are they that mourn" doesn't mean blessed are they that mourn for the dead. It means blessed are they who mourn for their sins, their mistakes, and are penitent—and that follows naturally from humility.

We don't learn gospel principles as we do the times table: two times two is four. Our understanding of each principle can grow and should grow with experience. Honesty, for example, for a child may mean not to lie or steal. For an adult it also means integrity, being true to one's convictions and values.

When I was about five years of age my mother sent me to the grocery store to buy two yeast cakes for a nickel. She gave me a quarter. I decided on the way to keep the change. You know, you could get a root beer or an ice cream cone for a nickel in those days. I decided to keep the change unless she asked me for it. If she asked me for it I wouldn't lie, I'd give it to her. Well, she asked me for it. But my idea of honesty was pretty limited at five, and at seventy-five I am having my problems with integrity.

Humility remains the foundation of a vital, growing, religious, ethical life. These gospel terms are just words, and their meaning has to grow with us and with experience.

Faith

The second great Christian principle is faith. Jesus had implicit faith in his Heavenly Father and taught us to exercise the same kind of faith. "Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?" (Matthew 6:30.)

Anticipating the cross, Jesus said, "Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." (Luke 22:42.) Faith in God doesn't mean that we always have implicit trust that he will grant us our every desire. It means rather that we trust his judgment, that we believe God is on the side of truth and justice and mercy. A disciple of Jesus can also say,"Father, thy will, not mine, be done." With the ancient prophet Habakkuk, he can say, "Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. The Lord God is my strength." (Habakkuk 3:17-19.)

Read all of Habakkuk, chapter three, and read the seventy-third psalm, because in both instances the authors love God and put trust in him because of who he is, not in terms of receiving blessings. A Christian does not walk through life alone.

Integrity

The third basic virtue of the Christian life, I think, is integrity. There are two virtues, two ethical principles, that embrace all the virtues of life. They are integrity and love. Integrity includes the more personal virtues of humility, repentance, sincerity, honesty, and moral courage. Love encompasses the more social virtues of tolerance, kindness, mercy, forgiveness, helpfulness. Love presupposes integrity, and integrity needs the direction love can give it. If you want to simplify your ethical life, work hard on those two virtues—integrity and love—and you will have eternal life.

Integrity means oneness, wholeness, unity in the inner life. A person of integrity is free of guile, pretense, deceit, and hypocrisy. His life is an open book. He has convictions and values clearly defined, and he is true to them in every walk of life. Integrity creates meekness or self-control. It gives peace of mind, a sense of strength. A person of integrity knows no fear, no shame, no guilt. A Christian is true to himself, to fellow humans, and to God. His conscience is clear. He can sleep at night.

Love

The fourth and last principle I will mention is love. Love is the central principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ. This is clear from many statements of the Savior. You will recall Christ's reply to the lawyer who asked, "Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" Jesus said unto him, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets." (Matthew 22:36-40.)

Jesus didn't originate these two commandments. They are found separately in the Mosaic law, in Deuteronomy and Leviticus. But he brought them together and made them the central focus of the religious life. Shortly before his death he said to the twelve, "By this shall men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another." (John 13:35.)

Following his resurrection, he found Peter and others who had returned to their fishing. Jesus asked Peter, "Lovest thou me more than these" (the fish that they had caught)? "Yea, Lord," said Peter, "thou knowest that I love thee." Jesus said, "Feed my lambs." Three times Jesus asked Peter, "Lovest thou me?"and three times he said, "Feed my sheep." We could cite other sayings of Jesus which illustrate the central role of love in his life and teaching, but let us turn to the role of love in the life of a Christian.

It is interesting to me that a human being's need after food, clothing, and shelter is to be accepted, needed, wanted, and loved by other human beings. To give and receive love is the deepest of all psychological human needs. Isn't it interesting that it is also the central and basic principle of the gospel? Verily, the gospel of Jesus Christ is congenial to human nature. It fulfills human nature.

What do I mean by love? There are three basic kinds of love between people—romantic, friendship, and love of neighbor, or Christian love. Romantic love tends to be possessive, demanding, self-concerned, and sometimes fickle. Friendship at its best is reciprocal. But Christian love is outgoing, selfless, centered in the other person. A Christian's love is unconditional, not earned, graciously given. It is universal. If you don't love all people, you may not love any of them, in a Christian sense. A Christian loves all people and any individual: an authoritarian husband, a nagging wife, a disobedient son, a thief in the night. The real test of Christian love is if you can forgive an enemy who has despitefully used you and hurt you, with or without cause. A Christian can and will love people he doesn't like, that he disagrees with and finds troublesome. To love someone in a Christian spirit, one need only to wish him well and to seek his well-being.

Perfection

I find that a lot of Latter-day Saints are trying to be perfect, and I hear a lot of preaching about perfection. Sometimes a stake conference is built around the theme, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." I have a high priests quorum I attend every Sunday, and they talk sometimes as though they were near perfection. Even if you'd like to be perfect, I suggest that seeking perfection is not a wise way to go about it. It is not a good way to live a Christian life.

I have five reasons why I think it is foolish, unwise, un-Christian almost, to seek perfection as a goal in this life.

The first reason is, I don't think we know what perfection is. I associate perfection with God and with Christ, but I don't understand them fully—their character, their thinking, their understanding of life and the universe, and so I really don't know what overall perfection is or what perfection in anything is.

Secondly, I think you are bound to fail if you try to be perfect as a human being, and you will have a sense of guilt, a sense of shame. You will be burdened with failure.

Thirdly, you might think you are succeeding. Jesus, in the eighteenth chapter of Luke, tells a parable about two men who went out to pray, a publican and a Pharisee. The Pharisee said, "I thank thee, God, that I am not as other men are. . . . or even as this publican here." And the publican would not as much as look unto heaven, and beat upon his chest and said, "God be merciful to me a sinner." Jesus said the latter was justified, and that he that exalteth himself shall be abased and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. (Luke 18:10-13.)

The fourth reason I have for not seeking perfection is that wonderful Mormon doctrine that I love—eternal progression. Progression means the act of stepping forward, eternally. I think that is the vision of Mormonism, that we may grow eternally under the tutelage of our Father in heaven and Christ, and enlarge our lives forever more—certainly in this life, and I hope in the life to come.

Finally, people who strive to be perfect, in my observation, put themselves at the center of things. They are conscious of themselves too much. I had a fine freshman student who spent half of his time keeping track of himself. He had three big looseleaf notebooks, and he jotted down every thought he had and every feeling and every word. He reduced his life to his own parameters. I am very fond of Jesus' wisdom when he said, "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 10:39.)

I think the only time you experience life as a whole, in all its potentiality, is when you give yourself to a cause that is greater than yourself, one that is outside of yourself.

Conclusion

May I summarize by saying that a Christian believes in the atonement wrought by Jesus Christ on his or her behalf and gratefully acknowledges the abundant grace of the Savior. I think a Christian has to have real feeling for the Savior, feelings of gratitude, of loyalty, of reverence—of friendship, if I may say so. Like Jesus, his highest loyalty on earth is to persons. The Church and the gospel are, for a Christian, here to build the lives of human beings—one's own included but not singled out for preference.

A Christian is not caught up in a quest for material possessions. He believes in plain and simple living and high thinking. Above all, a disciple of Jesus cultivates humility, lives by faith, holds fast to his integrity, and makes love the central core of his life. For him, love is a verb and must find expression in service to others. God help us to learn to be true disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Reprinted here are two chapters from The Unknown Testament (Deseret Book, 1988), written in Lowell Bennion's eightieth year.
