Eugene England, Lowell L. Bennion, Best of Lowell L. Bennion: Selected Writings 1928-1988 ( 1988)

33

God the Ethical and Merciful

God the Ethical

When we contrast the Old Testament with Greek myths, the closest written records in time and space to come down to us, we see an immediate [^1] contrast in the nature of the deities each presents. The gods of Olympus are spiteful, jealous, capricious, vindictive, domineering, and exploitive. Certainly, many episodes recorded in the Old Testament might justly earn one or more of these objectives as well; but as I read the Old Testament, I see the massacre of the Canaanites and the sacrifice of Jephthah's daughter as isolated incidents against a background of moral standards.

God is ethical in his relations to human beings and unrelenting in his requirements that human beings be ethical with each other. The message of the writing prophets—Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel—is unmistakable. Flattery, offerings, bribes, and praises are not part of the worship of Israel's god. On the contrary, not even praise and sacrifice are meritorious unless accompanied by moral relations with one's fellow human beings.

Moses, speaking for God, said: "Ye shall be holy; for I the Lord God am holy."(Leviticus 19:2.) In the rest of that powerful and thought-provoking chapter, he defined holiness in terms of honesty, justice, and mercy in human relations.

Amos (760-740 b.c.) was the first of the writing prophets to declare the moral character of God. Speaking for God, Amos exclaimed:

I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies.

Though ye offer me burnt offerings, and your meat offerings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.

Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.

But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. (Amos 5:21-24.)

And why is this worship rejected? Because in daily dealings with each other, these chosen people were unjust, deceitful, unfair, and oppressive to those least able to defend themselves:

Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came! . . .

That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; that chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David; that drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. (Amos 6:1, 4-6.)

The psalms recognize and praise the righteousness of the Lord, reciting a veritable litany of ethical qualities:

Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shall go before thy face. (Psalm 89:14.)

The Lord is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him. (Psalm 92:15.)

For he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth. (Psalm 96:13.)

The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad thereof. Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne. (Psalm 97:1-2.)

His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness endureth for ever. He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and full of compassion. . . . The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure. They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightness. (Psalm 111:3-4, 7-8.)

Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart. They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways. Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments. I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly. (Psalm 119:1-8.)

Think of the cumulative effect on a people of bearing in their imaginations the image of an ethical and righteous God who requires justice, obedience, truthfulness, honor, and compassion from his people. As generations passed, the "fear" of God capriciously punishing on a whim or for omitting a trifling part of the cult would disappear into a superstitious background, to be replaced by a relationship of truth in a God who needs to be feared only in the sense that rigorous standards and consistency of judgment always require appraisal of one's motives and behavior. Instead of being mysterious and alien, this is a God who is the model of righteous behavior for his people.

Isaiah, in eloquent language, describes God's rejection of Israel's religious ritual when keeping it has been used to justify neglecting the ethical life. How could a God of integrity and compassion accept praise from people who cheat their neighbors and take advantage of widows and orphans?

To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he goats.

When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to treat my courts?

Bring me no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of blood.

Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. (Isaiah 1:11-18.)

Micah speaks eloquently of the kind of religious offering acceptable to an ethical God:

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? (Micah 6:6-8.)

It is important to remember that ethics are not the same as religion. There are many aspects of the religious life and several legitimate ways to be religious, either individually or in a congregation. One aspect is intellectual: a knowledge of theology, scripture, and religious history is valuable. Ritual, church activity, and attending services bind an individual to his or her cobelievers. Christian service and personal worship of God through prayer are also essential to the religious life.

The unique and powerful emphasis in the Old Testament is the repeated declaration of God through his prophet-spokesmen that none of these ways of expressing religious values are acceptable to him unless they are accompanied by justice and mercy in our everyday relations with fellow human beings. In short, the Old Testament affirms that there can be no true spirituality without genuine social morality.

These ethical concepts are drawn directly from the nature of God himself. They constitute the core of the prophetic message of Elijah, Amos, Micah, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. They underlie the whole Mosaic law as spelled out in Deuteronomy. This concept is called ethical monotheism, Judaism's finest contribution to the world, in my opinion. God is ethical. And those who would serve him must also be ethical in their human relations.

Theology is of no value if it substitutes for social morality. Devils also believe and tremble. To be righteous, belief must include concern for our fellow human beings. Religious ordinances and rituals are vain if they do not encourage spirituality and morality. Church life is not an end in itself but a place to be inspired to go forth and deal honestly and compassionately with each other.

This is a lesson we must learn over and over. Reading the Hebrew prophets with their passionate clarity is, in my opinion, an excellent way to renew our commitment to justice and mercy.

God the Merciful

It is interesting to me that the ancient Hebrews rejoiced in the mercy of God and invoked it with the same faith and confidence that they applied to his judgment. Obviously, these two virtues were not seen as incompatible or contradictory in their thought.

The Lord's mercy is beautifully portrayed in Hosea, whose marriage was a graphic example in miniature of the Lord's relationship to Israel. His wife, Gomer, bore him several children, then was unfaithful to him with several lovers. At some point, she came to her senses and returned to Hosea, who normally would have disowned her. However, in love and mercy he received her back and resumed the marriage.

Similarly, Israel deserted the Lord's law for the permissiveness of the cult of other gods. Hosea expresses the Lord's anger and disappointment with backsliding Israel:

O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away. . . . For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings. But they like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me. (Hosea 6:4, 6-7.)

My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children. (Hosea 4:6.)

For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large place. (Hosea 4:16.)

Hosea also spells out the method by which Israel can repent, meriting the Lord's mercy by doing mercifully. It is impressive to me that this call to repentance is not threatening or angry, but tender and pleading. The Lord reminds Israel of his love and promises them his mercy, appealing to them with gentleness and generosity:

Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you. (Hosea 10:12.)

Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually. (Hosea 12:6.)

O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.

Take with you words, and turn to the Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.

Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is turned away from him.

I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon. (Hosea 14:1-7.)

No one could question the Lord's right to be angry and punitive, to set conditions of acceptance and probation. Instead, he appeals to Israel's memory of the loving, trusting faith that had existed between them and stands ready to heal the breach.

Just as God is merciful, so he requires us to be merciful, particularly to those who have no particular claim on us: the poor, the widow, the stranger, the fatherless, and the afflicted. . . . Humility before God and person-to-person mercy result in spirituality and social morality. It would be difficult to make a case for removing them from any spiritual life.

The law of Moses mandates mercy:

And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest. And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I am the Lord your God. (Leviticus 19:9-10.)

Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant that is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates: At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. . . . Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherless; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge. (Deuteronomy 24:14-15, 17.)

As we read these passages, the law of Moses seems to be describing the kinds of activities we would today term "charitable work." I find it particularly appropriate that the God of love defines mercy in terms of loving behavior. Beyond our baptism, confirmation, ordinations, prayers, and offerings to the Lord, he requires our mercy, compassion, love, and generosity to one another. We learn mercy by practicing the works of mercy.

This means that we visit the widows and others who are lonely, succor the disabled of mind and body, provide work for the unemployed, take an interest in children who need attention, and help people become more self-sufficient both at home and abroad. It means that we are troubled by the suffering of fellow human beings and do something to relieve it. It also means that our sharing is somewhat selfless in that we do not praise ourselves for these works or criticize others for needing our mercy. Nothing sours the sweetness of a loving act so quickly as the merest taint of self-congratulation on our generosity or sensitivity or tact!

It is not enough to pay a generous fast offering and leave compassionate service to the bishopric and Relief Society presidency. We must set aside time, energy, and means to help low-income and lonely people, the elderly, the disabled, and the alienated—all marginal members of our community, whether they be members of the Church or not.

I know a father of nine who seeks out one or two widows each month and works in their yards, or makes minor repairs on their homes. He has been doing this for several years. He is a true disciple of the prophets and of Jesus. . . .

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Reprinted here are two chapters from The Unknown Testament (Deseret Book, 1988), written in Lowell Bennion's eightieth year.
