Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

PREFACE

Each revelation or document considered in this work is given a doctrinal and historical introduction to help in understanding the particular circumstances that called it forth. General commentary follows with a detailed consideration of words or phrases that are important to a meaningful understanding of the text under consideration. It is intended that this volume be used as a study aid in conjunction with the scriptures.

In both historical and doctrinal issues we have drawn liberally on the best thinking and insights of latter-day prophets and apostles and Latter-day Saint scholars. In some instances our understanding has been extended by secular sources. We acknowledge indebtedness to the hundreds of sources we have cited. We have attempted to properly credit them in a manner that is easy for the reader to follow in seeking either the source or additional information. Whether the thought was borrowed or originated with us, we assume responsibility for it. Shortcomings that may be found in this work are our own.

We are not vain enough to suppose that we have given the best possible explanation of everything covered in the length and breadth of these revelations. We hope, however, that our efforts enlighten and are thus in harmony with the Spirit of him of whom the revelations testify.

We extend special appreciation to our friend and colleague Robert L. Millet for his helpful counsel in the preparation of this manuscript and to Suzanne Brady of Deseret Book for her valuable contribution in its preparation for publication. We also extend thanks to Robert J. Matthews for his Church sense and understanding, particularly of the revelations on the priesthood; and to Lee Ann Lavender and Rebecca Sybrowsky, who spent countless hours laboring on and improving the tedious and thankless parts of this manuscript. Rachel Strain contributed significantly in historical research and content review. Greg Giauque also aided in researching and reviewing the manuscript.

As always, we are particularly indebted to our wives, Brenda and Sandra, who picked up the slack while we were lost in the labor.
