Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

INTRODUCTION

Were our modern day to produce a Moses, who among the world's throngs would accept him? Who today would believe a man claiming to have stood face to face with the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to have received commandments by which the people were to be governed, and to have been charged with the responsibility to gather Israel from the ends of the earth and establish God's covenant people once again in their lands of promise? Among the Catholics, Protestants, Jews, and Muslims, all of whom profess an acceptance of the ancient Moses as a prophet, who would accept a modern successor? Surely the announcement that such a prophet again walked the earth could only be received with rejoicing among people of faith and goodness.

What if we were to learn that this very prophet had been foreseen and described by Moses, that Israel's ancient lawgiver had come to him and instructed him, and that Moses himself had laid his hands upon the head of his modern successor and given him the very keys and authority he had received from the great Jehovah on the heights of Sinai? Surely we would then know with perfect assurance that the God of heaven, that same God who gathered the Israelites anciently and led them out of their Egyptian bondage, had not forgotten his people nor the promises made to them by so many of the ancient prophets.

If the ancient revelations are true, modern revelations and heavenly visitations must follow. If we are to believe that God was a God of miracles in ancient times, are we not justified in believing that he is a God of miracles in our day? If he could speak in that ancient day with both the voice of thunder and the voice of perfect stillness, if he could stand face to face with his chosen prophet, if he could reveal to him his mind and will, if he could commission him to stand in his stead and labor in his behalf, if he could gather his people and put his name and blessing upon them, could he not do so today? If such a course represented a God of wisdom and love in that day long ago, would it not represent the same in our day? Or are we to suppose that God has come to realize the futility and folly of such a course?

Latter-day Saints worship a God who speaks to his children, who of his own accord chooses men to mark the path he would have us follow. In our day God has chosen Joseph Smith as a modern-day Moses. Like his ancient counterpart, this latter-day prophet is a great revelator of Christ for his dispensation. If Moses stands approved by us for his word and works, certainly one whose fruits are the same should merit the same approbation. The testimony of this book is that the God who called and spoke to the prophets of the Old and New Testaments is the same God who called and spoke to Joseph Smith. Their doctrines, priesthood, works, and opposition are the same, as are the rewards for faithful discipleship to them.

The revelations of the Restoration stand as the perfect evidence that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever. All who believe that he spoke anciently are bound to believe that he speaks in our day, for such was the promise of his ancient prophets. And all who have come to know that he speaks with authority today know in turn that he spoke to his chosen people anciently. Thus Moses revealed the role to be played by Joseph Smith in the latter-day gathering of Israel, and Joseph Smith in turn revealed much about his ancient counterpart (Moses 1).

This volume places the revelations of the Restoration in their historical and doctrinal context in order that we might see more clearly their purpose and meaning. In it we see how one revelation builds upon another, and we are invited to advance from grace to grace, following the path of our Lord and Master.
