Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1

DATE: 1 NOVEMBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

Our dispensation began in the spring of 1820 with the First Vision. In this marvelous theophany, the Father, of whom Jesus of Nazareth testified and whom he worshipped, appeared to the youthful Joseph Smith. He did so to assert anew that this same Jesus, who also appeared in this vision, was both his Son and the source of our salvation. In response to Joseph's question about which church he should join, he was told, "None of them, for they are all wrong." Thereafter, Joseph Smith learned of an apostasy both in doctrine and authority that followed the death of Christ and his apostles. He also learned that he had been chosen to act as the agent of the Lord in the restoration of gospel truth and of priesthood authority by which the ordinances of salvation were to be preformed. As stones are quarried and set side by side in the building of a great temple, so revelations were granted to Joseph Smith one upon another as the great labor began to establish the mountain of the Lord's house upon the earth. By the time the Prophet received Doctrine and Covenants 1, he had recorded more than sixty revelations. The time had now come to bind them in a single volume so that their testimony might go forth to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, declaring the beginning of the great and final dispensation of the gospel.

The matter of selecting revelations for publication was considered at a special council of high priests held in Hiram, Ohio, beginning 1 November 1831. This revelation, which affirmed the Lord's interest in the matter, was received between the sessions held that day. William Kelley, who was present, records the circumstances in which the revelation was received: "A committee had been appointed to draft a preface, consisting of O. Cowdery and, I think Sidney Rigdon, but when they made their report . . . the conference then requested Joseph to enquire of the Lord about it, and he said that he would if the people would bow in prayer with him. This they did and Joseph prayed.

"When they arose, Joseph dictated by the Spirit the preface found in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants while sitting by a window of the room in which the conference was sitting; and Sidney Rigdon wrote it down. Joseph would deliver a few sentences and Sidney would write them down, then read them aloud, and if correct, then Joseph would proceed and deliver more, and by this process the preface was given" (William Kelley, quoted in Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants, 2).

After Joseph received this revelation, a number of the brethren present at the conference arose and testified to the truthfulness of the Book of Commandments. Notwithstanding this, some of the brethren criticized the language in which the revelations were recorded. The Prophet did not take any notice of these critics; if the Lord should select some other instrument through whom to speak to the Church, it would be agreeable to him. But the Lord had no such intentions. A test was then given by way of revelation by which the Prophet's critics could test the legitimacy of his revelations (D&C 67).

It should be noted that the language of Doctrine and Covenants 1 and the previous revelations received by Joseph Smith (including the Book of Mormon) established the pattern for the revelations of this dispensation. Since the events they announce had long been prophesied in the Bible, and since the King James Bible was the Bible of the American frontier, where the Restoration took place, it was natural that the revelations be recorded in that language or style. In contrast to the colloquial or informal language of some modern translations, the King James Bible preserves a sense of reverence and dignity for the sacred with a choice of words that carry the feeling of Sunday go-to-meeting best dress.

The revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants repeatedly pick up phrases in the language of the King James translators in such a manner as to announce their fulfillment or to provide a significant commentary on them. Reading these phrases affirms our faith in the Bible, the Lord's approval of the labor of the King James translators, our unity with prophets of old, and the restoration of the faith of the ancients.

A host of Bible translations following the King James Version have announced themselves to be superior to it. After all, the modern translator has a thousandfold more ancient manuscripts to work with than the translators did in the days of King James, and many of these manuscripts are older and thus more reliable. It is also held that today's translator has a greater command of the ancient languages than those at the time of King James. Further, it is argued that in the interim period the language of the King James translators has in many instances become archaic. Despite such arguments, the Church retains loyalty to the Bible of Joseph Smith's day. In so doing we are not attempting to be another quaint sect that refuses to move forward with the times. We freely acknowledge the difficulties that exist in the Bible and are used to being criticized for having made that admission. However, what we retain from our loyalty to the King James Bible far outweighs what we might gain from more modern translations. We continue to use this "archaic" version for two primary reasons: first, because of the near countless instances in which the revelations of the Restoration pick up the language of the Bible of Joseph Smith's day, announcing its fulfillment or amplifying it by the Spirit of revelation; and second, because it was the King James Version of the Bible that Joseph Smith used to give us what is known as the "Inspired Version," or "The Joseph Smith Translation." This text adds immeasurably to our understanding of the gospel as it was known to those of both Old and New Testament times. At the same time, we have no hesitation in using any Bible translation that adds to our understanding.

Of particular importance is the understanding that ours is a restored Church and as such binds us in faith and practice to the peoples of the Bible. Indeed, we are the true old- time religion; we have no principles save they are eternal. We seek with great interest a knowledge and understanding of the ancient Saints and their faith and practices. Just as they called forth the revelations of heaven, worked miracles, entertained angels, and stood in the divine presence, we seek to do the same, standing where they stood and believing what they believed. It is through our faith that we will find salvation even as they found it. It follows that we cannot truly be students of the Doctrine and Covenants without also being students of the Old and New Testaments. In the Doctrine and Covenants many of the words of the prophets find fulfillment. As the New Testament is replete with prophecy from the Old Testament, is rendered in the language of the Old Testament, and stands in fulfillment of the Old Testament, so the revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants stand in relationship to the Bible. These revelations witness that the Bible is true and that all that has been spoken by God's prophets will find fulfillment.

The Voice of Warning to All People

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1:1-7

1:1 Hearken ye people from afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together. The announcement that all are to listen to the voice of the servant of the Lord comes from the words of Isaiah as he prophetically described the latter- day gathering of Israel (Isaiah 49:1). Implicit in the text is the promise that the Lord will speak to the scattered remnants of Israel through a prophet just as he spoke to their fathers anciently through prophets. It is a perfect text to introduce the revelations of the Restoration and to show that they come in fulfillment of the words of the ancient prophets.

The text has a rich heritage. It can be and properly has been applied to the ministry of Christ. The early American colonials thought it a prophecy of their destiny. In their Bible it read, "Listen unto me ye Isles [or coastlands]." They applied this to their coming to this land and thought of themselves as those the Lord had gathered to build a New Jerusalem. As Nephi rendered it to his people: "Hearken, O ye house of Israel, all ye that are broken off and are driven out because of the wickedness of the pastors of my people; yea, all ye that are broken off, that are scattered abroad, who are of my people, O house of Israel. Listen, O isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far" (1 Nephi 21:1). His language fits perfectly these refugees from the religious wars of Europe.

In the present text the Lord applies the words of Isaiah first to those of his church and then to the ends of the earth that will listen. In its first line this revelation links the announcement of the Restoration with Isaiah's prophecy of this event. The Isaiah text then goes on to describe a prophet known by name and ordained before he was in his mother's womb. This, of course, fits the Prophet Joseph Smith perfectly (2 Nephi 3:15; Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365). Jesus of Nazareth and the nation of Israel also fulfill this prophecy.

1:2 The voice of the Lord is unto all men. "The voice of warning shall be unto all people" (v. 4). That is to say, this revelation and the entire compilation of revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were intended to go to the world. The Doctrine and Covenants is to be used in missionary work! While it is true that the Book of Mormon is the book ordained in the councils of heaven to gather Israel, it is equally true that it was not intended that the Book of Mormon stand alone. The Book of Mormon would be of no benefit to the nations of the earth unless someone were ordained and given authority to preach the gospel and administer its ordinances. Thus the compilation of revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants assume a place of eminence among the revelations of the Restoration. The Doctrine and Covenants provides the framework for the Restoration. This compilation of revelations announces that the heavens have been opened and that God speaks to prophets today as he did anciently. It is here that we learn that the priesthood or authority to act in the name of God has been restored. In these revelations we learn of "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30) being reestablished. We learn that the authority to baptize has been given again to the children of men as have all other ordinances necessary for their salvation.

1:3 The rebellious. No neutrality exists where the gospel of Jesus Christ is concerned. We sustain it, embrace it, and live it, or we stand in opposition to it. There is no middle ground. We number ourselves among the citizens of the kingdom of God, or we must march with those who are in rebellion against that kingdom.

1:4 The voice of warning. The voice of warning that is to go forth to all people cannot in the justice of God be confined to the writings of prophets who lived thousands of years ago. The promise of this text is that it will go forth by the mouth of those whom the Lord has chosen in our day. "It is only just," wrote Joseph Fielding Smith, "that the Lord would speak again from the heavens, before that great day shall come, and commission his servants and send them forth to proclaim repentance and once again say to the people, 'The kingdom of heaven is at hand.' Surely, the Lord would not depend entirely upon the predictions of his ancient prophets for this warning of his second coming. True it is, that the warnings given of old are to be heeded, but near the approach of these great events, it is right, and reason compels us to believe, that the Lord would again raise his voice through his appointed servants in a warning that the people might know that this great and dreadful day is even now at our doors" (Restoration of All Things, 302-3).

1:4 By the mouths of my disciples. It is commonly thought that the prophecies announcing that the gospel will be taught to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people can somehow be filled through radio, television, computers, or other forms of mass communication. This, however, cannot be the case. Only an ordained servant of the Lord can receive a confession of sins, baptize, and confer the gift of the Holy Ghost. Though the mass media can greatly help in the teaching of the gospel, it will never replace the need for missionaries to find, love, teach, and nurture those who are seeking the blessings of the gospel.

1:5 None shall stay them. No power can prevent the gospel from going forth. It is destined to be taught to those of every nation, kindred, and tongue. "The Standard of Truth," Joseph Smith said, "has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done" (History of the Church, 4:540).

1:6 My preface unto the book of my commandments. The revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith were first gathered and prepared for publication under the title the Book of Commandments. This revelation, recorded in section 1, was given as the preface to that compilation. Apparently, a committee had been appointed to write a preface but was unable to do so to the satisfaction of the conference. As noted in the introduction to this section, the Prophet was then requested to inquire of the Lord. He did so, and this revelation was the result. Hence we find the Lord saying this is "my preface" to the Book of Commandments.

"The publication was commenced by William W. Phelps and Co. in Jackson County, Missouri, but before the work was completed the press and type were destroyed by a mob, July 20, 1833, and only a few of the printed forms were preserved; these were bound and used by those fortunate enough to secure them in the uncompleted condition as the Book of Commandments. Later, in the year 1835, the revelations, now greatly increased in number, were again compiled and ordered printed as The Doctrine and Covenants" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 7n).

Wickedness Precedes the Second Coming

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1:8-16

1:8 Power given to seal. Anciently, a seal was a hard substance formed into a particular emblem used to make an impression on wax or clay. Often a seal would be set in a signet ring and used like a signature to convey authority or to assure authenticity of a document. Figuratively, as used in a text such as this, it signifies the right of possession. Thus Alma speaking of the unrepentant says the devil "doth seal you his" (Alma 34:35), whereas the Lord told Joseph Smith that the faithful "are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true" (D&C 76:53). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:53, "Sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise."

It is not uncommon for Latter-day Saints to be asked by Protestants, "Have you been saved?" A more proper expression on their part would be, "Have you been sealed?" That is, has the Holy Ghost placed the seal of his approval on your life and works? In the complete and proper sense, no one is saved in mortality. We seek to be saved from the effects of Adam's fall, which has estranged us from God. Only when wethrough the atonement of Christhave overcome death and sin are we saved, or fully reconciled to him. Thus to be saved is to obtain eternal life and live in the presence of God. We can, however, enjoy the assurance of heaven that the Lord approves of the course we are following as we work out our salvation in this mortal estate.

The unbelieving and rebellious. The priesthood has power over both the righteous and the wicked. By its authority the righteous are blessed and the wicked cursed. Blessings are the God- given reward for obedience; cursings are the God-given penalty for disobedience. To accept the gospel is to be blessed; to reject it is to be cursed. To receive the servants of the Lord is to receive their reward (Matthew 10:40-41). Those who reject the servants of the Lord have the promise that they will be "sealed up" according to the law and the testimony and be "delivered over unto darkness" (D&C 133:71-72). From him who does not repent, the Lord said, "shall be taken even the light which he has received" (D&C 1:33), and he shall be left to suffer the effects of darkness until the day of his redemption. "These are they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection" (D&C 76:85).

As the sealing of someone to eternal life requires both priesthood and keys, so does the sealing of one to the wrath of God. Today such authority is held only by the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve and any to whom they specifically give it. It is not held by missionaries generally.

1:10 The Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to his work. The scriptures repeatedly attest that judgment will be by works not by the profession of faith (Matthew 5:16; John 3:21; 8:39; Acts 10:35; Revelation 3:15-16; 20:12-13). "By their fruits ye shall know them," the Savior said. "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven." Then, of those who do not endure in faith to the end, he said, "Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity" (Matthew 7:20-23).

Our devotion to the gospel cause is found in the way we choose to live. To believe a principle is to live the principle. James taught the doctrine well when he said, "For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also" (James 2:26). We do not expect rewards for faith we have not exercised, answers to prayers we have not offered, strength in muscles we have not used, or talents we have not cultivated. We do not expect to harvest where we have not planted, understand books we have not read, hear that to which we will not listen, or see that to which we will not open our eyes. Indeed we believe that "there is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

1:11 That all that will hear may hear. Contrary to the idea that some are born to heaven and others to hell, the announcement of heaven is that the gospel of Christ is "unto all men" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:46). No soul will be brought to judgment without having had the full chance to accept the saving truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ. All are entitled to hear the gospel declared, for all are capable of embracing it and receiving the fulness of its blessings. Were this not so we could not argue in behalf of the justice of heaven or the infinite nature of Christ's atonement.

1:12 Prepare ye for that which is to come. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 34:5-9; 65:1, 3.

1:13 His sword is bathed in heaven. This phrase comes from Isaiah. The full text reads: "For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment" (Isaiah 34:5). Idumea is the symbol of the world, meaning the people of the world (D&C 36), all of whom have been cursed by their rejection of the gospel. Raising the warning voice, Isaiah announced that the Second Coming will be a day of vengeance and judgment, a day in which the indignation of the Lord shall come upon all nations and his fury upon their armies. In that day all that is worldly is destined to be destroyed (Isaiah 34:1-10).

1:14 Salvation can only be found by following a living voice and the direction of scripture as given to those of each dispensation. Those of our day cannot find salvation in the Bible while rejecting the revelations of the Restoration any more than those of Christ's day could find it in rejecting him and following the law of Moses. The true gospel always requires living ministers to perform its ordinances and living prophets to teach its truths. See commentary on verse 30.

The arm of the Lord shall be revealed. Again, the imagery is that of Isaiah. The ancient prophet promised that the Lord would make "bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations" (Isaiah 52:10). Commenting on this passage, Nephi said, "The Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel. Wherefore, he will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Nephi 22:11-12). Missionaries, those commissioned of the Lord to gather scattered Israel to the covenants of salvation, are the arm of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 35:13-14.

Shall be cut off from among the people. This language comes from Moses' prophecy to the children of Israel describing what would become of those who failed to accept Christ (Deuteronomy 18:18-19). "The people" to whom reference is made are the rightful heirs of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. To be cut off is to be left without family ties in the worlds to come. Peter quoted this same text on the day of Pentecost (Acts 3:22-23), as did Christ to the nation of the Nephites (3 Nephi 21:11). Moroni also quoted it to Joseph Smith, announcing that it was about to be fulfilled. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:40, "He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses," page???.

1:15-16 The language of verse 15 relates to another prophetic description of the last days given by Isaiah. "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left" (Isaiah 24:5-6).

The earth was created for righteous purposes and is defiled by wickedness and rebellion against the truth. The word ordinance as used by Isaiah refers to laws or statutes, particularly those fixed in writing. To say that people have broken covenants and changed ordinances could well be intended to convey the idea that they have tampered with holy writ in order that others might stumble or stray from the laws of God, as the present revelation states (Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 3:607). This is precisely what Nephi prophesied would happen (1 Nephi 13:29). To break the "everlasting covenant" suggests that there would be those who would seek salvation in supposed covenants of their own making or on their own terms without the necessity of priesthood covenants. The Lord said that such do not seek righteousness but seek to walk in their own way, after the image of their own god, who is in the image and likeness of the world.

1:16 After the image of his own God. All gospel principles are simply appendages to our understanding of the nature of God. No salvation is found in the worship of a false god. The crowning revelation of the New Testament is the fatherhood of God. Christ virtually never referred to Deity by any title other than Father, and the Father never refers to Christ by any title or name other than Son. While 240 references sustain this doctrine, the traditional Christian world declares it to be a metaphor. Thus the Christian world's great claim to truth is that it has a better metaphor for God than rival systems of salvation. Indeed, we are told that "all affirmations of Scripture and the Fathers [those who wrote after the death of the Apostles] are but metaphors devised for the ignorant" (Cross, Oxford Dictionary, 576). Further, we are told that "Eusebius is a faithful enough disciple of Origen to agree with Plato that it is sometimes necessary for the lawgiver to lie in order to persuade people rather than coerce them, and to suggest that this is an explanation of the anthropomorphism of the Old Testament" (ibid., 1:452). Or as the great Catholic scholar Erigena explained: "We know only that he is, we do not know what he is. Whatever we affirm in regard to him is true of him in a figurative sense only; hence, in reality he is not what we declare him to be" (Bavinck, Doctrine of God, 23). According to such scholars, the real reason God consistently appears to Old Testament prophets in the form of a man is that the people are better off believing a lie than being confronted with the truth. As to the truth, traditional Christianity tells us that God is underivable, unnameable, and incomprehensible. He is thus known best by those who know him not at all.

Fundamental to the Catholic and Protestant faiths is acceptance of the God of their creeds. Known to us today as the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, this teaching first found formal expression in the Nicene Creed and then in its successor, the Athanasian Creed. It reads as follows: "We worship one God in trinity and trinity in unity; neither confounding the persons; nor dividing the substance. For there is one person of the Father: another of the Son; and another of the Holy Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is all one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternal.

"Such as the Father is: such is the Son: and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate: the Son uncreate: and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father incomprehensible: the Son incomprehensible: and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible.

"The Father eternal: The Son eternal: and the Holy Ghost eternal. And yet there are not three eternals: but one eternal. And also there are not three uncreated: nor three incomprehensibles, but one uncreated: and one incomprehensible. So likewise the Father is Almighty: the Son Almighty and the Holy Ghost Almighty. And yet they are not three Almighties: but one Almighty:

"So the Father is God: the Son is God: and the Holy Ghost is God; And yet they are not three Gods: but one God. So likewise the Father is Lord: the Son is Lord: and the Holy Ghost is Lord. And yet not three Lords: but one Lord. For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity: to acknowledge every person by himself to be God and Lord: so are we forbidden by the Catholic religion: to say, there be three Gods, or three Lords" (Smith, Restoration of All Things, 49).

The Nicene Creed is not found in any Gospel. It derives from no utterance of Christ nor from the words of any of his apostles. It directly contradicts the plain language of the New Testament. Its ideas cannot even be expressed in scriptural language; they are cloaked in that of the Greek philosophy from whence they came. Its best defense is the admission that it is a mystery and as such is indefensible. Edward Gibbon tells us: "The great Athanasius himself, has candidly confessed that whenever he forced his understanding to mediate on the divinity of the Logos, his toilsome and unavailing efforts recoiled on themselves; that the more he thought, the less he comprehended; and the more he wrote, the less capable was he of expressing his thoughts" (Gibbon, Decline and Fall, 392). Of the Athanasian Creed, which was formulated about a century after the Nicene Creed, James E. Talmage said, "It would be difficult to conceive of a greater number of inconsistencies and contradictions expressed in words as few" (Articles of Faith, 44).

In the midst of this great dispensation of darkness, a time would come according to Jeremiah in which people would awake, saying: "O Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit. Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods? Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name is The Lord" (Jeremiah 16:19-21).

As that day begins to dawn, we see on the horizon such noble spirits as Thomas Jefferson, who observed, "When we shall have done away with the incomprehensible jargon of the Trinitarian arithmetic, that three are one, and one is three; when we shall have knocked down the artificial scaffolding, reared to mask from view the very simple structure of Jesus; when, in short, we shall have unlearned everything which has been taught since his day, and got back to the pure and simple doctrines he inculcated, we shall then be truly and worthily his disciples" (quoted in McGrath, Understanding the Trinity, 110). Or as Parley P. Pratt would observe when once the light of the restored gospel had risen: "It is painful to the human mind to be compelled to admit that such wonderful inconsistencies of language or ideas have ever found place in any human creed. Yet, so it is. It is but another way of saying that there is a God who does not exist, a God who is composed of nonentity, who is the negative of all existence, who occupies no space, who exists in no time, who is composed of no substance, known or unknown, and who has no powers or properties in common with any thing or being known to exist or which can pos sibly be conceived of as existing either in the heavens or on the earth" (Key, 18).

The pantheon of false gods is a great and spacious building that provides room for all manner of social and political philosophies. It invites men to worship at the shrine of their own intellect and to worship science and the laws of nature. It honors false Christs and false prophets who teach their disciples to walk after their own devices and after the imagination of their own evil hearts (Jeremiah 18:12). The promise of our present text is that all such, like Babylon of old, will perish. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:28.

Joseph Smith to Restore Truths and Powers

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1:17-23

1:17 Commencing in the spring of 1820 the Lord spoke to Joseph Smith and gave him commandments. By obedience to these commandments, recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants, we can prepare ourselves for the Second Coming and be spared the calamities that will precede it. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:19.

1:18 Proclaim these things unto the world. In an earlier revelation the Lord had said, "You shall declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun. You shall begin to preach from this time forth, yea, to reap in the field which is white already to be burned" (D&C 31:4). It is the message of the Restoration that must go to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. The heavens have been opened. God speaks! Angels have come to restore all the power and authority known to the faithful of the ancient world. The dispensation of the fulness of times has commenced.

1:19 In establishing his Church and kingdom during the meridian of time, Christ did not choose to convey the keys of that kingdom upon the twelve most learned scribes or rabbis of that generation; rather, he chose, with one exception, unlettered men from Galilee. Of his understanding of the gospel, Paul wrote, "I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ" (Galatians 1:12). In his epistle to the Corinthians he explained: "Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: that no flesh should glory in his presence" (1 Corinthians 1:25-29).

It is that same gospel known to the meridian Saints that the Lord restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Of necessity this means that the Church must be governed by the spirit of revelation as that spirit manifests itself through those whose knowledge and testimony stand independent of the wisdom and learning of the world.

1:20 That every man might speak in the name of God. Along with the restoration of the gospel comes the restoration of the priesthood, which is the power and authority to speak in the name of God. In the providence of God all men are entitled to hold the priesthood and preside over their family in righteousness.

1:22 That mine everlasting covenant might be established. The restoration of the gospel centers on the restoration of the "everlasting covenant," not in the restoration of the organization of the New Testament church. Salvation is found in making and keeping covenants, not in the organizational structure of the Church.

1:23 That the fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 35:13.

Book of Mormon Brought Forth and the Church Established

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1:24-33

1:24 After the manner of their language. Revelations come in the language of those to whom they are given and according to their understanding. If an angel of the Lord speaks to a child he will speak according to the understanding of the child. Similarly, if our spiritual preparation is puny, the revelations we receive will in like manner be puny (2 Nephi 31:3).

1:25-27 We do not believe in the infallibility of prophets or any other set of men. All men err, sin, and are invited to repent (Romans 3:23). Lorenzo Snow observed: "I can fellowship the President of the Church if he does not know everything I know. . . . I saw the . . . imperfections in [Joseph Smith]. . . . I thanked God that He would put upon a man who had those imperfections the power and authority He placed upon him . . . for I knew that I myself had weakness, and I thought there was a chance for me. . . . I thanked God that I saw these imperfections" (quoted by Maxwell, in Conference Report, October 1984, 10). In so saying, Elder Snow reflected both the spirit and counsel of Moroni, who wrote: "Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been" (Mormon 9:31).

1:28 Receive knowledge from time to time. No one lives in a constant deluge of revelation. The treasures of heaven are not dispensed cheaply.

1:29 Joseph Smith did not translate according to the learning of men. He translated "by the gift and power of God" (D&C 135:3). At a Church conference in 1831, Hyrum Smith invited the Prophet to explain more fully how the Book of Mormon came forth. Joseph Smith responded that "it was not intended to tell the world all the particulars of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon; and it was not expedient for him to relate these things" (History of the Church, 1:220). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6-9.

1:30 Bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness. The phrase comes from Isaiah wherein he described the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. "And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness" (Isaiah 29:18; 2 Nephi 27:29). Nephi used this language to describe the latter day gathering of Israel. "Wherefore, he [God] will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheri tance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Nephi 22:12).

This text tells us that those who receive the Book of Mormon (referred to in this verse as "these commandments") will have power "to lay the foundation of this church" and "to bring it forth out of obscurity and out of darkness" (see commentary on D&C 18:4). The primary meaning of the word obscure is not that which is "little known" but rather that which is "devoid of light." It is the darkness of ignorance and unbelief to which this phrase makes reference (D&C 84:54). Nephi properly placed the phrase in the context of latter- day Israel being gathered to the light of the gospel, or more specifically to the knowledge and testimony of Christ, who is the Mighty One of Israel (1 Nephi 15:13-14; 2 Nephi 6:11; 10:7; 25:16-17). Thus the foundation of the Church becomes the truth and testimony of Christ as restored in the Book of Mormon.

Only true . . . church. Catholicism is founded on the idea that authority is necessary to represent God and that certain ordinances are essential to salvation. Those principles in turn dictate that there can be but one true church, meaning one church that has the right to speak for God and perform the ordinances of salvation. Protestantism, on the other hand, in breaking with the mother church, takes the only remaining positionrejecting the need for authority and ordinances. Having done so, Protestantism must of necessity argue that neither ordinances nor church membership is a tenet of salvation and that "the one true church doctrine" is narrow minded, bigoted, and even unchristian. This, of course, is what Protestantism does. Out of this chain of thought grows the popularized notion that it is not what you believe but how you believe that counts and the attendant idea that somehow all churches, even though they teach contradictory doctrines, are trueassuming, of course, that they are Protestant churches.

The idea that all churches are true, though satisfying to those who seek salvation on their own terms, defies every principle of truth and logic known to humankind. Let us briefly consider some of the ways it does so.

First, the essence of Christianity centers on the idea that salvation is in Christ. That being the case, everyone who truly embraces the Christian faith must at the same time embrace the idea that it is only in and through Christ that salvation comes. Christ himself said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6). The doctrine of all the holy prophets has been that there is "none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts 4:12; see also D&C 18:23; 2 Nephi 25:20; 31:21). Within the ranks of those professing to be Christians may be differences on the requirements of salvation, but all must agree on the acceptance of Christ as the source of salvation. At issue here is not whether a line must be drawn between the believer and the nonbeliever but simply where that line should be drawn. Historically Protestants do not hesitate to draw that line in such a manner as to exclude Catholics, Latter-day Saints, Seventh- day Adventists, and Jehovah Witnesses. In practice, then, it becomes a Christian duty for Protestants to draw that line, doing so in such a manner as to exclude all who dare disagree with them. It only becomes an unchristian practice when someone suggests that they are on the wrong side of the line.

Second, to argue that the power of salvation rests in the Protestant world is to argue that a live branch can be cut from a dead tree. Or, as James described it, it is to argue that a fountain can simultaneously bring forth sweet and bitter water or that a fig tree can bear olive berries (James 3:11-12). Protestants claim to have rejected corrupt Catholic traditions in a return to Bible religion. This argument raises two great difficulties. The first is that they simply do not do it. They have retained as foundational to their faith the most corrupting traditions of the old mother church, namely her creeds. The second great difficulty is that Bible religion is itself unbiblical because no one within the covers of the Bible ever had a Bible. Their religion was one of prophets, apostles, and continuous revelation. Never in Bible times was the Church and kingdom of God governed by a book. Now it is important to get our history straight. Christian existence predates the Bible by more than three centuries. The great Christian creeds, the very foundation upon which Protestantism's whole concept of Deity rests, are Bible free. Their creation predates that of the Bible. Protestantism holds fast to these creeds, refusing to acknowledge that they are part of the Catholic tradition that they claim to have rejected. It is allegiance to these creeds that predetermines the manner in which they interpret the Bible. At the same time they claim the Bible to be the last word on all things. Thus traditions rooted in historical creeds rather than the Bible have been retained as the guiding revelations of the Protestant faith.

Third, the notion that salvation can be found in any of a host of contradictory doctrines defies reason and argues that God's kingdom is one of chaos and disorder. We are being asked to believe that if a dozen people add a column of figures and each arrives at a different sum, we must accept each of them as right. After all, it is not the sum that you come to that matters but the zeal with which you add the figures that counts. Similarly, this notion argues that all men, women, and children who receive a prescription from a doctor are entitled to go to the pharmacists and concoct their own mixture of drugs. Not even a fool could swallow such a thing. Yet this is exactly what we are asked to believe in the realm of spiritual things. We are told that laws govern everything in the universe except in the realm of the spirit. As to spiritual things, the argument must become that God leaves it to each man, woman, and child to determine for themselves which gospel principles apply to them and which do not. Salvation becomes a divine smorgasbord at which we all satisfy our own appetites.

To maintain that all churches are truemeaning that they possess the power of salvation and the authority to act as the agent of God may have some resemblance to Christian tolerance. But upon examination such a notion reveals itself to be a deceptive ploy lulling people into the belief that it is for them to dictate the terms of salvation and to determine the nature and character of God. In such a god we have no interest.

True and living church. To be in possession of the doctrines of Christ is not of itself sufficient for salvation. Without living prophets there is no gospel and never has been. The gospel is not a book. "There is no salvation between the two lids of the Bible," Joseph Smith said, "without a legal administrator" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 319). Though the truths of salvation may be found in the Bible, the mere possession of the Bible brings neither the necessary authority to perform the ordinances of salvation nor the spirit of revelation necessary to appropriately apply those truths. One may possess the truth and yet be without the power to breathe life into it.

Some outside The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints profess a belief in the revelations found in the Doctrine and Covenants, but they refuse to sustain those men whom Joseph Smith ordained to be his successors. Yet it is that priesthood held by his successors, according to the revelations Joseph Smith received, that "administereth the gospel" (D&C 84:19). The "only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" must, by definition, possess not only the truths of salvation but also the necessary authority to perform the ordinances of salvation and the spirit of revelation by which those truths are properly applied.

1:33 For my Spirit shall not always strive with man. "The Holy Ghost will not dwell in unclean tabernacles nor strive with people unless they keep their minds as well as their bodies clean, and they are diligent before the Lord" (Smith, Answers, 4:88). The Holy Ghost does not strive with God's children but rather comes to teach, comfort, and edify only as they prepare themselves to receive his companionship. The light of Christ, on the other hand, will labor and strive with people to bring them to the additional light that comes from this member of the Godhead. People and individuals can, however, reach a state in which the light of Christ will cease striving with them. It was such a state that led to the destruction of the Nephite nation at the end of the Book of Mormon. In that context we find Mormon writing his son Moroni, saying, "My son, I fear lest the Lamanites shall destroy this people; for they do not repent, and Satan stirreth them up continually to anger one with another. Behold, I am laboring with them continually; and when I speak the word of God with sharpness they tremble and anger against me; and when I use no sharpness they harden their hearts against it; wherefore, I fear lest the Spirit of the Lord hath ceased striving with them" (Moroni 9:3-4). This proved to be the case as a nation of people turned against the light they had received and were destroyed.

Peace Shall Be Taken from the Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1:34-36

1:34 Make these things known unto all flesh. See commentary on verse 18.

1:35 Peace shall be taken from the earth. Doctrine and Covenants 87, a revelation on "war," states that peace would be taken from the earth with the beginning of the Civil War (vv. 1-2). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 63:32-35.

The devil shall have power over his own dominion. On all matters of light, virtue, and truth we make the choice to fight Satan or concede power to him. Joseph Smith said that "the devil has no power over us only as we permit him. The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181).

1:36 Judgment upon Idumea, or the world. Idumea was the name given to the land of Edom by the Greeks and Romans. Since Israel had to pass through Idumea to obtain the promised land, it became a symbol of the world, or the worldly, through which we must pass to obtain our divine inheritance.

Search These Commandments

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 1:37-39

1:37 Search these commandments. The command is to search those things recorded in the Book of Commandments, or what we now have as the Doctrine and Covenants. It is the obligation of every faithful Saint.

They are true and faithful. The word "true" is derived from the Old English "treowe," which means faithful, trustworthy, or covenant. To be true is to be constant, steadfast, and faithful. The thrust of the meaning here is that the words of the Lord are completely reliable or trustworthy and that obedient acceptance of them constitutes a covenant with God that he cannot break (D&C 82:10). Teaching this principle, Nephi said, "I heard a voice from the Father, saying: Yea, the words of my Beloved are true and faithful. He that endureth to the end, the same shall be saved" (2 Nephi 31:15).

1:38 Whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my servants, it is the same. The Lord's agents, those holding his priesthood, have both the right and responsibility to speak in the first person for him. For instance, speaking to Moses, the Lord said, "Thou shalt be made stronger than many waters; for they shall obey thy command as if thou wert God" (Moses 1:25).
