Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 3

DATE: JULY 1828

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

After Martin Harris's return from New York, where he showed the transcribed characters of the Book of Mormon to Charles Anthon, he commenced again his labor as scribe for the prophet about 12 April 1828. The two men worked together until 14 June, by which time they had completed 116 pages of manuscript on foolscap paper.

Joseph Smith recalled, "Some time after Mr. Harris had begun to write for me, he began to importune me to give him liberty to carry the writings home and show them; and desired of me that I would inquire of the Lord, through the Urim and Thummim, if he might not do so. I did inquire, and the answer was that he must not. However, he was not satisfied with this answer, and desired that I should inquire again. I did so, and the answer was as before. Still he could not be contented, but insisted that I should inquire once more. After much solicitation I again inquired of the Lord, and permission was granted him to have the writings on certain conditions; which were, that he show them only to his brother, Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife. In accordance with this last answer, I required of him that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in a most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding, however, the great restrictions which he had been laid under, and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him, and they never have been recovered unto this day.

"In the meantime, while Martin Harris was gone with the writings, I went to visit my father's family at Manchester. I continued there for a short season, and then returned to my place in Pennsylvania. Immediately after my return home, I was walking out a little distance, when, behold, the former heavenly messenger appeared and handed to me the Urim and Thummim againfor it had been taken from me in consequence of my having wearied the Lord in asking for the privilege of letting Martin Harris take the writings, which he lost by transgression and I inquired of the Lord through it, and obtained the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:21-22).

The Lord's Course

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 3:1-4

3:1 The purposes of God cannot be frustrated. As God cannot be deceived, neither can he be surprised, caught unaware, or unprepared. Provisions were made for the loss of the 116 pages even while the Book of Mormon was being engraved on the gold plates. Thirty years after arriving in the promised land, Nephi was commanded by the Lord to make another record in addition to the general record he had been keeping. Nephi said, "I have received a commandment of the Lord that I should make these [the small] plates, for the special purpose that there should be an account engraven of the ministry of my people" (1 Nephi 9:3). Nephi did not know why, but he was obedient because he trusted that "the Lord hath commanded me to make these plates for a wise purpose in him, which purpose I know not" (1 Nephi 9:5). These small plates were passed to Jacob, his sons, and eventually King Benjamin and the judges until they came into Mormon's hands. Mormon was inspired to insert these small plates after having abridged the large plates. He admitted that he did not know why but said he knew they would be "choice unto my brethren. And I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me . . . but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come" (Words of Mormon 1:6-7). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 10.

3:4 Sets at naught the counsels of God. More anxious to be heard than to hear, Joseph disregarded the Lord's counsel that he not entrust the 116 pages to Martin Harris. Having been twice refused by the Lord, he asked yet a third time and received the answer he sought. The stage was set for him to learn a lesson as important as it was painful.

No office or calling can excuse either man or woman from the responsibility of following the Lord's counsel and direction. For this reason, the life of Christ becomes such a perfect example for us. In all things he sought only to do the will of his Father (Mosiah 15:7). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 24:2.

Fear God More Than Man

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 3:5-8

3:5 You have been entrusted with these things. Properly the responsi bility for the loss of the 116 pages rested with Joseph Smith even though Martin Harris failed to keep his covenant with the Prophet. Concerning the plates, Moroni told Joseph Smith that he "should be responsible for them; that if [he] should let them go carelessly, or through any neglect of [his], [he] should be cut off" (Joseph Smith-History 1:59). In principle these same instructions applied to the translation text. Lucy Mack Smith explained that "the Lord permitted Martin Harris to take the manuscript home with him, on the condition that my son was responsible for its safety. This my son was willing to do, as he could not conceive it possible for so kind a friend to betray the trust reposed in him" (History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 160-61).

3:5 Remember also the promises which were made to you. Moroni told the Prophet that if he would make every effort to preserve the plates, he would be able to keep them safe (Joseph Smith-History 1:59). Oliver Cowdery said Moroni instructed Joseph after his first unsuccessful attempt to obtain the plates, saying, "You now see why you could not obtain this record; that the commandment was strict, and that if ever these sacred things are obtained they must be by prayer and faithfulness in obeying the Lord. . . . No man can obtain them if his heart is impure, because they contain that which is sacred. . . . Now, go thy way, remembering what the Lord has done for thee, and be diligent in keeping his commandments, and he will deliver thee from temptations and all the arts and devices of the wicked one.Forget not to pray, that thy mind may become strong, that when he shall manifest unto thee, thou mayest have power to escape the evil, and obtain those precious things" (Messenger and Advocate, 2:198-99).

3:7 You should not have feared man more than God. It is not difficult to see why Joseph Smith was eager to grant the request of Martin Harris to show the translation to his wife and family. Martin was Joseph's senior by more than twenty years. He was a wealthy land owner while Joseph was but a day laborer. In giving much by way of time and support to Joseph, Martin had become estranged from his wife and had become the laughing stock of Palmyra.

Martin's wife, Lucy Harris, had given her husband an ultimatum that he either bring the manuscript home for her to see or she would leave him, taking the children with her. After her husband's first visit to Harmony to serve as Joseph's scribe, Martin's wife "prepared a bed and room for him alone, which she refused to enter" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 155).

The Prophet's mother gave the following account of events in the Harris home after Mrs. Harris returned from visiting the Prophet in Harmony: "When she returned home, which was about two weeks from the time she arrived in Harmony, she endeavored to dissuade Mr. Harris from having anything further to do with the writing or translating of the record. But Mr. Harris paid but little attention to her, and as he had agreed to go back and write for a season at least, he did so.

"After Mr. Harris left again for Pennsylvania, his wife went from place to place, and from house to house, telling her grievances to everyone she met, but particularly bewailing that the deception which Joe Smith was practicing upon the people was about to strip her of all that she possessed. 'But,' said the woman, 'I know how to take care of my property, and I'll let them see that pretty shortly.' So she carried away her furniture, linen and bedding, and other movable articles, till she well-nigh divested the premises of everything which could conduce to comfort or convenience. These things she deposited with her friends in whom she reposed sufficient confidence to assure her of the safety of her property" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 157-58). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:25.

Notwithstanding these things, Joseph was to learn to fear God more than man. He was to trust the Lord to reward his servants and to make right all that in his wisdom should be corrected. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:21.

Joseph Is Warned to Repent

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 3:9-15

3:9 Thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord. "The Prophet Joseph Smith . . . [was] reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work" (D&C 138:53). Regardless of this foreordination, the Church is the Lord's and it is for him to run it. Neither Joseph Smith nor any other man in this church is greater than the calling to which they have been ordained.

Because of transgression, if thou art not aware thou wilt fall. When Martin informed Joseph that he had lost the manuscript, Lucy Mack Smith said that Joseph clinched his hands together and exclaimed, "'All is lost, is lost! What shall I do? I have sinned. It is I who tempted the wrath of God by asking him for that which I had no right to ask, as I was differently instructed by the angel.' And he wept and groaned, walking the floor continually.

"At last he told Martin to go back to his house and search again. 'No,' said Mr. Harris, 'it is all in vain, for I have looked in every place in the house. I have even ripped open beds and pillows, and I know it is not there.'

"'Then must I,' said Joseph, 'return to my wife with such a tale as this? I dare not do it lest I should kill her at once. And how shall I appear before the Lord? Of what rebuke am I not worthy from the angel of the Most High?'

"I besought him not to mourn so, for it might be that the Lord would forgive him, after a short season of humiliation and repentance on his part. But what could I say to comfort him, when he saw all the family in the same situation of mind that he was? Our sobs and groans, and the most bitter lamentations filled the house. Joseph, in particular, was more distressed than the rest, for he knew definitely and by sorrowful experience the consequence of what would seem to others to be a very trifling neglect of duty. He continued walking backwards and forwards, weeping and grieving like a tender infant until about sunset, when we persuaded him to take a little nourishment" (History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 165-66).

3:10 But remember, God is merciful; therefore, repent. God is not a vengeful master bent on the punishment of his servants. He is firm but also merciful. Because he desires to bless his children, he will prepare a way to deliver them, if they will repent and obey.

As published in the Book of Commandments, this verse included an additional phrase. "Therefore, repent of that which thou hast done, and he will only cause thee to be afflicted for a season." By turning his heart to the Lord, Joseph lost the gift of translation and the peace of the Spirit for only a short time (v. 14).

3:12-13 A wicked man . . . has broken the most sacred promises. The Lord had placed "certain conditions" on the permission that was granted to Martin Harris when he took the manuscript to Palmyra. The conditions were "that he show them only to his brother, Preserved Harris, his own wife, his father and his mother, and a Mrs. Cobb, a sister to his wife. In accordance with this last answer, I required of him that he should bind himself in a covenant to me in a most solemn manner that he would not do otherwise than had been directed. He did so. He bound himself as I required of him, took the writings, and went his way. Notwithstanding, however, the great restrictions which he had been laid under, and the solemnity of the covenant which he had made with me, he did show them to others, and by stratagem they got them away from him, and they never have been recovered unto this day" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:21). Lucy Mack Smith indicated that Martin "bound himself in a written covenant of the most solemn nature" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1979, 124).

3:14 Thou hast lost thy privileges for a season. Moroni took both the plates and the Urim and Thummim from the Prophet before Joseph received this revelation. Speaking of the events following his return to Harmony, Joseph said: "After I arrived here, I commenced humbling myself in mighty prayer before the Lord, and as I poured out my soul in supplication to him, that if possible I might obtain mercy at his hands and be forgiven of all that I had done which was contrary to his will, an angel stood before me, and answered me, saying, that I had sinned in delivering the manuscript into the hands of a wicked man, and as I had ventured to become responsible for this man's faithfulness, I would of necessity suffer the consequences of his indiscretion, and I must now give back the Urim and Thummim into his (the angel's) hands.

"This I did as I was directed, and as I handed them to him he remarked, 'If you are very humble and penitent, it may be you will receive them again; if so, it will be on the twenty-second of next September'" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 173-74).

The Book of Mormon to Save the Seed of Lehi

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 3:16-20

3:19 For this very purpose are these plates preserved. On the title page of the Book of Mormon, Moroni indicates that the book was written "to show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever And also to the convincing of the Jew and Gentile that JESUS is the Christ, the ETERNAL God." From beginning to end, the book is true to its announced purpose. In one of many examples that could be cited, Nephi spoke prophetically of a day in which the gospel would be taken to Lehi's seed, saying, "At that day shall the remnant of our seed know that they are of the house of Israel, and that they are the covenant people of the Lord; and then shall they know and come to the knowledge of their forefathers, and also to the knowledge of the gospel of their Redeemer, which was ministered unto their fathers by him; wherefore, they shall come to the knowledge of their Redeemer and the very points of his doctrine, that they may know how to come unto him and be saved" (1 Nephi 15:14).

The story unfolding here is that Moroni, the son of Mormon, who identified himself as "a pure descendant of Lehi" (3 Nephi 5:20), is bringing a sacred history to Joseph Smith in order that the Prophet might translate it and see that it is taken to the posterity of those who wrote it. For some reason it is of great importance to the writers of the book that their descendants, though many generations removed, receive it. It witnesses that the hearts of the fathers are turned to their children that death and the distance of time have not lessened their love and concern for them. It is a bold declaration that the enforced separation brought by death was not intended to bring an end to the family unit. It testifies that righteous parents watch over their children and their children's children through the generations, praying and laboring in their behalf.
