Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 4

DATE: FEBRUARY 1829

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

During the month of February 1829, Joseph Smith Sr. and his wife, Lucy, traveled to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to visit with their son Joseph and his wife, Emma. They had not seen Joseph since he left in the sorrowful circumstances following the loss of the 116 pages of the Book of Mormon manuscript. After receiving the news that the Lord had restored the ancient record and the gift of translation to his son, Joseph Smith Sr. asked his son to inquire in his behalf relative to his duty. This revelation is the result of that inquiry.

Valiant Service Saves the Lord's Ministers

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 4:1-4

4:1 A marvelous work is about to come forth. The marvelous work to which reference is made is the Book of Mormon and the restored Church. The language is that of Isaiah, the great prophet of the Restoration. Speaking for the Lord, he wrote, "Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid" (Isaiah 29:14).

4:2 The measure of our love for God is found in the way we live his gospel and labor in his cause. Our service to him ought to always represent the "first fruits" or the best we have to offer. Surely, we would not give Christ the scraps from our table but rather the seat of honor. Anciently, the law of sacrifice required the best of one's flocksthe breeding stock and the best of their fruits, the prized seed. Such an offering attested that God and the things of his kingdom came first, that our first love was not for the earth and its goodness but rather for the goodness of heaven. So it must ever be among his people.

4:3 This text is not intended to suggest that we can assume the right to act in the name of the Lord without having been called by prophecy and the laying on of hands. Rather, it explains that the desire to servethe willingness to serve as neededwill give birth to the opportunity to serve.

4:4 Field is white already to harvest. The hearts of many are ready to accept the gospel and unite themselves with the house of faith.

He that thrusteth in his sickle. After returning home to the Palmyra- Manchester, New York, area, Father Smith had opportunity to thrust his sickle into fields that were ripe for the gospel harvest. It was around this time that Oliver Cowdery came to stay in the Smith home and, from there, went to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to offer his help to the Prophet as a scribe. Joseph Smith Sr. also helped to strengthen the testimonies of Thomas B. Marsh, Solomon Chamberlain, and Parley P. Pratt in the days that immediately followed (McConkie, Father of the Prophet, 113-16).

In October and November 1830 Father Smith was unable to pay a fourteen-dollar debt. The holder of the note was a Quaker who hoped that he could persuade Joseph Sr. to renounce his testimony of the Book of Mormon at the promise of being set free. In addition to laboring in the jail's cooper shop to earn money to pay off the debt, Father Smith preached every Sunday that he was in jail. After his release, he baptized two individuals who were incarcerated with him and whose hearts had been pricked by the message of the marvelous work that had come forth in the latter-days as expounded by Father Smith (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 238-43).

He perisheth not, but bringeth salvation to his soul. Those who dedicate their efforts to bringing others to salvation save their own souls in the process. The Savior provided the perfect example of this process in his mortal ministry and invited all to follow him. Those who take upon them the name of Jesus Christ and covenant to enter into a partnership of caring about others and serving God with all of their souls receive grace for grace. The Lord strengthens them and enlarges their capacity to bless the lives of those they serve. The spiritual growth and testimony that comes through experiences gained in the service of God can be stored up, like summer wheat for the winter season. When winter storms blow in the paths of people who have faithfully served and developed this spiritual strength, they are able to endure in faith to the end.

Revelation identifies that faithful service and obedience have a direct relationship with the remission of sins: "Blessed are you who are now hearing these words of mine from the mouth of my servant, for your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 50:36). "Ye are blessed, for the testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon; and they rejoice over you, and your sins are forgiven you" (D&C 62:3). "I will forgive you of your sins with this commandment that you remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer" (D&C 84:61). "Verily thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Lyman: Your sins are forgiven you, because you have obeyed my voice in coming up hither this morning to receive counsel of him whom I have appointed" (D&C 108:1).

Qualifying to Serve God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 4:5-7

4:6 Remember faith . . . charity. These same qualities are mentioned by the apostle Peter in 2 Peter 1:5-10. He indicates that there is an additive order to the attaining of these attributes. Virtue is added to faith, knowledge is added to virtue, and so on. These characteristics are also mentioned in the instructions on priesthood in Doctrine and Covenants 107:30. In both instances, readers are promised that "if these things abound in them they shall not be unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord" (D&C 107:31). Of these qualities Peter says, "If ye do these things, ye shall never fall" (2 Peter 1:10).
