Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 5

DATE: MARCH 1829

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

After repenting of the vanity and foolishness that resulted in the loss of the 116 pages, Martin Harris requested the Prophet to inquire of the Lord in his behalf. The content of this revelation suggests that he still desired to see the plates.

Martin Harris Desires to See the Plates

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 5:1-4

5:1 Martin Harris has desired a witness. More than seven months had passed since the Lord sorely chastened the Prophet Joseph Smith for the lost manuscript episode. It appears that Martin Harris, identified in an earlier revelation as a wicked man who broke sacred promises (D&C 3:12-13), requested this witness because he had not seen the plates and was troubled about whether Joseph actually had them.

5:4 You have a gift to translate the plates. Joseph's ability to translate the plates, while requiring great faith and mental discipline, was a gift of God. The gift had been given for the Lord's purpose and was to be used only for that purpose. All references to the translation of the Book of Mormon in holy writ affirm that it was translated by "the gift and power of God" (Preface to the Book of Mormon; Testimony of the Three Witnesses; D&C 135:3).

The Lord's Word to This Generation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 5:5-10

5:6 Hereafter you shall be ordained. Common thought in the Protestant world is that spiritual experiences constitute the authority to declare the word of God. This is not the case. As the Prophet would yet write, "We believe that a man must be called of God, by prophecy, and by the laying on of hands by those who are in authority, to preach the Gospel and administer in the ordinances thereof" (Article of Faith 5). At this point in time, the authority to act in the name of God had not been restored. It was while the Prophet was laboring on the translation of the Book of Mormon that the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods were restored.

5:7 Modern history knows no book more criticized or vehemently damned by priests and clergy than the Book of Mormon. What is of interest is that there has never been a single instance in which these critics of the book have attempted to use the standard given by the Savior to discern whether it is true. Never has one of these spiritual leaders stood before their congregations or suggested to those to whom they write that they apply the simple test suggested by the book itselfread it and pray about it. On the contrary, countless efforts have been made to discredit the book through the use of bad history or poor reasoning.

The idea of discerning something by its fruits (content or message) comes from Christ. But from whence comes the idea of discerning by roots (authorship, antiquity, etc.)? Is it not significant that those choosing to judge the Bible by its roots have never come to faithful conclusions about its origins? Do we really want to reject the Book of Mormon with a standard that is equally, if not more, damaging to the credibility of the Bible? For example, try to find a higher critic who believes that Moses wrote the books of Moses, that Isaiah actually wrote the sixty- six chapters attributed to him, that David wrote the psalms ascribed to him, that Solomon is the author of Proverbs, or that Matthew and John wrote the books bearing their names. If you want to quibble with scholars over this matter according to their rules of scholarship, you will losethe Bible is not what it professes to be. But if you want to apply the test of the Savior and taste the fruits of the Bible, you will winit is all that it professes to be and more.

We cannot all be scholars and know all that our schools have to teach, but we can all be spiritual and learn those things that the Spirit has to teach. Again we turn to Christ for a standard by which all men might know truth. His words were as follows: "My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself" (John 7:16-17).

5:10 This generation shall have my word through you. As used in the text, the word generation can properly be understood to mean "dispensation." Just as there is no valid priesthood authority on the earth today that does not trace to the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smithto whom that priesthood was restoredso is there no valid testimony or knowledge of the truths of salvation that does not in like manner trace to him. As one cannot legitimately accept the Father while rejecting the testimony of his divine Son, so one cannot in truth profess to accept the Son while rejecting those upon whom he has placed his name. In the meridian day one could not profess to accept Christ while rejecting Peter or the other apostles; so it is in our day. One cannot profess to accept Christ while rejecting Joseph Smith, for he is the great revelator of Christ for this dispensation.

Each dispensation has followed this divinely appointed pattern. Those of all past dispensations were required to accept the testimony of the prophet called of God to lead them. Thus their faith was to be centered in the words of a living prophet rather than those of a dead one. In the days of Adam, then, to reject Adam as the Lord's spokesman was to close the door of salvation in one's own face. Yet if, in the name of loyalty to Adam or another of the dead prophets, individuals living in the days of Moses had rejected him and the gospel he received on Sinai, they too would have closed the door of salvation. In all generations, the faith of the true Saints has been a living one which manifests itself in the Saints' acceptance of the revelations of heaven as they are given for their own time and circumstances.

The Testimony of Three Witnesses

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 5:11-20

5:11 The testimony of three. More than twenty-three hundred years before the plates came forth in 1827, the Lord revealed to the prophet Nephi, "The book shall be hid from the eyes of the world, that the eyes of none shall behold it save it be that three witnesses shall behold it, by the power of God, besides him to whom the book shall be delivered; and they shall testify to the truth of the book and the things therein" (2 Nephi 27:12). Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris were chosen by the Lord to be witnesses of the gold plates (D&C 17). This was consistent with the law to determine truth as declared to ancient Israel: "at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established" (Deuteronomy 19:15).

Each of the Three Witnesses remained true throughout their lives to their testimony of the Book of Mormon. "When he reiterated his testimony [of the Book of Mormon] in the closing days of his life, David Whitmer said: 'I tell you of these things that you may tell others that what I have said is true, and I dare not deny it; I heard the voice of God commanding me to testify to the same'" (Anderson, Investigating, 118).

5:11 I will show these things. The Three Witnesses saw the plates and other sacred objects by the power of God. Joseph Smith did not show the plates to the Three Witnesses, the angel of God did. These men were not Joseph's witnesses, but they were witnesses commissioned by God to bear testimony to the world that they had seen the plates and the other sacred objects.

Shall go forth with my words. Beginning with the first edition of the Book of Mormon, each copy of the book has contained the testimony of the Three Witnesses (The Testimony of Three Witnesses, introductory pages of the Book of Mormon). The first edition of the book concluded with their testimony. Subsequent editions placed their testimony in the front of the book as a preface or introduction to it.

5:12 They shall know of a surety that these things are true. In addition to testifying that they had seen the plates, the Three Witnesses also included the following as their testimony to the world: "And we also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a surety that the work is true" (The Testimony of Three Witnesses, introductory pages of the Book of Mormon).

5:14 To none else will I grant this power, to receive this same testimony. The experience of the Three Witnesses is distinct from both the experience of the Eight Witnesses and the reported experience of Mary Whitmer in seeing the plates. While the Prophet Joseph Smith showed the eight men the plates and a messenger outside the Whitmer barn showed Mary Whitmer the plates, the Three Witnesses were shown the plates in vision by the power of God. In addition, they saw other sacred objects (D&C 17:1), beheld an angel, and heard the voice of God from heaven. No other witnesses have been granted such a powerful confirmation of the verity of the book.

The coming forth of my church out of the wilderness. This phrase comes from the revelation that John the Revelator received while on the Isle of Patmos (Revelation 12:1-6). He saw a woman who had given birth to a child and was afterward driven into the wilderness. Later, in the Joseph Smith Translation, the interpretation of the woman as representing "the church of God" driven into the wilderness was confirmed (JST Revelation 12:7).

The Church being driven into the wilderness represents the great apostasy that occurred in the meridian day, when the Church was both literally and figuratively driven into the wilderness. In this revelation the Lord announced that the time had come for his Church to come out of the wilderness. The First Vision and the translation of the Book of Mormon constitute the beginning of the restoration of the kingdom of God on the earth.

Clear as the moon, and fair as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners. The Church is to come out of the "wilderness of darkness, and shine forth" (D&C 109:73). It will rise up as the sun that dissipates the darkness of the long night of apostasy with its light. It will shine as the clear whiteness of the moon in contrast to the darkness of the night. It will announce its arrival openly, with banners unfurled, and cause emotions of terror in the breasts of the armies of Lucifer. The rising light of the Restoration, symbolically embodied in the sun and moon, causes the hounds of hell to howl. The restoration of the kingdom of God in the dispensation of the fulness of times indicates that the dawning of the Millennium is near. Therefore, Satan "knoweth that he hath but a short time" (Revelation 12:12) before he will be bound and unable to tempt the children of men. Thus the Church is likened to a mighty army that has come to reclaim the earth for its rightful king.

In 1834 the Lord indicated that before Zion or Jackson County could be redeemed, the Saints must fulfill this description by becoming sanctified through receiving their endowment in the Lord's house at Kirtland, Ohio (D&C 105:31-33).

5:16 The promise here is that those who believe in the Book of Mormon will also experience other manifestations of the Spirit of the Lord. The knowledge obtained from the Book of Mormon brings with it greater faith in the God of heaven, which faith in turn brings a greater yield in the blessings of the Spirit.

5:19 A desolating scourge shall go forth. Since the time of this revelation, the world has suffered from the chastisement of cholera, small pox, and, more recently, AIDS. The continuation and extent of the sicknesses that shall yet plague the world are dependent upon mankind's response to the Lord's command to repent of their sins. Isaiah prophesied: "The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left" (Isaiah 24:5-6). In this revelation the Lord specifically states that the scourge awaiting the world is a result of people hardening their hearts against the testimony of the Book of Mormon and of the restoration of the Church of Jesus Christ. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:17.

5:20 As I also told the people of the destruction of Jerusalem. On the last day of his mortal ministry as the Savior taught on the temple mount, he prophesied its destruction, saying that not so much as one stone would be left standing upon another. That evening, surrounded by his disciples in a private garden on the Mount of Olives, he responded to their questions about his prophecy and told them that the nation of the Jews would be destroyed and that its survivors would be scattered among those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:16; Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:1-4, page 340.

It is now a matter of history that the Roman armies destroyed Jerusalem in A.D. 70. As impossible as the Master's prophecy must have appeared in the day in which it was uttered, every jot and tittle has been fulfilled.

Here we are told that if the inhabitants of the earth do not repent, the destruction of the wicked inhabitants of the earth by a desolating scourge in the latter-days is equally as sure as the destruction that came upon Jerusalem.

Martin Harris as One of the Witnesses

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 5:21-29

5:21 Yield to the persuasions of men no more. The Prophet is reminded of the difficult lesson learned when he yielded to Martin Harris's requests regarding the 116-page manuscript. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 3:7.

5:22 Even if you should be slain. This is the first hint in the revelations given to Joseph Smith that a martyr's death awaited him. While incarcerated in Liberty Jail, he was told that "there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (D&C 121:25), and that "bounds" had been set beyond which his enemies could not go. "Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:9).

5:24 If he will bow down before me. Martin's wickedness in breaking his covenant regarding the 116-page manuscript was known to all those who were involved. Martin acknowledged to the Prophet Joseph Smith that he had sinned. Indeed, his first words to Joseph after losing the manuscript were, "Oh! I have lost my soul. I have lost my soul" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 165). Martin had not approached God concerning his sins, however. Like Martin Harris, all who transgress the commandments of God must bow themselves before the God of heaven to seek his forgiveness. The truly repentant must humble themselves before God in acknowledging their sins and covenant with him to keep his commandments (v. 28).

Then will I grant unto him a view of the things which he desires to see. Martin was given a conditional promise that he would be one of the three special witnesses to be shown the plates by the power of God. To be granted this privilege Martin must humble himself before the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 17:2.

5:29 Nor trouble me any more concerning this matter. Earlier, when the Lord revealed that Martin Harris could not take the 116-page manuscript to show to his wife and others, he persisted in the request like a young child pestering a parent until Joseph wearied and gave in to his request. Here the Lord announced that he would give his answer but once. Having so done it was then up to Martin Harris to repent and qualify himself to be one of the special witnesses of the Book of Mormon.

The Lord Directs Joseph Concerning the Translation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 5:30-35

5:30-34 I will provide means whereby thou mayest accomplish the thing which I have commanded thee. The Lord is directing the work of the translation of the Book of Mormon. When Martin Harris broke his covenant and subsequently lost the 116-page manuscript, he no longer served as a scribe. Emma, Joseph's wife, stated that she and her brother, Reuben Hale, both aided as scribes for part of the translation (Saints Herald, 26:289). The Lord did not intend for either Emma or Reuben to be the primary scribe for the Book of Mormon translation. Within a few weeks Oliver Cowdery would be led by the hand of the Lord to Harmony, where he would offer his help to the Prophet. See introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6.
