Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84

DATE: 22 AND 23 SEPTEMBER 1832

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

The Prophet Joseph Smith designated as a revelation on priesthood the revelation now recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 84. Any account of the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood, if the Prophet left one, is lost to us. We do not know what instruction, explanation, or direction Peter, James, and John gave Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery when this priesthood was conferred upon them. Thus, section 84 becomes the first great revelation on the nature and purpose of the Melchizedek Priesthood for our dispensation. In the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, section 20which directs the organization of the Church and discusses the duties of elders, priests, teachers, and deacons constituted section 1; the revelation we have now in section 84 came next, followed by what is known today as section 107, which also deals with matters pertaining to the priesthood. Clearly, this arrangement points to the importance of the organization of the Church and of the restoration of the authority upon which it is founded.

Section 84 gives us a meaningful understanding of what took place anciently regarding the priesthood and dramatizes that ours is truly a restored church, possessing the authority held by prophets of Old and New Testament times. This revelation centers on the restoration of the priesthood to Moses and his desire to give the fulness of its blessings to his people, who refused it and thus had it taken from them.

The Lord sent Moses down into Egypt not simply to liberate an enslaved people but to create a holy nation. Surely there was reason to wonder if leaving the fertile valley of the Nile for the furnace of Sinai was any kind of liberation. But it was at Sinai that the Lord announced his intention to make of them a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (Exodus 19:5-6). They, like their ancient fathers, were to be a covenant people. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had stood in God's divine presence and received the promise of a continuation of their seed throughout the endless expanses of eternity. Likewise, the Lord manifested himself to their children and extended the same promise to them. Thus it was that Moses was to sanctify the children of Israel and prepare them to stand in the presence of the Lord.

Not willing to fully sanctify themselves, the children of Israel refused to come into the presence of God and thus lost the privilege of holding the priesthood given to prepare them for that purpose. The Lord, therefore, took the Melchizedek Priesthood from them and left them to be governed by the Aaronic or Levitical Order.

In our day the Melchizedek Priesthood has been restored for the same purpose. Under the direction of a modern Moses, Israel is once again to be gathered that she might be offered the blessings the Lord sought to give her fathers at Sinai. The place of the gathering is the New Jerusalem, where the mountain of the Lord's house is to be built. Here, the gathered hosts of Israel can sanctify themselves that they might stand where their forefathers would not: in the presence of their God.

The New Jerusalem and the Temple to Be Built in Missouri

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:1-5

84:2 Two reasons are given in this text for the organization of the Church: (1) for the gathering of Israel as promised by ancient prophets, and (2) for the gathering of the Saints to "stand upon Mount Zion," the New Jerusalem. That is, Israel must be gathered or returned to the covenants and promises made to her faithful fathers. According to prophecy, the Lord's people are to build temples in both the New Jerusalem and the Jerusalem of old. Then the prophecy of Isaiah will find fulfillment that "out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:3; 2 Nephi 12:3). Revelation directs that they "who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion. And let them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the Lord's house" (D&C 133:12-13).

84:3 Orson Pratt explained: "God gave commandment to His people in the summer of 1831 that they should gather up from the Eastern lands, New York, the New England States, Pennsylvania and the Middle States, from Ohio and various parts of the United States, upon the western frontiers of Missouri; that is, that they should continue to gather, but not let their flight be in haste, and let all things be prepared before them. God led forth the Prophet that He had raised up to the western part of Missouri, and pointed out, by His own finger, where the great city of Zion should stand in the latter days, the great city of the New Jerusalem that should be built up on the American continent. I say He pointed out these things and gave direction to His people to gather to that land, and commanded them to lay the corner stone of a great and magnificent temple that was to be built during the generation in which the people then lived. The corner stone was laid in the summer of 1831, in Jackson County, State of Missouri" (Journal of Discourses, 13:359-60).

84:4-5 It is through the faith of the Latter-day Saints that these words will yet find a literal fulfillment. "The Latter- day Saints have as firm faith and rely upon this promise," stated Orson Pratt, "as much as they rely upon the promise of forgiveness of sins when they comply with the first principles of the Gospel. We just as much expect that a city will be built, called Zion, in the place and on the land which has been appointed by the Lord our God, and that a temple will be reared on the spot that has been selected, and the corner- stone of which has been laid, in the generation when this revelation was given; we just as much expect this as we expect the sun to rise in the morning and set in the evening; or as much as we expect to see the fulfillment of any of the purposes of the Lord our God, pertaining to the works of his hands" (Journal of Discourses, 14:275).

Confusion, however, has centered on the meaning of the word generation, as used in these verses. Speaking to Joseph Smith, the Lord said, "This generation shall have my word through you" (D&C 5:10). In this instance, as in the present, the word generation is being used as a synonym for the word dispensation. Similarly, when the Lord said that it is "a wicked and adulterous generation" that seeks after signs (Matthew 16:4), he was not confining the principle to the period of time between parents' births and the birth of their children. In the case of the temple in Jackson County, generation means dispensation.

To explain why the Saints were unable to build the temple in Missouri during Joseph Smith's lifetime, the Lord said: "When I give a commandment to any of the sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their offerings. And the iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and commandments I will visit upon the heads of those who hindered my work, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord God. Therefore, for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those whom I commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in Jackson county, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith the Lord your God. And I will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and anguish, and gnashing of teeth upon their heads, unto the third and fourth generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord your God. And this I make an example unto you, for your consolation concerning all those who have been commanded to do a work and have been hindered by the hands of their enemies, and by oppression, saith the Lord your God" (D&C 124:49-53).

84:5 A cloud shall rest upon it. The cloud is a sign attesting to both the glory and the presence of the Lord. "And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion," prophesied Isaiah, "and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence" (Isaiah 4:5). Here Isaiah compares the homes of the Saints to the temple, thus emphasizing the sanctity of Zion and her people in this marvelous day (Parry, Parry, and Peterson, Understanding Isaiah, 49; Exodus 16:10; 24:15-16; 34:5; 2 Chronicles 5:13-14).

Priesthood of Moses Traced to Adam

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:6-17

84:6-17 Properly, all who profess to act in the name of God may be required to show proof of their having been so ordained. Thus, priesthood, which embraces the authority to speak in the name of Deity and to perform the ordinances of salvation, must, if legitimate, be traceable to God himself. In illustration, the priesthood of Moses is here traced through the generations back to father Adam, who received it from God himself even while in the Garden of Eden (Abraham 1:2-4; Facsimile 2, Explan ation, Figure 3).

84:6 Jethro. When Moses fled from Egypt after killing Pharaoh's overseer, he lived with Jethro, a prince and priest of Midian. Moses married Jethro's daughter Zipporah and tended his sheep (Exodus 2:11-22; 3:1). Joseph Fielding Smith said: "Remember that the priesthood was not confined solely to the descendants of Jacob. Moses got his priesthood from Jethro who was not a descendant of Jacob, but was a descendant of Abraham. The blessings of Abraham are to be given to the Gentiles who repent and receive the gospel, and by adoption they become of the seed of Abraham" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:87).

84:12-13 Esaias. Following the pattern given in Doctrine and Covenants 107:40-53, Esaias received the holy priesthood from God (or one who had authority), then, at a subsequent time, received the fulness of the blessings of the priesthood under the hand of Abraham. This may suggest that when Melchizedek and his city were taken up (JST Genesis 14:33-34), Abraham succeeded him as the head of the dispensation.

84:14 It has frequently been taught that Melchizedek and Shem are one and the same. The argument traces back to Jewish traditions, more particularly to those who could not countenance the idea that Abraham, the father of the Semitic race, would bow down to or be subservient to someone not of that lineage. Melchizedek is an enigma to the scholars of the world who often think that he is a Canaanite priest. These verses lay that tradition to rest with the revelation that Melchizedek traced his priesthood through the "fathers even till Noah," the father of Shem. If it is reasoned that Melchizedek is the son of Noah, it would also follow, by such a reading of these verses, that Noah was the son of Enoch (v. 15). See commentary on Joseph Smith Translation Genesis 14:26-40, page 331.

84:16 Abel. Joseph Smith tells us that Abel held the keys of his dispensation (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 169), while Adam held the keys over all dispensations. Thus, in killing Abel, Cain took the life of the Lord's anointed. In later generations it was held by certain apostates that "the blood of the righteous Abel was shed for sins" (JST Genesis 17:7).

Conspiracy of his brother. A conspiracy is a secret agreement for harmful purposes. Cain was not alone in the murder of his brother. In the book of Moses we learn that "Satan said unto Cain: Swear unto me by thy throat, and if thou tell it thou shalt die; and swear thy brethren by their heads, and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if they tell it, they shall surely die; and this that thy father may not know it; and this day I will deliver thy brother Abel into thine hands. And Satan sware unto Cain that he would do according to his commands. And all these things were done in secret" (Moses 5:29-30).

Adam, who was the first man. The revelations of the Restoration declare that Adam "was the son of God" (Moses 6:22), that he was the "firstborn" of all men (Abraham 1:3), and that he was in the "image of his [God's] own body" (Moses 6:9). Lehi referred to Adam and Eve as "our first parents" and said that they brought forth "the family of all the earth" (2 Nephi 2:15, 20). The present text affirms that he "was the first man." Holy writ does not countenance the notion of pre-Adamites.

84:17 The church of God in all generations. Matthew 16:18 is the first reference to the word church in the Bible. It is commonly argued in the sectarian world that no church organization existed prior to the Savior's ministry. Here we are assured that not only was there a church in Old Testament times but also that the Church of God existed "in all generations," meaning dispensations (D&C 107:4).

The Greater Priesthood Administers the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:18-25

84:19 This greater priesthood administereth the gospel. All that is done in the Church and kingdom of God is and must be done under the direction of the priesthood. The priesthood can exist without the Church, but the Church cannot exist without the priesthood. "It shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church," the Lord declared, "except he be ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church" (D&C 42:11). A legal and binding baptism requires proper priesthood authority. Teaching the doctrine of baptism requires that same authority. Men have no more right to go forth preaching the gospel without having been properly commissioned than they have the right to represent the governments of men without such a commission.

The key of the mysteries of the kingdom. In the context of theology, "mysteries" are those singular truths that can be known only by revelation, or those doctrines revealed only to the initiated. They are, in a way, knowledge obtained through participation in sacred rites. Thus we are told that the priesthood holds the "key of the mysteries," meaning the authority to unlock to our understanding truths that cannot be known in any other way.

Even the key of the knowledge of God. It is the purpose of the high or holy priesthood to bring the children of God back into his presence both in this life and in the world to come. The ordinances (rites or rituals) of the priesthood are designed to prepare both men and women to stand in the presence of God.

84:20 In the ordinances thereof. In the broad and general sense, an ordinance is a law or statute of God. In a more particular and specific sense, an ordinance may be a ritual or rite, something designed to establish a union between heaven and earth.

84:21 When the authority of God is available to a people, they must comply with its laws and ordinances if they are going to be accounted worthy of either his power or his presence.

84:22 Without this. Reference is to the "power of godliness." As we read in the verses that follow, it was Moses' intent to bring the children of Israel into the divine presence. There is no thought here of excluding women or children; rather, it is the unsanctified who were to be excluded from God's presence.

The doctrine was well understood in Bible times that no unclean thing could enter into the presence of the Lord or his divinely sent messengers. Gideon, for instance, realizing he had seen an angel of the Lord, expected to die and found comfort only in the assurance from the Lord that he would not (Judges 6:22-23). Manoah, the father of Samson, was overwhelmed by the appearance of an angel to him and his wife and responded by saying, "We shall surely die, because we have seen God" (Judges 13:22). It was for this reason that Isaiah, when he discovered that he had been brought to stand in the heavenly council, said, "Woe is me! for I am undone [that is "I am lost" or "doomed"]; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts" (Isaiah 6:5). A ritual of purification immediately followed, and Isaiah was told that his sins had been purged. Moses also had an experience in which the Lord told him: "Thou canst not see my face at this time, lest mine anger be kindled against thee also, and I destroy thee, and thy people; for there shall no man among them see me at this time, and live, for they are exceeding sinful. And no sinful man hath at any time, neither shall there be any sinful man at any time, that shall see my face and live" (JST Exodus 33:20).

So it was that after the children of Israel heard the Lord speak to Moses on Sinai and "saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking" that they retreated some distance from the mountain and said to Moses, "Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die" (Exodus 20:18-19).

84:23 To sanctify his people. To sanctify a people is to set apart, ordain, or consecrate them for sacred purposes. The act of sanctification centers in a ritual purification and a covenant to remain free from sin. Whenever the Lord has had a people that he acknowledged as his own, he has demanded that they be a sanctified people, that is a holy people, or as was the case anciently, a holy nation. Thus, as the army of Israel would sanctify itself before going into battle in ancient times, so are Latter- day Saint missionaries sanctified before being sent forth to herald the news of the Restoration to the nations of the earth (Joshua 3:5; D&C 43:15; 95:8).

84:23-24 The Lord did not send Moses to Pharaoh simply to liberate the children of Israel from their Egyptian bondage. They were not to be taken to the beautiful beaches of the Mediterranean for a much-deserved rest; rather, Moses was directed to take them to the refining furnace of a desert. There it was that they were to meet their God and become a covenant and chosen people. Sinai, "the holy mountain," was the place where their nation was to be forged. Here it was that a covenant would be made that would distinguish them from all other nations and peoples. Here it was that the Lord said to them, "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." For this reason Moses was directed to sanctify his people that they might stand in the presence of their God (Exodus 19:5-6, 10-11).

Joseph Smith's situation constitutes a striking parallel to that of Moses. Moses liberated his people from their Egyptian bondage. Because of Joseph Smith and the restoration of the gospel, all who will listen are liberated from the bondage of ignorance and priestcraft. Moses took his people out of Egypt to a wilderness temple, where it was the purpose of God to make of them a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." Joseph Smith worked to gather liberated Israel to the wilderness of Jackson County, Missouri, where they were to build a temple to their God. The Lord invited ancient Israel to receive the fulness of the gospel and the blessings of the priesthood as known to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Those same blessings and promises would be granted to those who gathered under the direction of Joseph Smith, the modern Moses (D&C 28:2; 103:15-18; 105:16, 27; 107:91-92).

Moses did not seek to establish an Aaronic order of things, for that order would not bring his people into the presence of God. The Aaronic order came only after the children of Israel had rejected the invitation to stand in God's presence. The "kingdom of priests," to which reference is made, is clearly a kingdom of high priests. What the Lord sought to institute through Moses was a nation of men who had been ordained both "priests and kings" (D&C 76:56).

As we are told in this revelation, the children of Israel hardened their hearts and refused the privileges that were offered to them. This, combined with their foolish rebellion when Moses ascended the holy mount, resulted in having these promised blessings taken from them. In the Joseph Smith Translation we read, "And the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two other tables of stone, like unto the first, and I will write upon them also, the words of the law, according as they were written at the first on the tables which thou brakest; but it shall not be according to the first, for I will take away the priesthood out of their midst; there fore my holy order, and the ordinances thereof, shall not go before them; for my presence shall not go up in their midst, lest I destroy them. But I will give unto them the law as at the first, but it shall be after the law of a carnal commandment; for I have sworn in my wrath, that they shall not enter into my presence, into my rest, in the days of their pilgrimage" (JST Exodus 34:1-2).

84:25 He took Moses out of their midst. From the book of Alma we learn that Moses was translated (Alma 45:19).

And the Holy Priesthood also. Although the higher or holy priesthood was taken from the children of Israel, Joseph Smith told us that "all the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood and were ordained by God himself" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181).

The Lesser Priesthood Administers the Preparatory Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:26-32

84:26 Key of the ministering of angels. The Melchizedek Priesthood is empowered to bring us into the presence of God. The Aaronic Priesthood possesses the authority by which we may receive the ministering of angels. Thus, it is the right of those holding this priesthood to be instructed and blessed by angels. It is also their right to perform those ordinances that entitle those who do not hold the priesthood to also enjoy the ministering of angels.

Wilford Woodruff illustrates the principles here involved with the following experience: "I was once moved upon to go and warn old Father Hakeman, living on Petty- John Creek, Arkansas. He had been in Jackson County during the persecution period. His wife died there. His family consisted of five sons, all over six feet tall. Most of them had been whipped with hickory gads by mobs, and he went south into Arkansas, taking his sons with him. We went a good deal out of our way for the purpose of visiting Father Hakeman. I had a vision the night previous, in which was manifested to me the trouble that lay before us, but that the Lord would deliver us. We arrived at his house on Sunday morning. He was taking breakfast. We had had breakfast at the place where we stayed overnight. I saw a Book of Mormon on his shelf. He did not seem to pay any attention to us, or to take any interest in us. I took up the Book of Mormon, and said, 'You have a very good book here.'

"'Yes,' said he, 'but it is a book that came from the devil.'

"That opened my eyes. He had been an elder; he had been in Zion; had been persecuted there and driven out; but I found that he had apostatized, and he was our enemy. I saw he would do anything he could against us.

"We left him and went to Brother Hubbard's and stayed with him three weeks, during which we took our axes and cleared some land for him. I was strongly impressed three times to go up and warn Father Hakeman. At last I did so, according to the commandment of God to me. The third time I met with him, his house seemed to be full of evil spirits, and I was troubled in spirit at the manifestation. When I finished my warning, I left him. He followed me from his house with the intention of killing me. I have no doubt about his intention, for it was shown to me in vision. When he came to where I was, he fell dead at my feet, as if he had been struck with a thunderbolt from heaven. I was then a priest, but God defended me and preserved my life. I speak of this because it is a principle that has been manifest in the church of God in this generation as well as in others. I had the administration of angels while holding the office of a priest. I had visions and revelations" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 297-98).

To this Wilford Woodruff added, "I went out as a priest, and my companion as an elder, and we traveled thousands of miles, and had many things manifested to us. I desire to impress upon you the fact that it does not make any difference whether a man is a priest or an apostle, if he magnifies his calling. A priest holds the key of the ministering of angels. Never in my life, as an apostle, as a seventy, or as an elder, have I ever had more of the protection of the Lord than while holding the office as a priest. The Lord revealed to me by visions, by revelations, and by the Holy Spirit, many things that lay before me" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 300).

84:27 The "preparatory gospel" was had among the Jews from the time of Moses to the ministry of John the Baptist. Thus the promise of salvation could be extended to none save those who were obedient to its principles. There was nothing new in the ordinance of baptism when John came out of the wilderness and commenced preaching to them. Nor was there anything new in the doctrines of faith in Christ and the necessity of repentance. John, however, came to introduce a new dispensation, which of necessity required a new covenant and thus a new baptism.

John was the rightful heir to the office once held by Aaron and traced his authority to him (D&C 68:15-18; 107:16, 70, 76). Even while in his mother's womb, he enjoyed the companionship of the Holy Ghost (Luke 1:15).

84:28 Baptized . . . in his childhood. John was baptized "in his childhood," not in his infancy. He that "supposeth that little children need baptism is in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds of iniquity" (Moroni 8:14) and denies the atonement of Christ, according to Mormon (v. 20). In the days of Abraham, the Lord said, "Thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old" (JST Genesis 17:11).

It would be equally far from the mark to suppose that John had priesthood conferred upon him when he was eight days old. The text certainly does not say this. What Doctrine and Covenants 84:28 says is that he was "ordained . . . unto this power, to overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of the Lord" (emphasis added). It would appear that the giving of such a blessing required the higher priesthood, which Zacharias did not hold. Having, as did his son, the companionship of the Holy Ghost, Zacharias could and did prophesy relative to his ministry (Luke 1:67-80), but he did not seek to bless him. If what was taking place was a matter of conferring the Aaronic Priesthood, Zacharias could have done that. Indeed, as the rightful heir of the office of Aaron, it would have been his right and responsibility to do so. Suffice it to say, angels simply don't come to do what the Lord has already commissioned someone else to do.

It should also be noted that the Aaronic Priesthood in that day was not conferred upon a man until he was thirty years of age (Numbers 4:1-3).

To overthrow the kingdom of the Jews. The kingdom of the Jews centered in the temple priesthood and the great Sanhedrin in Jerusalem. When he came on the scene, John "was the only legal administrator in the affairs of the kingdom there was then on the earth" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 276). By rejecting him and his authority, the leaders of the Jews closed salvation's door to themselves. In their rejection of Christ, they sealed their own doom and that of their nation. "Because of priestcrafts and iniquities," Jacob said, "they at Jerusalem will stiffen their necks against him, that he be crucified. Wherefore, because of their iniquities, destructions, famines, pestilences, and bloodshed shall come upon them; and they who shall not be destroyed shall be scattered among all nations" (2 Nephi 10:5-6).

84:29 The high priesthood. The phrase "high priesthood" has been used to refer to the Melchizedek Priesthood and the office of a high priest in that priesthood. As used here, and in many of the early documents of the Restoration, it refers to the office of high priest rather than the Melchizedek Priesthood. Thus, in the present text, we are being told that the offices of "elder" and "bishop" are appendages to the office of high priest. It would be redundant to say that they were appendages to the Melchizedek Priesthood, as all priesthood offices are appendages to the priesthood. It naturally follows that no office or combination of offices in the priesthood could be greater than the priesthood itself.

In like manner, section 107 also uses the phrase "high priesthood" in reference to the office of high priest. There we read that "there must needs be presiding elders to preside over those who are of the office of an elder; and also priests to preside over those who are of the office of a priest; and also teachers to preside over those who are of the office of a teacher, in like manner, also the deaconswherefore, from deacon to teacher, and from teacher to priest, and from priest to elder, severally as they are appointed, according to the covenants and commandments of the church. Then comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all" (D&C 107:60-64; emphasis added). The text having listed the offices of deacon through elder says, "Then [after these offices] comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all." Given that the purpose of the text is to place the offices of the priesthood in their respective order, not to distinguish the obvious fact that the Melchizedek Priesthood is greater than the Aaronic, we can only conclude that its purpose is to tell us that the office of a high priest "is the greatest of all," which would be in harmony with the previous direction that if high priests and elders are both present the high priests are to preside (D&C 107:10-11). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:67, "President of the high priesthood."

A review of the history of the office of high priest in our dispensation, along with a review of how that office has functioned in past dispensations, brings meaning to the present text and to the office itself.

The first high priests were ordained at a conference convened at Kirtland, Ohio, on 3 June 1831. Describing this event in the History of the Church, Joseph Smith declared, "The Melchizedek Priesthood [meaning the fulness of that priesthood as found in its highest office] was manifested and conferred for the first time upon several of the Elders [those already holding the Melchizedek Priesthood]" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:176). The Prophet explained further: "The duty of a High Priest is to administer in spiritual and holy things, and to hold communion with God; but not to exercise monarchial government, or to appoint meetings for the Elders without their consent. And again, it is the High Priests' duty to be better qualified to teach principles and doctrines, than the Elders; for the office of Elder is an appendage to the High Priesthood, and it concentrates and centers in one" (History of the Church, 1:338).

Church historian John Whitmer recorded these events thus: "June 3, 1831, A general conference was called, and a blessing promised, if the elders were faithful, and humble before him [the Lord]. Therefore, the elders assembled from the East and the West, from the North and the South. And also many members.

"Conference was opened by prayer and exhortation by Joseph Smith Jr. the Revelator. After the business of the church was attended to according to the covenants. The Lord made manifest to Joseph that it was necessary that such of the elders as were considered worthy, should be ordained to the high priesthood" ("Book of John Whitmer," 65-66).

William E. McLellin, a participant in these events, recorded that "a number of Elders were ordained to the High-Priesthood of the Holy order of God among whom though I felt unworthy I was ordained and took upon me the high responsibility of that office" (Journals of William E. McLellin, 45; spelling and syntax standardized).

Of this same event, Elder George A. Smith said: "Among the early baptisms in Northern Ohio, was a Methodist minister by the name of Ezra Booth. He was present when the Elders first received the ordination of the High Priesthood. They met together in June, 1831, in a log school house in Kirtland, a room about eighteen feet by twenty. While they were there, the manifestation of the power of God being on Joseph, he set apart some of the Elders to the High Priesthood" (Journal of Discourses, 11:4).

Thereafter, at least to the time of President David O. McKay, the phrase "high priesthood" has often been used to describe the office of a high priest. Illustrations are as follows:

A review of the revelations of the Restoration relative to the office of a high priest sustains its distinctive place among the offices of the priesthood. Chief among them would be Alma 13 and Abraham 1. In Alma we read of those who became "high priests forever, after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father." Concerning "the holy order, or this high priesthood," we are told that "there were many who were ordained and became high priests of God; and it was on account of their exceeding faith and repentance, and their righteousness before God" that they were "called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb." We learn that in so doing, they became like Melchizedek (King of Righteousness), who had also taken upon him that "high priesthood forever," and like him became both priests and kings (Alma 13:9-11, 14).

Similarly, we read in the book of Abraham that Abraham also "sought for the blessings of the fathers and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same," which we would understand to be the keys or right of presidency. He was already "a follower of righteousness" but desired "to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of peace, and . . . to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God." He tells us he "became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers." This right, he said, came down from the fathers from the beginning of time and reached back even before the foundations of the earth. "I sought," he said, "for mine appointment unto the Priesthood according to the appointment of God unto the fathers concerning the seed" (Abraham 1:2, 4).

In his labor on the Joseph Smith Translation, the Prophet had already learned that Melchizedek "was a man of faith, who wrought righteousness" and "having been approved of God, he was ordained an high priest after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch, it being after the order of the Son of God," which order "was delivered unto men by the calling of his own voice, according to his own will, unto as many as believed on his name" (JST Genesis 14:26-29).

We are told that Adam gathered those who were "high priests, with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman" and there bestowed his last blessing upon them, after which the Lord appeared to them (D&C 107:53). The great revelation on the degrees of glory describe those who will receive the celestial kingdom, saying, "They are they who are priests [meaning high priests] and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; and are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son" (D&C 76:56-57).

In more recent years, the distinctiveness relative to the office of high priest has been replaced with an emphasis magnifying the particular office and calling that one has. We have often been told that it is not where we serve but how we serve that merits the pleasure of heaven. This principle is a true one. The elder who magnifies his priesthood works out his salvation as readily as does the apostle who in like manner magnifies his office. It is how one honors the office he holds that counts; it matters not what honor comes to man due to his office. To this is appended the scriptural assurance that every man who so honors the offices to which he is called will be privileged, like Melchizedek for whom the priesthood is named, to eventually become both priest and king.

A bishop, whose calling is an office in the Aaronic Priesthood, must also preside over his ward (which would have other Melchizedek Priesthood holders in it). To do so he must hold the office of a high priest and be set apart as the presiding high priest in the ward. He does not preside by virtue of the office of bishop or that of an elder, for these offices are appendages to the office of a high priest. The bishop presides because he holds the office of high priest and has been given the necessary keys to do so. These keys are not given to an elder nor are they given to a bishop who has not first been ordained a high priest.

84:30 The offices of teacher and deacon "are necessary appendages" to the Aaronic or lesser priesthood. This explanation is given because these offices were not a part of the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood in Old Testament times. The equivalent duties of a teacher or deacon would have been filled by those known anciently as Levites.

84:31 Both the sons of Moses and of Aaron are to present an acceptable offering in the house of the Lord. As part of the restoration of all things, the sons of Aaron will bring the offering prophesied by Malachi and promised by John the Baptist when he restored the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood (Malachi 3:1-4; D&C 13), which could be nothing other than animal sacrifice. Explaining this promise, Joseph Smith said: "It is generally supposed that sacrifice was entirely done away when the Great Sacrifice [i.e.,] the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus was offered up, and that there will be no necessity for the ordinance of sacrifice in future; but those who assert this are certainly not acquainted with the duties, privileges and authority of the Priesthood, or with the Prophets.

"The offering of sacrifice has ever been connected and forms a part of the duties of the Priesthood. It began with the Priesthood, and will be continued until after the coming of Christ, from generation to generation. We frequently have mention made of the offering of sacrifice by the servants of the Most High in ancient days, prior to the law of Moses; which ordinances will be continued when the Priesthood is restored with all its authority, power and blessings . . .

"These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the Holy Prophets be brought to pass. It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued.

"It may be asked by some, what necessity for sacrifice, since the Great Sacrifice was offered? In answer to which, if repentance, baptism, and faith existed prior to the days of Christ, what necessity for them since that time? The Priesthood has descended in a regular line from father to son, through their succeeding generations" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 172-73).

Holders of the Aaronic Priesthood cannot participate in the sealing ordinances of the temple. Of necessity their offering will differ from that of those holding the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Prophet identifies the "acceptable offering" to be made by the sons of Mosesthose holding the greater priesthoodas "a book containing the records of our dead" (D&C 128:24). That book will contain the list of those of our progenitors for whom we have stood as proxies in the performance of the ordinances of salvation. This is done that they might accept those labors performed in their behalf and obtain all the promises associated with them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:24.

This generation, upon the consecrated spot. See commentary on verses 4-5.

84:32 Mount Zion. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:66.

To build up my church. The servants of the Lord are sent forth "to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness" (JST Matthew 6:38). That is, they are sent forth to build, lift, encourage, teach, edify, but not to do otherwise.

This verse returns to the announcement in verse 2 that the Church has been restored in order that Israel might be returned to the covenants that God made with her fathers anciently. In the true and proper sense, the gathering of Israel is to those sacred covenants made in the house of the Lord.

The Oath and Covenant of the Priesthood

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:33-44

84:33-44 The Melchizedek Priesthood comes with an oath and covenant. The oath is on God's part, for he alone has the authority to swear oaths. The covenant is between God and the priesthood holder. Those receiving the priesthood covenant to magnify the office conferred upon them and to sustain those called to preside over them. They are to "live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God" (v. 44). God in turn covenants to accept the faithful priesthood holder as his heir and thus to make him equal in power, might, and dominion. This promisethat one can become as God is so far beyond the imagination of man that God, to affirm the reality of it, seals it with an oath.

Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "To swear with an oath is the most solemn and binding form of speech known to the human tongue; and it was this type of language which the Father chose to have used in the great Messianic prophecy about Christ and the priesthood. Of him it says: 'The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.' (Ps. 110:4.)

"In explaining this Messianic prophecy, Paul says that Jesus had 'an unchangeable priesthood,' and that through it came 'the power of an endless life.' (See Heb. 7:24, 16.) Joseph Smith said that 'all those who are ordained unto this priesthood are made like unto the Son of God, abiding a priest continually,' that is, if they are faithful and true" (Conference Report, October 1970, 92).

The doctrine of the priesthood centers in the understanding that God, contrary to all the creeds of men, is a personal being with body, parts, and passions. Indeed, he is an exalted, glorified man. He is literally the Father of our spirits and lives in the family unit. He possesses all attributes of godliness in their perfection.

Exaltation consists in our becoming like God. It is to become equal with him in power, might, and dominion. For this purpose, God endows his children with power from on high.

In the doctrine of the priesthood, we can enter an order of the priesthood named the new and everlasting covenant of marriage (D&C 131:2), named also the patriarchal order, because of which order we can create eternal family units of our own, patterned after the family of our Heavenly Father.

Thus, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained, we obtain "power, by faith, to govern and control all things, both temporal and spiritual; to work miracles and perfect lives; to stand in the presence of God and be like him because we have gained his faith, his perfections, and his power, or in other words the fulness of his priesthood" (Conference Report, April 1982, 50).

84:33 Magnifying their calling. Nowhere in scripture are men charged to magnify the priesthood; rather, they are charged to magnify their particular office or calling in the priesthood. To be entrusted with priesthood is an honor beyond that which either men or nations can confer. Men can add neither authority nor power to God; they can, however, utilize the office that has been conferred upon them with dignity and honor. Thus the elder must do the work and labor of an elder, the high priest that of a high priest, the apostle the labor of an apostle, and so forth. Each must labor to magnify his own office and his own calling (D&C 84:109; 107:99-100).

To labor faithfully sanctifies the soul. It has both a purifying effect and the power to bring about a remission of sins (James 5:19-20; D&C 4:4; 62:3; 84:61; 108:1; 132:50). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:31.

84:34 In a figurative sense, those who magnify their callings in the Aaronic Priesthood become the sons of Aaron, while those who magnify their callings in the Melchizedek Priesthood become the sons of Moses; all such are the seed of Abraham and the "elect of God."

84:38 All that my Father hath. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:94-95.

84:42 Wo unto all those who come not unto this priesthood. To receive the promise of salvation, a man must hold the higher priesthood and receive the blessings associated with the house of the Lord. To refuse the priesthood is to refuse those promises and blessings.

With equal propriety it could also be said to every woman, "Wo unto all those who come not unto this priesthood," meaning "wo" to those who do not choose to receive all the blessings of salvation under the hands of the priesthood.

A man cannot enjoy the fulness of the blessings of the priesthood without a woman who has been sealed to him for time and eternity. As there is no salvation for a man independent of the blessings of the priesthood, so there is no salvation for a woman independent of those blessings. They must magnify the callings that come to them, sustain those called to preside over them, and hearken unto every word of the Lord.

The Spirit of Christ Enlightens Men and Leads Them to the Father

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:45-53

84:45-53 This text affirms that the path of salvation is the same for all. Those who love light and truth will be led to greater light and greater truth. All such will, in the course of time, be brought to the knowledge of the Fatherhood of God and the covenant of salvation. By contrast, those who refuse such a course place themselves in bondage to both sin and darkness. Teaching this principle, Alma said: "It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him. And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full. And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell" (Alma 12:9-11).

84:45-46 We are taught that all men are born with the capacity to know and recognize the truths of salvation. Such truths are not incomprehensible mysteries! They are to be known, to be felt, and to be believed by all of God's children. Their understanding is within the grasp of every soul that desires to know them. No one is justified in rejecting the revelations of heaven. All revelations carry within them the evidence of their authenticity, and all children of Godbe their station high or low, be they young or oldare divinely endowed with the capacity to see the light and feel its warmth.

The Saints Are to Testify of That Which They Have Received

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:54-62

84:54-62 The Saints were chastened for treating lightly that which they had received. Considering all that they had been given, it is not surprising that theynotwithstanding all the difficulties they had facedwere spoiled by God's goodness to them. Earth's history knows no time when so many of heavens' treasures have been dispensed to so few in such a short period. Consider the events that had taken place between May 1829 and this revelation, which was recorded in September 1832. John the Baptist had come to restore the Aaronic Priesthood; Peter, James, and John had come to restore the Melchizedek Priesthood; the Book of Mormon, containing more than five hundred pages of scripture, had been printed; the Church was organized; the Joseph Smith Translation had commenced; more than eighty revelations had been given to the Saints; and the place of the New Jerusalem had been identified. It would be difficult to argue that those of us living in this century have yet grown up into an understanding and an appreciation of the flood of light granted during these few short years.

84:57 The new covenant, even the Book of Mormon. We have come to think of the Bible as consisting of the Old and New Testaments. Elder Jeffery Holland explained the division of the ancient record: "The words testament and covenant are virtually synonymous in their theological usage, the Latin definition of testamentum being 'a covenant with God, holy scripture.' Thus, the Old and New Testaments, as we commonly refer to them, are written testimonies or witnesses (the Latin testis meaning 'witness') of the covenants between God and man in various dispensations. Furthermore, such covenants always deal with the central issue between perfect, immortal God and imperfect, mortal man why they are separated and how they can again unite. The Latin root for covenants is convenire, 'to agree, unite, come together.' In short, all covenants, all testaments, all holy witnesses since the beginning have essentially been about one thingthe atonement of Jesus Christ, the at-one-ment provided every man, woman, and child if they will but receive the witness, the testi-mony of the prophets and apostles, and honor the terms of that coming together, that convenire, or covenant, whose central feature is always the atoning sacrifice of the Son of God himself" (Christ and the New Covenant, 7-8). So it is that in the Book of Mormon the Lord has given the world one last covenant or testament relative to the hope of salvation that is found in him. Thus, the Book of Mormon becomes God's "new covenant" with gathering Israel.

The former commandments which I have given them. Reference is to revelations given those in Zion (Missouri) through Joseph Smith. The counsel and instruction found therein was not being properly heeded. This caused the Spirit of the Lord to withdraw and opened the door to the spirit of contention, which quickly took its place. Some of their number had gone to Zion unprepared and without permission; others who had means to donate to the bishop in Missouri had refused to do so. See also Doctrine and Covenants 84:59 and 76.

84:58 Otherwise there remaineth a scourge and judgment to be poured out upon the children of Zion. This warning was to find both immediate and literal fulfillment the following year (1833) in the mob action against the Church in Independence.

84:60 Hear my words, which are my voice. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 18:36.

84:61 Here the Lord promises the Saints a remission of sins if they will be true to the message of the Restoration. If they will declare with boldness those singular truths that the Lord has revealed for the benefit of the children of men in this dispensation, they will find a purifying power therein. Their testimony would, of course, center in the Book of Mormon. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 31:4; 49:1-3; 75:4.

Signs Follow Them That Believe

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:63-76

84:63 You are mine apostles. The office of an apostle had not yet been restored. It would be another two and half years before this would take place (D&C 107). An apostle is a messenger or an emissary for someone else. In the context of the gospel, he is a special witness of the Lord and his gospel. Those to whom reference is made in this verse were high priests who had proven faithful in both delivering the message of the restored gospel and in testifying of its verity; thus, the Lord refers to them as both his friends and as apostles. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 35:8.

84:64-72 The promise that signs would follow them that believe was given by the Savior to the Twelve in both the Old World and the New (Mark 16:15-18; Mormon 9:23-25). Significantly, it is restored to our dispensation in a revelation on the priesthood, one which differs from the earlier texts by repeating the phrase "in my name" four times (D&C 84:66-69). This is the equivalent of saying, "By the authority of the priesthood" you will be able to do wonderful works, cast out devils, heal the sick, open the eyes of the blind and unstop the ears of the deaf, and so on. The present text also improves on its older counterparts by noting that the gift of the Holy Ghost follows baptism.

"When faith comes," Joseph Smith explained, "it brings its train of attendants with itapostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, wisdom, knowledge, miracles, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, etc. All these appear when faith appears on the earth, and disappear when it disappears from the earth; for these are the effects of faith, and always have attended, and always will, attend it. For where faith is, there will the knowledge of God be also, with all things which pertain thereto revelations, visions, and dreams, as well as every necessary thing, in order that the possessors of faith may be perfected, and obtain salvation; for God must change, otherwise faith will prevail with him. And he who possesses it will, through it, obtain all necessary knowledge and wisdom, until he shall know God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he has sentwhom to know is eternal life" (Lectures on Faith, 7:20). See commentary on Lectures on Faith, page 806.

84:73 A sense of sacredness attends the blessings of heaven and the manner in which the priesthood is used. In the days of Christ and his disciples, signs and wonders were given in a very public fashion to aid in the announcement that the gospel had been restored. Here we are commanded not to boast in the miracles we see or have performed for us. This is not to suggest that such miracles are to cease. Miracles are ever to be numbered among the fruits of the gospel. The public miracles that announce the Restoration to the world in our age are the revelations of the Restoration as found in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. This revelation centers our attention on the importance of bearing testimony to that which was revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith (vv. 54-61; D&C 24:13-14).

The Lord Will Care for the Needs of His Servants

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:77-91

84:76 Your brethren in Zion [are to be upbraided] for their rebellion against you. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 82:2, "Refrain from sin, lest sore judgments fall upon your heads."

84:77-91 Here the promise of divine protection is placed on those called to declare the message of the Restoration to the world. Fulfillment of this promise can be found in the experiences of virtually every missionary called to serve (Matthew 6:25-34; Luke 12:22-).

84:78 I suffered them not to have purse or scrip. In the early part of his ministry, Jesus sent his disciples out without purse or scrip (Mark 6:8; Luke 10:4). Later he charged them to take both food and money with them (Luke 22:35-36). As conditions change, the instruction given for the protection and wellbeing of missionaries will also change. "All of which shows," said Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "the need of continuing revelation so the Lord's people will always know how to act in the circumstances confronting them at any given moment" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:771; see also D&C 24:18).

84:79 The laborer is worthy of his hire. The servant of the Lord is a rightful heir to the blessings promised in these verses. Through faithful service he gains the promise of salvation (D&C 4:4).

Plagues and Cursings Await Those Who Reject the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:92-97

84:92-97 There are no blessings to be had in rejecting the gospel or the servants of the Lord. To reject the opportunity to be baptized for the remission of sins is to drown in sin. To refuse the light of heaven is to remain in the dark. To give no heed to the warning voice is to reap the disaster against which it warned. There is no neutrality where the prin ciples of heaven are concerned. Eventually, all must choose to stand with Christ or against him. They must choose to embrace his principles or stand in opposition to them. All such will be rewarded according to their works.

84:92 Cleanse your feet. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 24:15.

The New Song of the Redemption of Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:98-102

84:98-102 This is a hymn of great rejoicing. For century after century the scattered remnants of Israel have wandered the earth longing for that promised day when they would be gathered home again. Addressing the resurrected Christ, the meridian Twelve asked, "Wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel?" But theirs was not the promised day, and he responded, saying, "It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power" (Acts 1:6-7). Indeed, we are told that they would come to look upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage before their posterity, and even those who were "afar off" both in time and place would come to realize the promised blessings (D&C 45:17; Acts 2:39).

In that great day, Satan will be bound, for righteousness and truth will have swept the earth as a flood to gather out the elect from its four quarters into the New Jerusalem. The city of Enoch will return. Its inhabitants will fall upon their necks in rejoicing, and they will kiss each other. "And there shall be mine abode," the Lord said, "and it shall be Zion" (Moses 7:64).

Isaiah foretold the time when the scattered remnants of Israel would awake once again to the things of the Spirit, shed the rags of filth in which she was clothed, and put on the "beautiful garments" to which she had right by birth (Isaiah 52:1). Commenting on the words of the ancient seer, Joseph Smith said, "He had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost" (D&C 113:8).

84:100 Satan is bound and time is no longer. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:110.

Let Every Man Stand in His Own Office

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:103-10

84:104 The bishop in Zion. Reference is to Edward Partridge. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 72:5-6.

The bishop in Ohio. Reference is to Newel K. Whitney (D&C 72:8).

84:109-10 In harmony with the oath and covenant of the priesthood, it becomes the duty of the elder to do the work and labor of an elder, the high priest the labor of a high priest and so forth. All are to labor as they have been called, free from envy and free from the spirit of criticism. The great principle being, it is not where you serve but how you serve that brings forth the promises of heaven.

Proclaiming the Abomination of Desolation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 84:111-20

84:114 Shortly after this revelation was received, the Prophet accompanied Bishop Whitney on a hurried journey to Albany, New York City, and Boston. While in New York City he wrote his beloved wife, Emma, describing his feelings.

"My Dear Wife

"This day I have been walking through the most splendid part of the City of New Y the buildings are truly great and wonderful to the astonishing of every beholder and the language of my heart is like this can the great God of all the Earth maker of all things magnificent and splendid be displeased with man for all these great inventions sought out by them my answer is no it can not be seeing these works are calculated to make men comfortable wise and happy therefore not for the works can the Lord be displeased only against man is the anger of Lord Kindled because they Give him not the Glory therefore their iniquities shall be visited upon their heads and their works shall be burned up with unquenchable fire the inequity of the people is printed in every countenance and nothing but the dress of the people makes them look fair and beautiful all is deformity there is something in every countenance that is disagreeable with few exceptions Oh how long Oh Lord Shall this order of things exist and darkness cover the Earth and gross darkness cover the people after beholding all that I had any desire to behold I returned to my room to meditate and calm my mind and behold the thoughts of home of Emma and Julia [Murdock, the adopted baby] rushes upon my mind like a flood and I could wish for a moment to be with them my breast is filled with all the feelings and tenderness of a parent and a Husband and could I be with you I would tell you many things yet when I reflect upon this great city like Ninevah not discerning their right hand from their left yea more then two hundred thousand souls my bowels is filled with compassion towards them and I am determined to lift up my voice in this City and leave the Event with God who holdeth all things in his hands and will not suffer an hair of our heads unnoticed to fall to the ground there is but few Cases of the cholera in this City now and if you should see the people you would not know that they had ever heard of the cholera I hope you will excuse me for writing this letter so soon after writing for I feel as if I wanted to say something to you to comfort you in your peculiar trial and present affliction [Emma was expecting her fourth child] I hope God will give you strength that you may not faint I pray God to soften the hearts of those around you to be kind to you and take the burden off your shoulders as much as possible and not afflict you I feel for you for I know your state and that others do not but you must comfort yourself knowing that God is your friend in heaven and that you have one true and living friend on Earth your Husband, Joseph Smith Jr" (Jessee, Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 252-53; spelling standardized; punctuation as in original).

New York . . . Albany . . . Boston. Wilford Woodruff prophesied that New York would be destroyed by an earthquake, that Boston would be swept into the sea, and Albany would be destroyed by fire (Cook, Revelations, 177)

84:117 The desolation of abomination. The term is the same as abomination of desolation (Matthew 24:15; Joseph Smith- Matthew 1:12, 32), and the "abomination that maketh desolate" (Daniel 12:11; 9:27). The conditions of desolation, born of abomination and wickedness, as spoken of by Daniel, are destined to occur twice. The first occurrence centered in the destruction of Jerusalem in 70 A.D.; the second occurrence will be when these events repeat themselves in the last days. Drawing upon this imagery, this text uses the phrase "desolation of abomination" to describe the latter-day terrors that will be poured out upon the wicked wherever they may be.

That the pure and honest in heart may escape these desolations, the Lord sends his missionaries to raise a warning voice (D&C 84:114, 117). To this end President Joseph Fielding Smith observed: "When we become ripe in iniquity, then the Lord will come. I get annoyed sometimes at some of our elders who when speaking say the Lord will come when we all become righteous enough to receive him. The Lord is not going to wait for us to get righteous. When he gets ready to come, he is going to comewhen the cup of iniquity is full and if we are not righteous then, it will be just too bad for us, for we will be classed among the ungodly, and we will be as stubble to be swept off the face of the earth, for the Lord says wickedness shall not stand.

"Do not think the Lord delays his coming, for he will come at the appointed time, not the time which I have heard some preach when the earth becomes righteous enough to receive him. . . . Christ will come in the day of wickedness, when the earth is ripe in iniquity and prepared for the cleansing, and as the cleanser and purifier he will come, and all the wicked will be as stubble and will be consumed" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:3).
