Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 85

DATE: 27 NOVEMBER 1832

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This section is an extract from a letter written by Joseph Smith in Kirtland, Ohio, to William W. Phelps, who was in Missouri. Elder Phelps was troubled about problems associated with the manner in which the law of consecration was being administered. The Prophet wrote, "I fancy to myself that you are saying or thinking something similar to these words:'My God, great and mighty art Thou, therefore show unto Thy servant what shall become of those who are essaying to come up unto Zion, in order to keep the commandments of God, and yet receive not their inheritance by consecrations, by order of deed from the Bishop, the man that God has appointed in a legal way, agreeably to the law given to organize and regulate the Church, and all the affairs of the same.'

"Brother William," the Prophet continued, "in the love of God, having the most implicit confidence in you as a man of God, having obtained this confidence by a vision of heaven, therefore I will proceed to unfold to you some of the feelings of my heart, and to answer the question" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:298). What follows in this revelation is the Lord's answer to the questions troubling Elder Phelps.

Inheritances in Zion Are to Be Received through Consecration

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 85:1-5

85:1 The Lord's clerk. Reference is to John Whitmer, the Church historian. In addition to keeping the history of the Church, he was to keep a record of all that took place in Zion and a record of all persons who legally consecrated properties with the bishop of Zion, who was Edward Partridge (D&C 42:30-36).

85:2 It would be foolish on our part to suppose that all who embrace gospel covenants will keep them. There will always be those who fall short or quit before the journey is complete. We would suppose that every gospel dispensation has known its Judas. Special instructions were given concerning those who received property as a stewardship and then apostatized (D&C 51:4-6; 54:4-5).

85:3-5 The Lord directs that those who do not receive their inheritance by consecration, according to his law, are not to have their names enrolled with those who are to be known as his people. Neither they nor their fathers nor their children are to be acknowledged as having place among the children of the covenant. See commentary on verses 11-12.

85:3 Tithe his people. The law of tithing as understood in the Church today was not revealed until 8 July 1838. References to tithing prior to that time (D&C 64:23; 97:11-12) appear to be general in nature and simply refer to contributions or offerings. In this instance, those who have tithed are those who had consecrated their properties.

One Mighty and Strong Shall Give the Saints Their Inheritance in Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 85:6-12

85:6 Apostates who apostatize. All revelations do not come with the same clarity or the same power. Writing to Timothy, Paul said, "Now the Spirit speaketh expressly" (1 Timothy 4:1), thus suggesting that in other instances that same Spirit speaks less expressly. In like manner, the Prophet, in this text, observes that "often times" the Spirit makes his "bones to quake," though this is not always the case.

The phrase "still small voice," which is used in only two other scriptural texts, refers to the Holy Ghost (1 Kings 19:12; 1 Nephi 17:45).

85:7-8 One mighty and strong. The leader of virtually every cult or apostate group that has broken with the Church has claimed to be the "one mighty and strong" spoken of by the Lord who is to set the Church in order. As early as 1905, President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors, John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund, issued a statement on this text:

"It is to be observed first of all that the subject of this whole letter, as also the part of it subsequently accepted as a revelation, relates to the affairs of the Church in Missouri, the gathering of the Saints to that land and obtaining their inheritances under the law of consecration and stewardship; and the Prophet deals especially with the matter of what is to become of those who fail to receive their inheritances by order or deed from the bishop. . . .

"It was while these conditions of rebellion, jealousy, pride, unbelief and hardness of heart prevailed among the brethren in ZionJackson county, Missouri in all of which Bishop Partridge participated, that the words of the revelation taken from the letter to William W. Phelps, of the 27th of November, 1832, were written. The 'man who was called and appointed of God' to 'divide unto the Saints their inheritance'Edward Partridgewas at that time out of order, neglecting his own duty, and putting 'forth his hand to steady the ark'; hence, he was warned of the judgment of God impending, and the prediction was made that another, 'one mighty and strong,' would be sent of God to take his place, to have his bishopric one having the spirit and power of that high office resting upon him, by which he would have power to 'set in order the house of God, and arrange by lot the inheritance of the Saints'; in other words, one who would do the work that Bishop Edward Partridge had been appointed to do, but had failed to accomplish. . . .

". . . The Lord said, some three years later, that he was well pleased with Edward Partridge. The word of the Lord came to the Prophet to this effect, on the 7th of November, 1835:

"'Behold, I am well pleased with my servant Isaac Morley, and my servant Edward Partridge, because of the integrity of their hearts in laboring in my vineyard, for the salvation of the souls of men. Verily I say unto you, their sins are forgiven them, therefore, say unto them in my name, that it is my will that they should tarry for a little season, (in Kirtland) and attend the school and also the solemn assembly, for a wise purpose in me. Even so. Amen. (History of the Church, [2:302-3]).' . . .

". . . Inasmuch as through his repentance and sacrifices and suffering, Bishop Edward Partridge undoubtedly obtained a mitigation of the threatened judgment against him of falling 'by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning,' so the occasion for sending another to fill his station'one mighty and strong to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints'may also be considered as having passed away and the whole incident of the prophecy closed" (Clark, Messages, 4:112, 115-17).

85:8 Steady the ark. At the time of Eli, the ark of the covenant stood in the sanctuary at Shiloh (1 Samuel 3:3). Thereafter it fell into the hands of the Philistines (1 Samuel 4:10-11). Discovering that its possession only brought them misfortunes, they sent it back to Israel (1 Samuel 6). It was brought first to Beth Shemesh in the tribe of Judah, near the borders of the Philistines and soon after to Kiriath- jearim, about 7.5 miles northwest of Jerusalem. From there, David went with thirty thousand men to bring the ark to Jerusalem. As they were doing so the oxen stumbled, and Uzzah, who drove the cart on which the ark was being carried, put forth his hand to prevent the ark from falling. "And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died by the ark of God" (2 Samuel 6:7). Levites had been forbidden by the Lord to touch the ark on pain of death (Numbers 4:15-20).

However well intended Uzzah's efforts were, the Lord made it plain that he needed neither the help of Uzzah nor any other man to sustain his affairs. Thus, the direction not to steady the ark constituted sober warning to Edward Partridge to follow the counsel of the Prophet rather than seek to counsel him.

85:11-12 "The children of the priests . . . sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood" (Ezra 2:61-62).

The conclusion of the Prophet's letter to W. W. Phelps is counsel we should heed: "Now, Brother William, if what I have said is true, how careful men ought to be what they do in the last days, lest they are cut short of their expectations, and they that think they stand should fall, because they keep not the Lord's commandments; whilst you, who do the will of the Lord and keep His commandments, have need to rejoice with unspeakable joy, for such shall be exalted very high, and shall be lifted up in triumph above all the kingdoms of this world" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:299).

85:11 High Priesthood. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:29.
