Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 86

DATE: 6 DECEMBER 1832

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 86 appeared as the fifth section in the first publication of the Doctrine and Covenants. It was labeled as a revelation on priesthood and immediately followed what are now known as sections 107 and 84, which are also revelations on the priesthood. Though it is not generally thought of as an important revelation on priesthood in our day, it was considered to be such in the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It affirms that the Apostasy took place after the death of the meridian Twelve and that the restoration of the gospel centered in restoring the priesthood to the descendants of Abraham.

It is not clear whether this revelation preceded or followed inspired corrections made by the Prophet in the Bible parable of the wheat and tares. On a third editing of that manuscript, he appended a note to the par able that the wheat was to be gathered into the Lord's barn before the tares were to be bound and burned. That understanding probably came in the receipt of this revelation (Matthews, Plainer Translation, 82).

The Lord Interprets the Parable of the Wheat and the Tares

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 86:1-7

86:1 Concerning the parable. The use of parables in scripture always raises the question of whether their purpose is to reveal or to conceal. In the New Testament, for instance, Jesus did not begin to teach in parables until opposition to his teaching had developed and it became necessary for him to be very guarded about what he saying. To the Twelve he said, "Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God," while he spoke "to others in parables; that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not understand" (Luke 8:10; Matthew 13:10-17; Mark 4:11-12). So it is that the full meaning of the parable of the wheat and the tares can be had only by revelation. As Christ in his day explained the meaning of his parables privately, with those who had eyes to see and ears to hearhis chosen servantsso he does today. Thus the meaning of the parable is not given openly to all the world but privately to his servantsthose who sustain the prophet he has called.

86:2 The apostles. Christ alone ("a man") appears to be the sower of the seed in the New Testament parable (Matthew 13:24-30). Here we learn that the apostles were "the sowers of the seed," meaning those whose testimony gave spiritual life to others.

The seed. In this parable "the seed" is not the word or the gospel as is the case in the parable of the sower (Matthew 13:3-8). Christ said, "The good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one" (Matthew 13:38).

86:3 After the death of the apostles (those holding the keys of the priesthood), the enemy of Christ in the form of Babylon (sophistry and worldliness) sowed tares, meaning it mingled the philosophies of men with the truths of the gospel. These tares in turn choked the wheat (those things taught by Christ and the Twelve) and drove the Church into the wilderness (a state of apostasy).

The apostate, the whore. In a revelation recorded three weeks after this one (27 December 1832), the tares are identified as "that great church, the mother of abominations, that made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, that persecuteth the saints of God, that shed their blood she who sitteth upon many waters, and upon the islands of the sea" (D&C 88:94).

86:4 The Lord is beginning to bring forth the word. This was a prophecy to the early Saints that there was yet much to be revealed.

The blade . . . is yet tender. The faithful member of the Church is likened to a tender blade that has just broken ground after a long, cold winter. Church members need protection and the light of heaven if they are to grow and bring forth good fruits.

86:5 Angels are . . . ready . . . to reap down the fields. President Wilford Woodruff said: "I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have the vision of the night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured out upon this world, when I know these things are true, and are at the door of Jew and Gentile; while I know they are true and while I am holding this position before God and this world, can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people, and to the nations of the earth? I may never meet with this people again; I cannot tell how that may be. But while I live and see these things continually before my eyes I shall raise my warning voice. Now, the question I wanted to ask you is this: We have millions of people on this earth, and over them all there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and in safety" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 229-30). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:37, page 23.

86:6-7 The single great sign of the times is the extent to which Israel has been gathered. Christ will not return until the scattered remnants of Israel have been brought forth from those of every nation, kindred, tongue and people (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:31, 37). The promise given here is that Israel (the wheat) will be gathered into the barn (the kingdom of God on earth) before the tares are bound to be burned (JST Matthew 13:29). The gathering spoken of here will not preclude the greater gathering that will take place after the return of Christ and the introduction of the millennial era (3 Nephi 21-22).

86:7 The wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest. The "harvest," as identified in this text, represents the time of Christ's return. Until that day evil will hold its place in this fallen, or telestial, world. Righteousness and evil will be neighbors, and even among the Saints much will parade in the name of goodness and in the name of the Lord which is an abomination in his sight (D&C 50:4).

Promises to the Lawful Heirs of the Priesthood

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 86:8-11

86:8-10 In these verses a transition is made between the revealed explanation of the parable of the wheat and the tares and a revelation on the priesthood. The bridge between the two subjects is the word "therefore," with which verse eight begins. The word implies that because there was an apostasy and because the house of Israel has been scattered and lost for many centuries, those who have by birth the right to the priesthood and all of its blessings have not been able to claim them. Nevertheless they have not been lost to God. Indeed, they have been hidden by him to come forth at this time as "lawful heirs, according to the flesh"; as the literal descendants of Abraham they have claim on the promises given to their father. The Lord has looked after them even in their lost and fallen state. The promise to the priesthood has not been lost to Abraham's sons down through the generations. They are the seed of Abraham and the elect of God spoken of in Doctrine and Covenants 84:34. This has been known to all the holy prophets since the world began. All holy prophets have known that salvation is a family affair; it requires the blessings of the priesthood, which belong by birthright to the family of Abraham. Such was the promise that God made with our ancient father, adding a provision for the adoption of any who desired these blessings who were not naturally his seed (Abraham 2:9-11).

86:11 A light unto the Gentiles, . . . a savior unto my people Israel. This phrase combines the prophetic language of Isaiah and Obadiah (Isaiah 42:6; 49:6; 60:3; Obadiah 1:21). It identifies the destiny of Israel, meaning those who hold the priesthood restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith, which is to gather the scattered remnant of Abraham's seed and bring them to the covenant God made with their ancient father. It foreshadows the role that those gathering Israel will play in the house of the Lord as they perform ordinances for their kindred dead. It was not until Nauvoo, howeverwhere the revelations were received relative to the sealing powers and the eternal nature of the family unitthat the Saints began to understand the implications of this revelation.
