Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 87

DATE: 25 DECEMBER 1832

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation, given through Joseph Smith on Christmas day in 1832, is generally remembered as the prophecy that foretold the Civil War. In fact, this revelation reaches far beyond that sorrowful conflict that pitted brother against brother and father against son to be as prophetic for those of our day as it was when first recorded. It identifies the beginning of the Civil War as the time when peace would be taken from the earth. From that time forth, we are told, war will be poured out upon all nations. To that bloodshed, the heavens will add the testimony of famine, plague, earthquake, thunder, and vivid lightning, all of which will testify against her wickedness. Also foreshadowed in this revelation is the evil and bitterness that will greet the gospel as it goes forth to the nations of the earth as the blood of the Saints will have cause to cry forth to the Lord of Sabaoth for vengeance. Only then will the consumption decreed make a full end of all nations and the millennial reign of Christ be ushered in. Until that day the Saints are warned to stand in holy places.

War between Northern and Southern States Foretold

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 87:1-4

87:1 On 2 April 1843 Joseph Smith said: "I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God, that the commencement of the difficulties which will cause much bloodshed previous to the coming of the Son of Man will be in South Carolina. It may probably arise through the slave question. This a voice declared to me, while I was praying earnestly on the subject, December 25th, 1832" (D&C 130:12-13).

Concerning the wars. This is not a prophecy of the Civil War alone but rather a warning that there will be "wars" and undoubtedly rumors of war in greater profusion than has ever been known in earth's history.

Terminate in the death and misery of many souls. Nothing in the history of our nation has matched the Civil War for "death and misery." The aggregate of those killed in this war was 618,000 (360,000 from the North and 258,000 from the South). The next highest U.S. casualty figure is for World War II, when 318,000 were killed. The third highest figure is for World War I at 115,000. Other wars include the American Revolution: 4,044; the War of 1812: 2,200; the Mexican War: 13,270; the Korean War: 33,000; and Vietnam: 46,616 (Cannon, Studies in Scripture, 1:337).

87:2 Beginning at this place. The place is South Carolina, where, on 12 April 1861, the first shot of the war was fired by General Beauregard against Fort Sumter. On 1 November 1831 the Lord had said, "For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion" (D&C 1:35).

87:3 "In 1861 the South sent commissioners abroad to France, England, Belgium, and Holland in an endeavor to get these nations to recognize the Confederate States" (Sperry, Doctrine and Covenants Compendium, 419). The prophecy then says that, in turn, the nations called upon by the Southern States (France, England, Belgium, and so on) would call upon other nations to aid them. This prediction found literal fulfillment in World War II, when each of these nations sought help from other nations chiefly the United States.

87:4 Slaves shall rise up. Though this happened, at least in some measure, during the Civil War, the statement as here given refers to events yet future. Presiding Bishop Joseph L. Wirthlin suggested in a 1958 general conference talk that this text could be making reference to peoples in countries where the citizens were both slaves to the government and without freedom of religion (see Conference Report, October 1958, 32). We anticipate that the day will yet come, as it has at least in some measure in Russia, that the peoples of all such nations will rise up and throw off the schackles of oppressive and corrupt governments, demanding the freedom that will allow the gospel to be taught to them.

Calamities to Come

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 87:5-8

87:5 The remnants who are left. This text is often thought to be tied to Micah's prophecy that in the last days "the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver" (Micah 5:8). If the remnant here is one and the same with the remnant spoken of by Micah, then we can anticipate that this prophecy will find fulfillment through events involving all twelve tribes of Israel and encompassing the whole earth.

87:6 A full end of all nations. This phrase, "a full end of all nations," does not of necessity mean that all nations will be destroyed. During the Millennium all man-made governments will be dissolved to make place for the kingdom of God. Christ will rule as Lord of lords and King of kings.

87:7 The blood of the saints. In a prophecy that reaches to the ends of the earth in the promise of calamity among the wicked and divine warnings among those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, we can but suppose that his reference to the blood of the Saints bespeaks the sad reality that the gospel will not go forth unopposed and that there will yet be martyrs for the gospel cause among virtually all people (Revelation 16:6; 17:6; 18:24; 2 Nephi 28:10; Mormon 8:27, 41). This conclusion is sustained in Doctrine and Covenants 88:94, wherein we read that the "mother of abominations, that made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication," is the same "that persecuteth the saints of God, that shed their bloodshe who sitteth upon many waters, and upon the islands of the sea."

Lord of Sabaoth. Christ is the Lord of Sabaoth (Isaiah 1:9; Romans 9:29; James 5:4; D&C 88:2; 98:2). Sabaoth is a Hebrew word meaning hosts or armies; thus, Jehovah Sabaoth means the Lord of Hosts. Also, as revealed to the Prophet, "The Lord of Sabaoth . . . is by interpretation, the creator of the first day, the beginning and the end" (D&C 95:7).

87:8 Stand ye in holy places. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:32.
