Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88

DATE: 27 AND 28 DECEMBER 1832 AND 3 JANUARY 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

The revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 88 was given through the Prophet Joseph Smith at Kirtland, Ohio, in the translating room of the Whitney store. Receipt of the revelation spanned three days, 27 through 28 December 1832, and 3 January 1833. Fredrick G. Williams, who recorded the revelation and kept the minutes of this conference, wrote as follows:

"A conference of High Priests assembled in the translating room in Kirtland Ohio on the 27th day of Dec. A.D. 1832 . . . Bro Joseph arose and said, to receive revelation and the blessing of Heaven it was necessary to have our minds on God and exercise faith and become of one heart and of one mind. Therefore he recommended all present to pray separately and vocally to the Lord for [Him] to reveal His will unto us concerning the upbuilding of Zion & for the benefit of the saints and for the duty and employment of the Elders. Accordingly we all bowed down before the Lord, after which each one arose and spoke in his turn his feelings and determination to keep the commandments of God. And then proceeded to receive a revelation [D&C 88] concerning the duty [not legible] above stated. [At] 9 o'clock P.M., the revelation not being finished, the conference adjourned and commenced by prayer [and] thus proceeded to receive the residue of the above revelation. And it being finished and there being no further business before [the council], the conference closed the meeting by prayer, in harmony with the brethren and gratitude to our Heavenly Father for the great manifestation of His Holy Spirit during the setting of the conference" (Kirtland Council Minute Book, 3-4; spelling standardized).

The revelation was designated by the Prophet as "the 'olive leaf' which we have plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of peace to us" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:316). Verses 127 through 141 were received 3 January 1833.

Faithful Saints to Receive Another Comforter

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:1-5

88:1 You who have assembled. Meeting with the Prophet on this occasion were Joseph Smith Sr., Sidney Rigdon, Orson Hyde, Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Newel K. Whitney, Frederick G. Williams, Ezra Thayer, and John Murdock, all of whom were high priests (Cook, Revelations, 181).

88:2 The alms of your prayers. Alms, meaning works of righteousness, open the heavens and bring the ministering of angels, revelations, and all manner of spiritual blessings (Acts 10:4).

The Lord of Sabaoth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 87:7.

The book of the names of the sanctified. The book of life, meaning the book in which the names of those who will inherit eternal life, is here called "the book of the names of the sanctified." The names of the faithful are recorded here even while they are in mortality (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9) and blotted out in the event of wickedness (Revelation 13:8; 17:8; 22:19). In the instance of this verse, it appears that their prayers are also recorded there. And if prayers are recorded there, then we might wonder if sermons would also be so recorded. And if sermons were recorded there, we would suppose that all their works of righteousness would be so recorded.

88:3 Another Comforter, . . . the same that I promised unto my disciples, as is recorded in the testimony of John. This and the following verse are confusing because in the "testimony of John" Christ promised his disciples two Comforters. The Comforter known to the generality of mankind as the first Comforter, or the Holy Ghost, was promised to them as "another Comforter" (John 14:16), because during their ministry he had been their Comforter. He then promised them a second Comforter, having reference to his personal appearance (John 14:18-23). In a subsequent revelation the Prophet stated, "John 14:23The appearing of the Father and the Son, in that verse, is a personal appearance; and the idea that the Father and the Son dwell in a man's heart is an old sectarian notion, and is false" (D&C 130:3).

This verse draws upon the language of John 14:16, in which the phrase "another Comforter" has reference to the Holy Ghost. "The word another literally means 'another of the same kind,' that is, 'someone like Jesus Himself who will take His place and do His work.' The Greek word translated in the King James Version as Comforter is paraclete, 'one called to stand along side of.' Other meanings include 'a friend, especially a legal friend.' The word refers to 'a counselor who supports a defendant at a trial. The Spirit, then, will be the great defender of the disciples.' Other translations render the passage as 'another Helper' (New King James Version), 'another Counselor' (New International Version), and even 'another Advocate' (New Revised Standard Version; see also Revised English Bible). Although ultimately Christ is our Advocate with the Father (see D&C 45:3-5), the Savior has sent his Spirit to convict us of sin, convince us of the truth, and direct us toward righteousness (see John 16:8-11). The paraclete was 'any person who helped someone in trouble with the law. The Spirit will always stand by Christ's people.' The Holy Ghost, 'one called alongside to help,' would be that member of the Godhead who 'encourages and exhorts' the Saints" (Millet, "Ministry of the Holy Ghost," 180).

The Holy Spirit of promise. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:53.

88:5 Church of the Firstborn. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:54.

All Things Are Governed by the Light of Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:6-13

88:6-13 Joseph Smith is the great revelator of Christ for our dispensation. We learn more about our eternal Father, his Only Begotten Son, and of the laws that govern the endless expanses of eternity from his lips than from any other man who ever lived. In this revelation that was plucked, as he said, from the Tree of Paradise, we read a breathtaking testimony of Christ and the light that emanates from him. Where else are we told that Christ is the light of the sun, the moon, and the stars? Where else do we read that there are no laws save he gave them? No power save it is his? No knowledge or intelligence save it comes from him! No power for good save it comes of him! How puny the views of men who would have us believe that he obtained his exalted status by mastery of laws when the testimony of holy writ is that he is source and author of them all. How lame the notion that he is endlessly learning when the words of revelation assure us that he is the source of all knowledge, all wisdom, all understanding, that he is above all, and in all, and through all! Indeed, all things testify of himfor without him they are not.

We do not even begin to comprehend the length or breadth, the majesty or greatness of his power. Nevertheless, this we do know:

His light fills the immensity of spaceit is in greater or lesser measure everywhere present.

Light is the source of his power and the law by which all things are governed.

His light is the power that gives life to all things.

His light enlightens the mind and quickens the understanding of every person born into this world.

The light of Christ strives with men (the Holy Ghost testifies but does not strive) unless and until they rebel against light and truth, at which time it ceases to strive and withdraws from them.

Those who follow that light will receive more light and that light will grow brighter and brighter until the perfect day.

Resurrection Comes through the Redemption

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:14-16

88:14 Redemption. We are released from the bondage of death and sin through the obedience and sacrifice of Christ; hence, he alone is our Redeemer.

Resurrection. Resurrection is the inseparable union of body and spirit.

88:15 Soul. In most instances in scripture the word soul is used as a synonym for spirit. Our unembodied spirits in the premortal life are called souls (Abraham 3:23) as are our disembodied spirits awaiting the day of resurrection in paradise or hell (Alma 40:11-14). The mortal body is also called a soul (Abraham 5:7). This text gives yet another definition, defining a soul as a resurrected being.

The Law We Live Dictates the Glory We Receive

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:17-31

88:17 The poor and the meek of the earth shall inherit it. This promise given by the Savior in the Sermon on the Mount (Matthew 5:5) is also found in the writings of the psalmists (37:11, 29-30), who promised that the meek (meaning righteous) would obtain an everlasting inheritance on the earth. The idea that the meek inherit the earth would generally be thought of as a metaphorical expression. Latter- day Saints, however, knowing that the resurrection is corporeal and that the earth is destined to obtain celestial glory (vv. 18-20) understand this promise to be literal. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 38:18-20.

88:18 Sanctified from all unrighteousness. From the writings of Enoch we learn that he "looked upon the earth; and he heard a voice from the bowels thereof, saying: Wo, wo is me, the mother of men; I am pained, I am weary, because of the wickedness of my children. When shall I rest, and be cleansed from the filthiness which is gone forth out of me? When will my Creator sanctify me, that I may rest, and righteousness for a season abide upon my face?" (Moses 7:48). In the days of Noah the earth was cleansed with a baptism of water; and again in the last dayswhen it is consumed with wickednessit will be cleansed by the baptism of fire (Malachi 4:1-6).

The cleansing of the earth will take place in two stages, both of which are described as a new heaven and new earth. First it will be returned to that state of sanctity and purity known to it before the Fall. The tenth Article of Faith promises that "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." In this millennial state all that is of a telestial order will have been destroyed. "Every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; and also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth" (D&C 101:24-25). Thereafter the earth will die, be resurrected, and obtain its celestial glory (D&C 88:26). All that is terrestrial will be removed. Only that which is of a celestial nature may remain. "When the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth but for a little season; and the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea" (D&C 29:22-24). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:12.

88:21-24 With the help of the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that this same principle was taught by the apostle Paul. The principle was so obvious to him that he felt it was foolish to ask what kind of a body a man would have in the resurrection. To make the point, he likened the resurrection to the day of harvest, noting that one harvested what they planted. He simply reasoned that if you wanted to harvest wheat then you planted wheat, if you wanted to harvest beans that you planted beans, and so forth. Likewise, the nature of your body in the resurrection will reflect the law you chose to live in mortality. Those living a telestial law, he held, would receive a telestial body, those living a terrestrial law would inherit a terrestrial body, and those complying with the celestial law would obtain a celestial body. In making the point, Paul also asked what the various members of the animal kingdom would be in the resurrection? Again the point being that in the resurrection a bear has no hope of becoming a bird or a bird a bear. Fish will be resurrected as fish and skunks as skunks. Everything coming forth according to its order, which is according to the law it chose to obey (JST 1 Corinthians 15:37, 46).

88:26 It shall die, it shall be quickened again. The revelations of the Restoration take us far beyond what is known to us by science relative to the creation of the earth. By revelation we know that the earth is a living thing. Further, we know that all living things were created first as spirits (Moses 3:5) and as such existed long before they obtained the physical tabernacles known to them in this mortal state. Because of the fall of Adam, the earth is subject to corruption and will yet die. In like manner, because of the atonement of Christ, the earth will be resurrected and obtain a celestial glory and become the abiding place of all things that lived upon it and also abided by that same order.

88:27 Spiritual body. Alma describes a resurrected body as immortal, one that can die no more, and in which body and spirit are united, never to be divided. "Thus," he said, the whole becomes "spiritual and immortal" and cannot "see corruption" (Alma 11:45). In like manner, Paul spoke of a natural bodya body subject to corruptionand a spiritual body one not subject to corruption (1 Corinthians 15:44). In accord with this pattern, the present text also tells us that the union of the natural body with the spirit becomes "a spiritual body"a body that is not subject to death or corruption. The bodies of Adam and Eve prior to the Fall are properly referred to as "spiritual" bodies and the creation as a physical-spiritual event.

88:28 The same body which was a natural body. The resurrected body will be the same body inherited in mortality. In the resurrection Christ took up the very body that died upon the cross and had been laid in the tomb. To emphasize this fact, when he appeared to his disciples after his resurrection he showed them the marks of the wounds in his hands, feet, and side (Luke 24:36-40; John 20:26-27). In the resurrection our bodies will come forth from the grave as they were laid down. President Joseph F. Smith declared: "It was revealed from God, the fountain of truth, through Joseph Smith the prophet, in this dispensation, that in the resurrection of the dead the child that was buried in its infancy will come up in the form of the child that it was when it was laid down; then it will begin to develop. From the day of the resurrection, the body will develop until it reaches the full measure of the stature of its spirit, wheter it be male or female" (Gospel Doctrine, 24).

The body received in mortality is an eternal inheritance. Some question the literalness of resurrecting with the same body, or the same elements that made up the mortal body before the corruption of the flesh destroyed it in the grave. Apparently, a similar comment was included in a talk given by Orson Pratt during the Church's April 1843 general conference in Nauvoo. "To a remark of Elder Orson Pratt's, that a man's body changes every seven years, President Joseph Smith replied: There is no fundamental principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in this world or in the world to come; I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and he has the power to do it. If any one supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:339). There are many elements of the earth that pass through our bodies as we gain and lose flesh; however, the fundamental parts of our bodies, referred to by the Prophet, will rise with us in the resurrection. Further, our resurrected bodies will be composed of the same particles that were incorporated in our system during mortality (Alma 11:43-44; 40:32).

88:28 Your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened. It is the spirit of an individual that will quicken the body in the resurrection. It follows that the light and glory received by the spirit determines the glory that quickens the body. Further, the law that the spirit has come to abide determines the glory it receives, whether that be celestial, terrestrial, or telestial. Those who abide celestial law receive a fulness of the glory of the Father, as did the Savior (D&C 93:3-7, 22).

88:28-31 To be "quickened by a portion of the celestial glory" appears to mean that if the major thrust of one's life has been in harmony with a celestial standard, that person will come forth in a celestial resurrection and thereafter be able to grow up into a fulness of that glory. The same principle would apply to those who come forth in the terrestrial and telestial resurrections.

Those Who Are Filthy Still

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:32-35

88:32 They who remain shall also be quickened. After all who are to inherit a degree of glorybe it celestial, terrestrial, or telestial have come forth from the grave in an inseparable union of body and spirit, those unworthy of any gloryelsewhere referred to as sons of perditionwill also be resurrected.

88:35 Filthy still. These have committed the unpardonable sin and, though they are resurrected, they remain "filthy still" and thus are unable to inherit even the least of the degrees of glory.

All Kingdoms Are Governed by God's Law

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:36-41

88:36 All kingdoms have a law given. Well might the Lord ask of us, as he did of Job so many years ago, "Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?" (Job 38:33). Do you know the laws that govern the planetary systems and all the endless expanses of the eternities? Can you account for the difference of their motions, and the influences by which they are retained and revolve in their orbits? Sir Isaac Newton, considered by many to be the greatest scientist of all time, identified the law of universal gravitation. Yet, in response to the question, From whence is gravity? he could neither explain nor comprehend. No man, unaided by the power of God, can comprehend "the ordinances of heaven." The God we worship is not a divine scientist. He did not discover law and then harness it for righteous purposes. He is the author and creator of all "the ordinances of heaven and earth" (Jeremiah 33:25; D&C 88:42).

88:37-38 There is no place in the eternities where God is without authority. There is no border that one can cross to escape his justice or hide from his wrath. He stands supreme. There is no space that is not governed by his law.

88:39 To be justified is to be judged to be in compliance with the law. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "Once a law has been ordained, it thereafter operates automatically; that is, whenever there is compliance with its terms and conditions, the promised results accrue. The law of gravitation is an obvious example. Similarly, compliance with the law of faith always brings the gifts of the Spirit. By obedience to celestial law men automatically qualify for a celestial inheritance in eternity; by open rebellion against law, they automatically assure themselves of a place in a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory" (Mormon Doctrine, 433). This would be according to and in compliance with the law of justification.

88:40 All things produce after their own kind. Love begets love, goodness results in goodness, and kindness is reciprocated with kindness. Conversely, hatred begets hatred, one evil incites another, and a mean act will be matched by another. Doves beget doves and snakes beget snakes. As people who seek light and truth are led to it, so will those who seek darkness and evil in like manner find that which they seek.

Judgment goeth before the face of him who sitteth upon the throne. God is not nonjudgmental. Without judgmentthat is the approving of one thing and the disapproving of anotherthere could be no virtue, no goodness, no righteousness, and no kingdom of light and truth. All that is good stands opposed by that which is not good. All that is true stands opposed by that which is not true. To suppose that God does not discrimi nate between the two is to deny the very existence of God and all the attributes of godliness. Thus we are commanded to discern spirits by the Spirit and to make righteous judgments (JST Matthew 7:1-3).

88:41 He comprehendeth all things. The announcement here is not simply that God knows all things but that he constitutes the source of their existence. All things are an expression of the existence of God. Every truth, every law, every form of existence all evidence the hand of God. He created them all; there is nothing relative to them that he does not know. Thus he is above all things, he is the source of life to all things, and governs all things. Again, to suppose that there is place or knowledge that is presently beyond God is to suppose that in some place or in some matter God is other than, indeed less than, God. God himself testifies that this is not the case.

God Both Knows and Governs All Things

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:42-45

88:42 He hath given a law unto all things. A common Latter-day Saint heresy is that we become as God is through education or the mastery of laws. The notion being that God became God by identifying the laws of nature and learning how to live in harmony with them and how to harness them for his purposes. Our present text (see also v. 36) refutes such a notion. God is the author of law, not the co- partner with it. We do not worship law. Law, like the sectarian god, is without body, parts, and passions; it knows nothing of justice or mercy, or of good or evil. It has no power to determine or change its own course.

But, says one, is it not by obedience to law that Christ became as his Father and that we become as God is? To which the answer is, Yes, of course, but Christ followed only laws that had been ordained by the Father. His salvation rested in doing the will of the Father, not in discovering laws that govern in the universe and attempting to comply with them. So it is with us. We seek salvation in the teachings of the prophets, not that of scholars.

It is righteousness of which the scriptures speak, not scholarship. Exaltation is obtained by faith in Christ, repentance from sin, compliance with the ordinances of salvation, and enjoying the companionship of the Holy Ghost, not by the mastery of math and science. By obedience to gospel principles, Christ obtained the fulness of his Father. Having obtained that fulness, he became the personification of the Father and thus became a perfect expression of the mind and will of the Father. The power and authority of the Father thus became his and so we say of him (as we say of the Father) that he is in and through all things, that nothing is greater than he is, for he and the Father are one. The idea that God became such by the mastery of the laws of nature is a modern tower of Babel built on a college campus. It gets men no closer to heaven than its ancient counterpart. By contrast, revelation tells us, "The powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:36).

Man Will Yet Comprehend God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:46-50

88:47 All created things bear witness of a Creator. As the existence of a watch attests to the existence of the watchmaker, so must all life forms trace to a source of life. A single cell, it has been learned, contains more information than all the volumes of the Encyclopedia Britannica put together. And with this knowledge comes the haunting suspicion that in future years, when our ability to see and understand has been extended, we may also find that the intelligence found within that cell has expanded proportionately. Among the great discoveries of modern times is the immense extension of the universe in space. In comparison to what we see and know today, the Cosmos of the ancient world was but a jeweled cup found floating on the ocean. As our ability to see increases, the immensity of space increases. In it all, from great to small, we see the majesty of God and find the constant assurance that all things testify of him.

88:48 He who came unto his own was not comprehended. Introducing his testament of Christ, John the Beloved wrote: "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name" (John 1:10-12).

88:49 The day shall come when you shall comprehend even God. The god of the philosophers transcends the ability of man to comprehend. He is unknown and unknowable, inexpressible, immovable, invisible, and unapproachable. Thus it is improper to ascribe to him form, movement, place, attributes, or names. Such is the god adopted in the creeds of historical Christianity. By contrast, Christ chided the woman of Samaria for not knowing the God she worshipped, saying to her, "Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship." The time had come, he said, for those having the truth to "worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to worship him" (John 4:22-23; emphasis added). As he offered the great intercessory pray to the Father, Christ said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent"(John 17:3). In that same spirit Joseph Smith said, "It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God, and to know that we may converse with him as one man converses with another" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 345). The promise given in this text is that in a future day, when the power of God has been placed upon us, we will be able to see, know, and understand the nature of God. See commentary on King Follett Discourse 4:4, page 1086.

The Parable of the Servants in the Field Being Visited

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:51-61

88:51-61 This parable, given in the context of a discussion about the endless expanses of eternity, is one of the plainest assertions in scripture that there are other inhabited worlds, each of which will be visited by Christ. In each instance the pattern is the same: Christ chooses his servant, appoints to him his labor, and gives the attendant promise that he will, at the appropriate time and season, visit him, which he does. The parable does not suggest that Christ made appearances to anyone other than his appointed servant in each of these worlds. That the resurrected Christ appeared to great multitudes on the various planets following the pattern of his appearance among the Nephites and among various groups of the lost tribes seems a reasonable assumption. It is not, however, the purpose of this parable to make that point. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:23-24.

The Faithful to See the Face of the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:62-76

88:62 My friends. Here Christ calls the ten men involved in the receipt of this revelation his friends. In principle the expression extends to all his faithful servants. Similarly, he referred to the meridian Twelve as "my brethren" (John 20:17).

88:63 Draw near unto me and I will draw near unto you. To his people in the days of Malachi, the Lord said, "Return unto me, and I will return unto you" (Malachi 3:7). Our relationship with the Lord is conditional.

88:64-65 No one enjoys being in a situation in which a friend asks something of him that is either improper or inappropriate. Such a request may strain or seriously impair their relationship. The same principles apply in our relationship with our divine Father. The invitation to ask of him has obvious bounds or limits. We ask only for that which is right, proper, expedient, necessary, that which edifies and for which the Spirit directs. To pray improperly is to take the Lord's name in vain, but to trifle with that which is sacred may well, as this text warns, bring "condemnation" (D&C 8:10; 18:18; 75:10; 3 Nephi 18:20; James 4:3).

88:66 My voice is Spirit. To hear the quiet whisperings of the Spirit is to hear the voice of the Lord. Reading the words of scripture in company with the Spirit is also to hear that voice (D&C 18:35; 84:60). It can also be our privilege to hear the audible voice of the Lord (D&C 130:14-15; Helaman 5:29-33; 3 Nephi 11:3-7).

88:67 The chain of thought here is simple and direct: "That which is of God is light; and he that receiveth light, and continueth in God, receiveth more light; and that light groweth brighter and brighter until the perfect day" (D&C 50:24). As the immediate text notes, to be filled with light is to comprehend all things. God is light, and to be filled with the Spirit of God is to possess the wisdom and knowledge of God. Such would be the case with messengers that come from his presence known to us as angels of light. Teaching this principle, Brigham Young observed, "God is the source, the fountain of all intelligence, no matter who possesses it, whether man upon the earth, the spirits in the spirit- world, the angels that dwell in the eternities of the Gods, or the most inferior intelligence among the devils in hell. All have derived what intelligence, light, power, and existence they have from God from the same source from which we have received ours" (Journal of Discourses, 8:205).

88:68 Sanctify yourselves. See Doctrine and Covenants 88:74.

You shall see him. The promise here given was that Christ would manifest himself to these, the "first laborers," after they had sanctified themselves (for the fulfillment of this promise see commentary on verses 74-75).

88:69 The great and last promise. In the concluding chapter of his Gospel, Luke gives an account of the appearance of Christ to the Twelve in the upper room shortly before his ascension. Having instructed them, he said, "I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high" (Luke 24:49). Luke begins his next epistle, known to us as the book of Acts, at the same point. He reminds Theophilus, to whom he is writing, that Christ had appeared to the Twelve and commanded them not to depart Jerusalem until they had received "the promise of the Father. . . . Ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:4, 8). During the infancy of the Church, while the Saints were still in New York, the Lord commanded them to go to Ohio, saying, "There I will give unto you my law; and there you shall be endowed with power from on high" (D&C 38:32). Returning to this instruction in another revelation, given three days later, the Lord said, "And inasmuch as my people shall assemble themselves at the Ohio, I have kept in store a blessing such as is not known among the children of men, and it shall be poured forth upon their heads. And from thence men shall go forth into all nations" (D&C 39:15). After their arrival in Ohio the Lord said: "Ye are to be taught from on high. Sanctify yourselves and ye shall be endowed with power, that ye may give even as I have spoken" (D&C 43:16). In a revelation that came after the present text, the Lord said, "I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house [the Kirtland Temple], in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; for this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem" (D&C 95:8-9).

The promise given to the Twelve at the time of Christ centered in a ritual endowment of power that was to be theirs before they took the gospel of Christ to the nations of the earth. The gospel requires the same endowment of power in our day. The brethren assembled at the time this revelation was received were to be among the first to participate in that ordinance which would be restored and which is called "the great and last promise" (D&C 88:69, 74-75).

Cast away your idle thoughts. Of those called to labor in his behalf, the Lord requires the full measure of their heart, mind, might, and strength. Idleness has no place in the Lord's kingdom.

Your excess of laughter. The text directs the avoidance of "excess," not of laughter. Laughter is an essential ingredient of good health. In excess, any virtue or wholesome thing becomes a vice. No light-mindedness was to exist in the School of the Prophets (D&C 88:121).

88:70 Call a solemn assembly. Solemn assemblies are meetings of a particularly solemn or sacred nature. Their attendance is limited by both worthiness and invitation. They are not for the world. Generally they are of three kinds: a temple dedication, the sustaining of a new presidency of the Church, and special priesthood leadership meetings held in temples. In the context of this revelation, two special solemn assemblies were anticipated. First, the meetings at which the "first laborers" would be washed and anointed prior to the dedication of the Kirtland Temple; and second, the dedication of the temple itself.

Of the first of these solemn assemblies the Prophet explained, "We must have all things prepared, and call our solemn assembly as the Lord has commanded us, that we may be able to accomplish His great work, and it must be done in God's own way. The house of the Lord must be prepared, and the solemn assembly called and organized in it, according to the order of the house of God; and in it we must attend to the ordinance of washing of feet. It was never intended for any but official members. It is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us here.

"The endowment you are so anxious about, you cannot comprehend now, nor could Gabriel explain it to the understanding of your dark minds; but strive to be prepared in your hearts, be faithful in all things, that when we meet in the solemn assembly, that is, when such as God shall name out of all the official members shall meet, we must be clean every whit. Let us be faithful and silent, brethren, and if God gives you a manifestation, keep it to yourselves; be watchful and prayerful, and you shall have a prelude of those joys that God will pour out on that day. Do not watch for iniquity in each other, if you do you will not get an endowment, for God will not bestow it on such. But if we are faithful, and live by every word that proceeds forth from the mouth of God, I will venture to prophesy that we shall get a blessing that will be worth remembering, if we should live as long as John the Revelator; our blessings will be such as we have not realized before, nor received in this generation. The order of the house of God has been, and ever will be, the same, even after Christ comes; and after the termination of the thousand years it will be the same; and we shall finally enter into the celestial kingdom of God, and enjoy it forever.

"You need an endowment, brethren, in order that you may be prepared and able to overcome all things; and those that reject your testimony will be damned. The sick will be healed, the lame made to walk, the deaf to hear, and the blind to see, through your instrumentality. But let me tell you, that you will not have power, after the endowment to heal those that have not faith, nor to benefit them, for you might as well expect to benefit a devil in hell as such as are possessed of his spirit, and are willing to keep it: for they are habitations for devils, and only fit for his society. But when you are endowed and prepared to preach the Gospel to all nations, kindreds, and tongues, in their own languages, you must faithfully warn all, and bind up the testimony, and seal up the law, and the destroying angel will follow close at your heels, and exercise his tremendous mission upon the children of disobedience; and destroy the workers of iniquity, while the Saints will be gathered out from among them, and stand in holy places ready to meet the Bridegroom when he comes" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 91-92).

88:74-75 In all dispensations and generations the faithful servants of the Lord have been endowed with power from on high and commissioned to raise the warning voice in order that they not be responsible for the sins of those they failed to teach (Jacob 1:19). In this process they sanctify themselves that they might receive the blessings of heaven.

"All who are prepared, and are sufficiently pure to abide the presence of the Savior, will see Him in the solemn assembly," said Joseph Smith (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 92). The solemn assembly was held in the Kirtland Temple, 30 March 1836, three days after it had been dedicated. The History of the Church records the events of that day, according to Joseph Smith.

A Commandment to Teach Each Other the Doctrine of the Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:77-80

88:77-80 Ignorance and the gospel are as antithetical as light and darkness. Schools and learning can no more be separated from the principles of salvation than faith and repentance. Here the command is given that we teach one another. True it is that in the pursuit of an education, many of our teachers will not be people of faith. We anxiously receive whatever light they have, but we do not look to them to set the peri meters of our faith or to determine our standards. The curriculum in which Latter- day Saints should be conversant, according to the Lord, includes things in the heavens, things on the earth and under the earth, things which have been and which are, things which must shortly come to pass, things at home, and things abroad. This, the Lord said, will prepare us "to magnify" our callings to take the message of salvation to all that will hear it.

It is important that Latter-day Saints not lose sight of the Lord's purpose for directing his Saints to be conversant in secular subjects. There is no implication in this revelation that we will find salvation in secular learning. Salvation comes only through the atonement of Christ and our obedience to the laws and ordinances he has instituted for that purpose. No amount of secular learning will ever substitute for that faith or those principles. For this reason, this revelation includes the direction to first teach doctrine, "the law of the gospel," that which is "expedient," that we might understand the order of things in the kingdom of God.

All Who Have Been Warned Are to Warn Their Neighbors

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:81-85

88:81 It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor. All who have been warned of an impending danger have an obligation to warn others. This is true regardless of whether they choose to heed the warning or not. If I have been warned of the necessity of repentance and baptism and choose not to comply, I still have the obligation to warn family and friends that they must repent and be baptized.

88:84 Go forth among the Gentiles for the last time. Ours is the final gospel dispensation. According to prophecy, the gospel is to go first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews a "last time" before the day of calamity and judgment (1 Nephi 13:42; D&C 1:17-23).

As many as the mouth of the Lord shall name. The Good Shepherd "calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them." "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand" (John 10:3, 27-28). See commentary on Doctrine and Cove nants 50:41-42.

To bind up the law and seal up the testimony. The language is Isaiah's, coming from a description of those of both houses of Israel, who would reject Christ and his gospel. Isaiah charged servants of the Lord to "bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples" (Isaiah 8:16).

All disciples "go forth" with power given them "to seal both on earth and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious; Yea, verily, to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure" (D&C 1:8-9). Of these wicked and unbelieving ones, the revealed word says: "Behold, and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when they were sent unto you ye received them not. Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye were delivered over unto darkness. These shall go away into outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth" (D&C 133:71-73).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "The gospel brings blessings or curses. Both are administered to men by the Lord's agents. Those whom they bless are blessed, and those whom they curse are cursed (D&C 124:93). The Lord's servants go forth 'to bind up the law and seal up the testimony, and to prepare the saints for the hour of judgment which is to come' (D&C 88:84). The crowning blessing bestowed is: 'And of as many as the Father shall bear record, to you shall be given power to seal them up unto eternal life' (D&C 68:12)" (Promised Messiah, 174; see Doctrine and Covenants 109:46).

88:85 The desolation of abomination which awaits the wicked. See commentary on Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:32, page 349; Doctrine and Covenants 45:19, 47.

The first elders. The reference is to the presiding officers of the Church (D&C 20:1-2; 105:7).

Signs, Upheavals of the Elements, and Angels Prepare the Way for the Return of Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:86-94

88:86 Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free. Servants of the Lord must be free from the bondage of sin, the slavery of addiction, the darkness of ignorance, the meanness of prejudice, the shallowness of idleness, the stench of uncleanness, and all things that would be offensive to the light of Christ and the companionship of the Holy Ghost. The servants of the Lord should not take as their companion any spirit unworthy of the message they bear.

88:87-94 This section of the revelation bears a striking similarity to chapters seven through twenty-two in the book of Revelation. The events spoken of by the Revelator are obviously being summarized here so that we might see and understand them in the light of the Restoration. The writings of the Revelator prophetically describe the destruction and calamity that is to precede the return of Christ. The wickedness and destruction described here are soul depressing; but standing behind them is the ultimate promise of the return of Christ. Righteousness will prevail, good will conquer evil, and the enemies of light and truth will be vanquished.

Gospel scholar Robert J. Matthews observed: "The Prophet had been involved for many months with making an initial draft of an inspired translation of the New Testament, concluding with the book of Revelation in March 1832. In the process of making the translation, many important things were revealed to him about the gospel and in this case about future events to take place on the earth (D&C 45:60-62). The history of the earth, the ministry of seven angels who play a prominent part in the final judgment scenes, and the opening of the seven seals are significant aspects of the Revelation of John. These were reiterated and partially explained in Doctrine and Covenants 77 as a consequence of the translation and were further enlarged upon in these verses from section 88. Thus we regard this part of section 88 as a further clarification and explanation of the Revelation of John. These are eschatological itemsthe winding- up events to take place on the earth before it is prepared for the celestial glory. All nations must hear the proclamation of the gospel and be informed of the means of redemption. The earth must die and wickedness be cleansed from off its face. There will be a resurrection of all mankind and a final judgment. Through faith in Jesus the Saint will have gained the victory over sin and death and will be crowned with eternal glory (vv. 106-7). The calamities and convulsive quaking of the earth, the wars and the pestilences spoken of in these verses are the 'details' involved in the larger concept of the earth being prepared for its eternal celestial destiny" ("Olive Leaf," 352).

88:92 Angels shall fly through the midst of heaven. Every priesthood, key, power, or authority known to the ancients has been restored by those who held them. It is for us to complete the labor that they commenced. "The Son of Man shall come," we have been promised, "and he shall send his angels before him with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:37).

88:93 A great sign in heaven. Speaking of the signs of the times, Joseph Smith said: "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of [M]an will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286-87; emphasis added).

88:94 That great church, the mother of abominations. History has seen no shortages of false and even devilish churches. Indeed, there never has been a timeeven from before the earth beganwhen false churches have not stood in opposition to the Church and kingdom of God. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: church of the devil is the world; it is all the carnality and evil to which fallen man is heir; it is every unholy and wicked practice; it is every false religion, every supposed system of salvation which does not actually save and exalt man in the highest heaven of the celestial world. It is every church except the true church, whether parading under a Christian or a pagan banner. As Moroni will say in a later era of Nephite history, and as we shall ascertain in our evaluation of Rev. 18:1-24, it is 'secret combinations,' oath-bound societies, and the great world force of Godless communism (Ether 8:14-26)" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:541).

Angelic Trumps Call Forth the Dead Each in Their Order

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:95-102

88:95-102 These verses set forth the order of the resurrection, affirming that it is universalall will be resurrected and that all will be called forth according to the obedience they rendered to the law of heaven. Thus, resurrection begins with the most righteous (Christ) and ends with those who were most wicked (those who are perdition). Those who are to inherit the celestial kingdom will be the first resurrected, then those obtaining terrestrial glory, telestial glory, and perdition, in that order.

88:95 There shall be silence in heaven for the space of half an hour. Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "What is meant by the half hour of silence has not yet been revealed. If it is to be reckoned on the basis of 'the Lord's time' of 1000 years to a day, the duration would be some 21 of our years (Abraham 3:4; 2 Peter 3:8)" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:498). The phrase comes from Revelation 8:1.

The face of the Lord shall be unveiled. Apparently, this is the time referred to by the Lord when he said, "All flesh shall see me together" (D&C 101:23; Revelation 1:7).

88:96 Here we are told that at Christ's return the Saints that are upon the earth "who are alive" will be caught up to meet him. This seems to imply that those who have died are also upon the earth. Joseph Smith said, "The spirits of the just . . . are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 326). See verse 104.

88:97-98 Those who lived according to a celestial law will join Christ when he comes. Those Saints who are alive at the time of his coming, those awaiting the day of resurrection in the spirit world, and those who were resurrected with Christ will all join him at the time of his return. "The dead in Christ shall rise first," taught the apostle Paul. "Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord" (1 Thessalonians 4:16-17).

88:99 The second trump. Joseph Fielding Smith said: "After the Lord and the righteous who are caught up to meet him have descended upon the earth, there will come to pass another resurrection. This may be considered as a part of the first, although it comes later" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:296-97). Those who rejected Christ while in the flesh but accepted him in the world of the spirits will come forth in this resurrection to inherit the terrestrial kingdom. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:73.

88:100 The third trump. At the sounding of the third trump, those who will inherit the telestial kingdom will be resurrected. This will take place at the end of the Millennium.

88:102 The fourth trump. After all who inherit a degree of glory have been resurrected, then those who receive no glory or remission of sins but remain "filthy still" will be resurrected. These are they who are perdition.

Angelic Trumps Proclaim the Restoration of the Gospel, the Fall of Babylon, and the Battle of the Great God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:103-16

88:103 The fifth angel. This appears to be Moroni (Revelation 14:6-7).

88:104 When the fifth angel sounds his trump, all the inhabitants of heaven and earth will bow the knee and confess that the kingdom is Christ's and that judgment rests with him. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 133:36-45.

88:105 When the sixth angel sounds his trump, the judgment on the mother of abominations, the great apostate church, will be carried out. "Babylon is fallen! is fallen!" (Revelation 14:8). Nephi gave the following prophetic description of these events: "And the blood of that great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall turn upon their own heads; for they shall war among themselves, and the sword of their own hands shall fall upon their own heads, and they shall be drunken with their own blood. And every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that great whore, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea, that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it. . . . For the time speedily shall come that all churches which are built up to get gain, and all those who are built up to get power over the flesh, and those who are built up to become popular in the eyes of the world, and those who seek the lusts of the flesh and the things of the world, and to do all manner of iniquity; yea, in fine, all those who belong to the kingdom of the devil are they who need fear, and tremble, and quake; they are those who must be brought low in the dust; they are those who must be consumed as stubble; and this is according to the words of the prophet" (1 Nephi 22:13-14, 23).

88:106-7 When the seventh angel, who is Michael (v. 112), sounds his trump, the triumphant cry will ascend to heaven and reverberate through the universe, "It is finished!" The plan of redemption as announced by the Father in the Grand Council of Heaven, including the appointment of the Firstborn to come as a ransom for us all, will now have been accomplished in every detail. Then shall the angels be crowned with glory, and the Saints receive their celestial inheritance "and be made equal" with the Almighty God power, and in might, and in dominion" (D&C 76:95).

88:107 Be made equal with him. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:94-95.

88:108-10 Again the seven angels will sound their trumps, each representing one of the seven seals as seen by the Revelator, each seal representing a thousand years of the temporal history of the earth (D&C 77:7, 12). From each seal the secret acts of men will be revealed and the mighty acts of God.

88:110 There shall be time no longer. The phrase "there should be time no longer" comes from Revelation 10:6. Both the Living New Testament translation and the Revised Standard translation render it, "There should be no more delay," and the Amplified translation records, "There should be no more waiting or delay" (Layman's Parallel New Testament, 908-9). The idea here is not that time will cease but rather that the righteous will have waited and implored the Lord long enough. Satan will be bound, and the time of persecution and evil will have ended.

Satan shall be bound. Bruce R. McConkie explained: "What does it mean to bind Satan? How is he bound? Our revelation says: 'And in that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man' (D&C 101:28). Does this mean that power is withdrawn from Satan so that he can no longer entice men to do evil? Or does it mean that men no longer succumb to his enticements because their hearts are so set on righteousness that they refuse to forsake that which is good to follow him who is evil? Clearly it means the latter. Satan was not bound in heaven, in the very presence of God, in the sense that he was denied the right and power to preach false doctrine and to invite men to walk away from that God whose children they were; nay, in this sense, he could not have been bound in heaven, for even he must have his agency.

"How, then, will Satan be bound during the Millennium? It will be by the righteousness of the people. Thus Nephi says: 'The time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned.' The destruction of the wicked sets the stage for millennial righteousness. When the wicked are burned, those who are left will not be susceptible to the promptings from beneath. 'And the time cometh speedily that the righteous must be led up as calves of the stall, and the Holy One of Israel must reign in dominion, and might, and power, and great glory.' During the Millennium, when the Lord reigns, children will grow up in an environment of righteousness. No longer will the calves of Abraham's herds and the lambs of Jacob's flocks be lost in the deserts of sin; no longer will they forage for food by the wayside and drink water from stagnant pools; no longer will they be pulled down by the evils and designs of conspiring men. In the millennial day, in the household of faith, children will be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, as calves in the stall, as lambs in the sheepcote" (Millennial Messiah, 668-69).

88:111 A little season. "After the Millennium plus a little seasonperhaps itself another thousand years during which men turn again to wickedness, then cometh the end, not of the world, which occurred at the Second Coming, but the end of earth. Then the final battle against Gog and Magog, the battle of the Great God, will be fought. Michael will lead the armies of heaven and Lucifer the legions of hell" (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 22).

88:112 Michael . . . the archangel. Michael is Adam, who holds the "keys of salvation" (D&C 78:16) or the "keys of the universe" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157). From the time of Satan's rebellion in premortal councils through the final winding up scenes Michael will lead the armies of the Lord in their battles against Satan.

88:114 The battle of the great God. After the Millennium, Satan, who has been bound, will be loosed for a little season. He will gather his armies together as will Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel. Then will come "the battle of the great God" in which the devil and his armies will "be cast away into their own place," no longer to have any power over the Saints of God. "This final great battle, in which evil spirits, mortal men, and resurrected personages all participate, will be the end of war as far as this earth is concerned. Then the earth shall be celestialized and become the abode of the righteous forever (D&C 88:16-31, 116)" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 75).

Seek Learning, Build the Temple, Be Charitable

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:117-26

88:117 Call your solemn assembly. See commentary on verses 70, 74-75.

88:118 As all have not faith. The knowledge of God and those things associated with him must precede faith. We cannot exercise faith in that of which we have no knowledge. Therefore, the Saints are to teach one another that faith might increase among their number. It naturally follows that there is no place in a Church classroom for that which is not productive of faith.

Seek ye out of the best books. The Lord's people are to be a literate people. They should be constantly reading good books. As to "the best books," men and women of faith and goodness will always write them.

Seek learning, even by study and also by faith. Much learning would come to Latter-day Saints were they to couple their study with greater faith. For instance, the revelations of the Restorationincluding the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, the Pearl of Great Price and the Joseph Smith Translationcan unlock an immeasurable amount of knowledge about the teachings of the Old and New Testaments if we have the faith to allow them to do so. Were we as a people less concerned with having everything that we are told by revelations conform to the findings of the science of our day, our understanding of the origin of man and life beyond the grave would be greatly enhanced. We too are entitled to that same Spirit and the same knowledge known to Joseph Smith and the great prophets of dispensations past in which they, clothed in the robes of righteousness, have had the mysteries of heaven unfolded to them.

88:119 Establish a house. It is the Kirtland Temple to which reference is made. At first it was referred to as a "house of God," or a "school." Extant evidence suggests that the Prophet initially conceived the primary function of this sacred edifice to be that of a schoolhouse for missionaries. It was to have two levels the lower being for preaching and public meetings, the upper for classes and study. It was not until Nauvoo that the full endowment was revealed and a temple built primarily for the administering of sacred ordinances. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 95.

88:121 The spirit one feels in the temple or other sacred places is the spirit they take with them. No divine endowment will compensate for our failure to have prepared properly. Further, the presence of those who have not properly prepared will restrain that which others present might have enjoyed. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 59:15.

88:122 The direction here is that one be appointed as the teacher (for it was not expected that Joseph Smith do all the teaching) and that all be given the opportunity to be heard. There is nothing here that suggests everyone in the School of the Prophets was equal in understanding or that in a class the teacher was obligated to call on those who had not prepared themselves to contribute. This was the School of the Prophets, and all that were in attendance were expected to have the spirit of prophecy. See Doctrine and Covenants 88:134.

The Order of the School Set Forth and Ordinances Instituted

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 88:127-41

88:131 The everlasting covenant. The composite of all covenants essential for salvation constitutes the "everlasting covenant."

88:139 The ordinance of the washing of feet. Here the washing of feet as instituted by the Savior with the Twelve at the Last Supper is identified as an ordinance. For Jesus to kneel and wash his disciples' feet, as slaves did for their masters, was not simply a gesture of humility on his part. It was an ordinance of salvation that he performed; that is, it was a rite without which they could have no part in his Father's kingdom. Be it recalled that Peter, the first to have his feet washed, objected, saying to the Savior, "Thou shalt never wash my feet," to which Jesus responded, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me" (John 13:8). That same ordinance was being restored anew to those invited to be a part of the School of the Prophets.

Orson Pratt gives this description of the ordinances performed in the Kirtland Temple: "When the temple was built, the Lord did not see proper to reveal all the ordinances of the Endowments, such as we now understand. He revealed little by little. . . . These administrations in the Kirtland Temple were revealed, little by little, corresponding with what I have already been saying, that the Lord does not give the fullness at once, but imparts to us according to his own will and pleasure" (Journal of Discourses, 19:16).

88:140 All ordinances must be done under the direction of those who have been given the keys or presidency over them.
