Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 89

DATE: 27 FEBRUARY 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Recalling the circumstances that precipitated this revelation, Brigham Young said: "I think I am as well acquainted with the circumstances which led to the giving of the Word of Wisdom as any man in the Church, although I was not present at the time to witness them. The first school of the prophets was held in a small room situated over the Prophet Joseph's kitchen, in a house which belonged to Bishop Whitney, and which was attached to his store, which store probably might be about fifteen feet square. In the rear of this building was a kitchen, probably ten by fourteen feet, containing rooms and pantries. Over this kitchen was situated the room in which the Prophet received revelations and in which he instructed his brethren. The brethren came to that place for hundreds of miles to attend school in a little room probably no larger than eleven by fourteen. When they assembled together in this room after breakfast, the first [thing] they did was to light their pipes, and, while smoking, talk about the great things of the kingdom, and spit all over the room, and as soon as the pipe was out of their mouths a large chew of tobacco would then be taken. Often when the Prophet entered the room to give the school instructions he would find himself in a cloud of tobacco smoke. This, and the complaints of his wife at having to clean so filthy a floor, made the Prophet think upon the matter, and he inquired of the Lord relating to the conduct of the Elders in using tobacco, and the revelation known as the Word of Wisdom was the result of his inquiry" (Journal of Discourses, 12:158).

A Word of Wisdom Given to the Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 89:1-3

89:1-3 As the Prophet received it, the revelation began with the fourth verse as it is now rendered. The first three verses were simply an introduction that he gave to the revelation. The revelation was directed particularly to the brethren attending the School of the Prophets in Kirtland. The Saints in Missouri and in the Church generally were also invited to conform to the prohibitions of the revelation.

89:1 Council of high priests. The organizational structure of the Church unfolded gradually. It is evident from the beginning that the Church was to be governed by councils. Even before the first stake high council was formed or the Quorum of the Twelve was called, decisions were made in councils formed from among those holding the office of high priest. The reference in this revelation to the "council of high priests, assembled in Kirtland" is to those involved in the School of the Prophets, which met in the upper room of the Whitney store.

The saints in Zion. This refers to those members of the Church who had already gone to Missouri.

89:2 Not by commandment or constraint. As originally given, the Word of Wisdom was not binding on the Church as a commandment. The Lord, in his wisdom, was patient in allowing a time and season for his people to grow up into the commandment. President Joseph F. Smith offered this explanation, "The reason undoubtedly why the Word of Wisdom was givenas not by 'commandment or restraint' was that at that time, at least, if it had been given as a commandment it would have brought every man, addicted to the use of these noxious things, under condemnation; so the Lord was merciful and gave them a chance to overcome, before He brought them under the law" (Conference Report, October 1913, 14). Since the early 1930s, however, the prohibitions of the commandmentrefraining from the use of alcohol, tea, coffee, and tobacco have been viewed as binding on the faithful Saint. Adherence to the same is considered a prerequisite for baptism and for entrance into the temple.

The Church has often been criticized for such an unyielding standard. "It keeps thousands of good people out of the Church," one woman bitterly complained to the writer. Such a complaint rather misses the point. Were the Church to announce today that its members were no longer expected to abide by the standards of this revelation, all who ceased to do so would forfeit the blessings promised those who adhere to its standards. Nothing short of compliance to its standards will bring the promised blessings.

89:3 A principle with promise. The Word of Wisdom, like many other principles, has specific and particular blessings promised to those who live it. See verses 18-21.

Weakest of all saints. The thought being conveyed with this expression is that all who desire to live the commandment will be blessed with the ability to do so.

Use of Alcohol, Tobacco, Tea, and Coffee Prohibited

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 89:4-9

89:4 Evils and designs . . . in the hearts of conspiring men. In today's world evil abounds. Greedy and conspiring men seek wealth and power, marketing prostitution, pornography, weapons, drugs, vulgar music, and entertainment offensive to the light of Christ. A prime target for their avarice will always be our children. The tobacco industry markets an addictive and killing poison, knowing it to be such. Profit is their only concern. We have found it necessary to pass numerous laws that protect consumers in the supermarket, yet all manner of destructive influences are available on the streets, in our schools, and even in our homes through television and the Internet.

There is no form of wickedness that someone will not make available for a price. To give their evil designs some sense of respectability, they hide them behind weak phrases: "If it offends you, don't buy it." We in turn are expected to be so foolish as to suppose that if we don't buy that which is evil or offensive we will be spared its effects. The logic is threadbare. Our choice not to operate a smelter will not protect us against another man's choice to do so. We all breathe the same air; nonsmoking sections in a restaurant provide precious little protection to the nonsmoker. Again, one man's choice not to use alcohol will hardly protect him from drunk drivers.

Gratefully, the spirit and direction of the revelations of the Restoration are such that not only are we warned against the designs of evil men, but a path of safety is marked so that we canto the extent possibleprotect ourselves from their destructive influence in our society. See commentary on verses 18-21.

89:6 Pure wine. Convincing arguments can be presented to sustain the idea that the phrase "pure wine" refers simply to grape juice or to a wine with a low level of intoxicant in it. The language of this revelation leaves the impression that a wine with a low level of intoxicant is intended. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:2-3.

89:7 Strong drinks are not for the belly. "Strong drink" is a biblical phrase used to mean intoxicating drinks (Leviticus 10:9; Numbers 6:3; Deuteronomy 14:26; 29:6). It is not simply drunkenness that is prohibited here, but indulgence in any drink that has the capacity to intoxicateregardless of how moderate that use may bewith the exception of the sacrament.

"The Lord has told us that 'Strong drinks are not good,' who is it that will say they are?" asked Hyrum Smith, "when the Lord says they are not. That man who says 'I can drink wine or strong drink, and it not hurt me,' is not wise. But some will say, 'I know that it did me good, for I was fatigued, and feeble, on a certain occasion, and it revived me, and I was invigorated thereby, and that is sufficient proof for me:' It may be for you, but it would not be for a wise man, for every spirit of this kind will only produce a greater langor when its effects cease to operate upon the human body. But you know that you are benefited, yes, so does the man who has mortgaged his property, know that he is relieved from his present embarrassments; but his temporary relief only binds the chords of bondage more severely around him" (Times and Seasons, 3:800).

Washing of your bodies. Alcohol is a very helpful agent for cleansing wounds and abrasions.

89:8 Tobacco . . . is an herb for bruises and all sick cattle. Applied with skill, a tobacco poultice can be useful in healing cuts and bruises on cattle.

89:9 Hot drinks. This language is contemporary to the days in which the revelation was given. Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl observe in their commentary that "'Hot drinks' means tea and coffee, as those two beverages were the only ones in common use among the members of the Church, and drunk at a high temperature, at the time when the Reve lation was given. The reason why those beverages were condemned was because they contained a habit-forming drug, rather than because of the temperature at which they were swallowed; although liquids taken into the sto mach at too high a temperature, frequently and in large quantities, would be hurtful. But the chief objection to tea and coffee is the drug they contain. It follows logically that any other beverage which contains a hurtful drug or element, is open to the same objection, regardless of the temperature at which it is taken" (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 573).

Herbs, Fruits, Meat, and Grain Were Given by God for the Use of Men

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 89:10-17

89:11 In the season thereof. Illustrating the meaning of this phrase, Joseph Fielding Smith said: "Some have stumbled over the meaning of the expression . . . and have argued that grains and fruits should only be used in the season of their growth and when they have ripened. This is not the intent, but any grain or fruit is out of season no matter what part of the year it may be, if it is unfit for use. The apple under the tree bruised and decaying is out of season while the good fruit is waiting to be plucked from the tree" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:385).

89:11-13 Flesh also of beasts and of the fowls of the air. The eating of meat is not prohibited by this or any other revelation from God. This revelation does direct, however, that meat be used with "prudence," with "thanksgiving," "sparingly," and preferably "in times of winter, or of cold, or famine."

Previous revelations had already addressed issues relative to the use of meat by the Saints. The first announced that anyone who forbade the use of meat did so without the authority of God, for "the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air" had been "ordained" by God "for the use of man for food and for raiment" (D&C 49:19). In the second revelation on the matter, the Lord told the Saints that "the fulness of the earth is yours, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the trees and walketh upon the earth," all these were created for the "benefit and the use of man," as "food" to "strengthen the body and to enliven the soul." As with all things that the Lord has given us, these are to be used "with judgment, not to excess" (D&C 59:16, 18-20). "Wo be unto man that sheddeth blood or that wasteth flesh and hath no need," the Lord warned (D&C 49:21). In the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis 9:8-11, we learn that after the Flood "God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth. And the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth upon the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered. Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things. But, the blood of all flesh which I have given you for meat, shall be shed upon the ground, which taketh life thereof, and the blood ye shall not eat. And surely, blood shall not be shed, only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hands."

89:13 They should not be used. When this revelation was first printed in the Doctrine and Covenants (1835), there was no comma after this phrase. The addition of the comma clarifies the meaning of the text, thus dramatizing the importance of proper punctuation. The addition of the comma is in harmony with the context of the revelation, which is that meat should be used sparingly.

Blessings Promised to the Obedient

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 89:18-21

89:18 All saints. Saints who abide by the principles given in this revelation are rightful heirs to its promises. This assumes, as the verse states, that they are walking in obedience to all the commandments. The promise of blessings is not extended to those who keep the Word of Wisdom in isolation of that covenant obligation. Those other than the "saints" who abide the principles of health here espoused will be rewarded for doing so but have no claim to the blessings that are associated with living this principle in harmony with the fulness of the gospel law.

Health in their navel and marrow to their bones. Symbolically, the navel represents the original source of nourishment and strength to every soul born into this world. Marrow represents the source of strength to the bones. The metaphor is rooted in one of the Proverbs. It reads: "Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the Lord, and depart from evil. It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones" (Proverbs 3:7-8). In this expressive way, the ancient sage reminds us that obedience to the commands of God brings a healthy body. The chain of thought being that to trust God brings peace of mind, this in turn fosters good health, which in its turn brings a long and happy life.

89:19 Wisdom . . . knowledge . . . hidden treasures. It is spiritual wisdom and knowledge to which reference is being made in this text. The revelation does not concern itself with the wisdom and knowledge of the world. Moral cleanliness, purity of soul, and the recognition that the body is a divine temple and is not to be polluted with that which is unclean or subjected to addictions are not requisites to study in the great universities of men. They are, however, quite necessary for those who desire to obtain that knowledge that comes only by the spirit of revelation. It was the need for those brethren attending the School of the Prophets in Kirtland to measure up to the standard that called forth this revelation. In doing so they prepared their hearts and minds to receive truths and understanding that would have remained hidden to them otherwise.

We understand observance of the Word of Wisdom to be an essential key in obtaining a knowledge and understanding of spiritual truths. It is not simply a health law. There would be little purpose in extending someone's life if it were not replete with light and truth. To avoid cancer, for example, as marvelous as that may be, is not as important as being able to dream dreams, entertain angels, or get answers to your prayers.

89:20 Run and not be weary . . . walk and not faint. The promise given in this verse is couched in the language of Isaiah, who wrote as follows: "Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the Lord . . . shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint" (Isaiah 40:28-31). Here Isaiah reminds us that God does not tire, nor does he sleep, and his knowledge is infinite. This is the God who gave us the breath of life and of whom we should seek the strength to sustain it. Isaiah reminds us that those who "wait upon the Lord," those found "walking in obedience to the commandments," will "renew their strength," they will run and not be weary and walk and not faint. With the aid of this revelation we can also say that there will be "no searching" their understanding, for theirs is the promise of "wisdom," of "knowledge," and of "hidden treasures"all things reserved for the obedient.

89:21 The destroying angel shall pass by them. Is this reference to the destroying angel in this text to be understood figuratively or literally? The answer, it would appear, is both. Certainly there have been those whose lives were destroyed by their failure to comply with the principles given in the Word of Wisdom. There will yet be others who will lose their lives in like manner. Given also that this revelation cannot, in the proper sense, be lived in isolation of all the commandments of the Lord and thus all the promises of the Lord, we would also think that the time must surely come when the angels of heaven will take vengeance on the wicked as they did among the firstborn of the Egyptians (Exodus 12:23, 29).
