Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 90

DATE: 8 MARCH 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation came in response to the prayers of the Prophet and his brethren and centers in the organization of the First Presidency, which would take place ten days later. On that occasion (18 March 1833) Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were set apart by the Prophet as his counselors in the presidency of the high priesthood. On that occasion "many of the brethren saw a heavenly vision of the Savior, and concourses of angels" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:335).

Keys of the Kingdom Committed to Joseph Smith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 90:1-5

90:2 Keys of the kingdom. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 81:2.

Which kingdom is coming forth for the last time. There have been many dispensations of the gospel, or, in other words, many instances in which the truths of salvation have been dispensed anew from the heavens. Ours, however, is the dispensation of the fulness of all past dispensations. It represents the last time the gospel will be restored before Christ comes in judgment upon the wicked and commences to rule and reign personally upon the earth (Daniel 2:35, 44; Jacob 5:62-64, 71, 75-76; D&C 24:19; 33:3; 39:17).

90:3 Earlier revelations had stated that only Joseph Smith could receive revelations for the whole Church. These revelations, however, contained the provision that this was to be the case unless the Lord placed another in his stead. Were that to happen, however, even the reve lation identifying Joseph Smith's successor must come through him (D&C 28:7; 35:18; 43:3). The present text does not contain that provision; but rather, it promises that Joseph Smith will hold the keys of the kingdom both in life and in death. Thus it appears that the Prophet was on probation for a time and that having proven himself that season had now ended.

90:5 Oracles of God. An oracle is a brief utterance. An oracle of God is that which has been spoken by way of divine revelation. It is the right of the First Presidency "to receive the oracles [the word of God] for the whole church" (D&C 124:126). We occasionally refer to those through whom the word of God comes as oracles.

Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams Called to Serve in the First Presidency

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 90:6-7

90:6 Accounted as equal . . . in holding the keys. The principle here established is that counselors in a presidency can act in the stead of the president when they do so under his direction. It is not intended to suggest that counselors are equal in authority with the president; but rather that they are to be "accounted as equal" when they act by his authority. It is for this reason that they are set apart as counselors and not as presidents. "I laid my hands on Brothers Sidney and Frederick," recounted the Prophet, "and ordained them to take part with me in holding the keys of this last kingdom, and to assist in the Presidency of the High Priesthood, as my Counselors" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:334).

Be it remembered that it was Joseph Smith who was told that he would hold the keys of the kingdom in this world and in the world to come, not his counselors (v. 3). It will also be remembered that the release of a president brings with it the release of his counselors. The same principle is involved in the presidencies of the various auxiliaries to the priesthood. In each instance, the counselor is empowered to act for the president when doing so under the president's direction; and in each instance, the counselor is released with the release of the president.

90:7 The school of the prophets. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:119.

Gospel to Be Preached to the Nation of Israel and to Gentiles and Jews

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 90:8-11

90:8 The nations of Israel. The nations of Israelthat is, the twelve tribes of Israel are at the present time scattered among all the nations of the earth. Missionaries, armed with the Book of Mormon, will yet go to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people to "show unto the remnant of the House of Israel what great things the Lord hath done for their fathers; and that they may know the covenants of the Lord, that they are not cast off forever." The message of the Restoration is also to go to both Jew and Gentile, that they too might know that Jesus is the Christ, the author and source of salvation (Preface to the Book of Mormon).

90:9 Gentiles first, and then . . . the Jews. Because the gospel went first to the Jews in the meridian dispensation and they rejected it, by the justice of the Lord, in this the dispensation of the fulness of times it is to go first to the Gentiles and only then to the Jews. Thus it is said that the first shall be last and the last shall be first. Nephi, speaking some six hundred years before Christ was to be born among the Jews, prophesied, saying, "And the time cometh that he shall manifest himself unto all nations, both unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles; and after he has manifested himself unto the Jews and also unto the Gentiles, then he shall manifest himself unto the Gentiles and also unto the Jews, and the last shall be first, and the first shall be last" (1 Nephi 13:42; Luke 13:30).

90:10 When the arm of the Lord shall be revealed in power. See Doctrine and Covenants 43:25.

The heathen nations. Reference is to those nations unacquainted with the true God.

The house of Joseph. The house of Joseph consists of the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. Of Joseph's house Moses said, "His glory is like the firstling of his bullock [meaning the birthright is his], and his horns [a symbol for authority] are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push [gather] the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh" (Deuteronomy 33:17). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 133:26-32.

90:11 In his own tongue. Not only are we promised that the gospel will go to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people but that it will go to them in their "own tongue." Further, Alma tells us, "The Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to each his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have" (Alma 29:8). Nephi assured us that the great winding- up scene will not take place until there are congregations of the Saints "upon all the face of the earth" (1 Nephi 14:12), to which John the Revelator tells us that there will also be those who have been ordained "kings and priests" (Revelation 5:9-10) in the house of the Lord among all the nations of the earth.

The First Presidency to Set the Church in Order

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 90:12-18

90:13 Translation of the prophets. In the Hebrew canon, or Old Testament, the Major Prophets are followed by a collection of smaller prophetic oracles that are commonly designated as the Twelve Minor Prophets. It is to these books that reference is being made here. The Prophet had returned to labor on these books after completing his work on the New Testament on 2 February 1833 (Smith, History of the Church, 1:324). Section 91, which was received the next day, indicated that the Prophet had now come to that portion of the Old Testament known as the Apocrypha, which his copy of the Bible contained, hence his inquiry about whether it should be translated.

The school. The reference is to the School of the Prophets. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:119.

90:14 From time to time. No one lives in a constant deluge of revelation. The treasures of heaven are not dispersed cheaply.

Mysteries of the kingdom. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:7.

90:15 Set in order the churches. Reference is to the various congregations of the Church. At the time of this revelation the Church was less than three years of age, and such geographic divisions as wards, stakes, and missions did not exist.

Study and learn. It is expected that the Lord's people will be conversant with all good books and that they will be students of literature, art, history, languages, and music. Indeed, all that enlightens the mind has its proper place in the gospel of Jesus Christ. Nor is that the end of the matter, for it should be their lot also to write the best books, produce the finest art, compose the most edifying and inspiring music, and do well all else that lifts and ennobles humankind. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:77-80, 118.

90:16 To preside in council. The first presidency, to whom this revelation was given, would preside not only in council meetings as this revelation directs but in any Church meeting that they attended.

Diverse Instruction

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 90:19-37

90:24 Search diligently, pray always, and be believing. It is for us to search the word of the Lord that we might obtain a clear understanding of the principles of eternal life, for it is in harmony with those principles that all the blessings of heaven are obtained. Such a search cannot be conducted without prayer and the companionship of the Lord's Spirit. Those who search in faith are rewarded in kind; while the unbelieving, those who refuse to seek after the things of the Spirit, become more narrow and restricted in their thoughts and understanding, for they begin to lose even the light which they once had.

In similar language, Moroni counseled that we "ask the Father in the name of Jesus for what things soever ye shall stand in need. Doubt not, but be believing, and begin as in times of old, and come unto the Lord with all your heart, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling before him" (Mormon 9:27).

Remember the covenant wherewith ye have covenanted one with another. We are not saved separately and singly. No one who understands the gospel of Jesus Christ would say, "I have been saved," suggesting that they, independent of their relationship with the community of Saints, have obtained salvation. A church organization is essential in the declaration of the gospel and the performances of the ordinances of salvation. We do not baptize ourselves; the most righteous of men cannot confer the priesthood upon himself, nor can either a man or a woman endow themselves. All gospel covenants are community covenants. In baptism, for instance, we covenant to mourn with those that mourn and to comfort those that stand in need of comfort (Mosiah 18:9). Moses took the children of Israel to Sinai that the Lord might make of them a covenant people, a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation, not a kingdom of individuals (Exodus 19:5-6). This has been the pattern for those seeking salvation in all gospel dispensations.

90:25-27 This instruction is directed to the heads of households. It has nothing to do with the number of children born to them. It is an expression of concern about the size of their extended family, which often included friends, who sought shelter and succor from them. For them to be overly generous would hinder their ability to accomplish those things the Lord had called upon them to do. Joseph Smith Sr., because of his kindly nature, was particularly cautioned.

This same principle has to guide us in the affairs of the Church. Though we always desire to help those in need, it would not be wisdom that all of the Church's means be given to the poor and thus deprive it of the ability to accomplish its greater mission of building temples and proclaiming the gospel throughout the nations of the earth.

90:28 Vienna Jaques. "Vienna Jaques, a woman who had been kind to the Prophet and had cared for his wants when in need and had helped the elders, was now by revelation to be helped with means so that she could gather with the Saints in Zion" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:391).
