Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 91

DATE: 9 MARCH 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 91 was revealed one day after section 90. The Prophet was at that time engaged in the revision of the Bible (D&C 90:13). The Bible from which he was making his corrections contained the Apocrypha. Thus he inquired of the Lord as to whether he should revise those books. This revelation indicated that it was not necessary for him to do so.

The Apocrypha Need Not Be Translated

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 91:1-3

91:1-3 "An apocryphal writing," explained Hugh Nibley, "is one that had been accepted as inspired scripture by any Christian or Jewish group at any time. When such texts are brought together and examined, they are found almost without exception to reveal all the characteristics of real scripture. The manuscripts that contain them are just as old as and sometimes older than many of those of the canonical books, i.e., the books of the Bible; they are found in the same places and conditions; they were anciently put to the same uses; they talk about the same things in the same terms and make the same claim to divine origin. It is clear, for example, that the Qumran community considered the Book of Jubilees, the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, the Apocalypse of Baruch, the Assumption of Moses, the Psalms of Solomon, and many other writings just as sacred as anything in the Bible. So closely in fact do these documents resemble the scriptures and each other that to this day there is no agreement among their pious readers or among the specialists who study them as to what is really 'apocryphal' in the Bible and what is really biblical in the Apocrypha" (Approach to the Book of Mormon, 194-95).

We would suppose that no age has been spared its spiritual charlatans and counterfeiters. Nephi told us that many plain and precious things were taken from the Bible (1 Nephi 13:26-29). This revelation affirms that the workers of such mischief also freely added to the sacred books.

91:1 Apocrypha. The word apocrypha has been used so differently that its proper meaning is often confused. This confusion arises partly from the ambiguity of the ancient usage of the word and partly from its modern application to a group of books associated with the inter- testament period. Etymologically the word means "secret or hidden." Some have suggested that the content of these books is of such a nature that they ought to be kept hidden because they contain mysteries or esoteric lore too profound or sacred to be trusted to the uninitiated (2 Esdras 14:45-46). Others have suggested that the term was used by those who held that such books should be kept hidden because of their spurious or heretical nature. Thus the term had both an honorable and a derogatory meaning appended to it.

According to general usage today, "the Apocrypha" is the designation given to a collection of fourteen or fifteen books written during the last two centuries before Christ and the first century of the Christian era (Bible Dictionary, 610-11). None of these books is included in the Hebrew canon. All of them, however, with the exception of 2 Esdras, are found in the Greek version of the Old Testament known as the Septuagint.

91:2 Interpolations. "The act of foisting [to pass off something worthless as genuine] a word or passage into a manuscript or book" (Webster, Dictionary, 1828).

Those Enlightened by the Spirit Can Benefit from Study of the Apocrypha

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 91:4-6

91:4-6 While it does warn against things that have been added to the Apocrypha by designing men, this revelation does not reject it as being untrue. It simply states that it must be discerned by the Spirit. This principle applies to the reading of scripture as well as all other books.
