Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93

DATE: 6 MAY 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Section 93 is one of the greatest doctrinal revelations given in this dispensation. The historical record gives no indication as to what precipitated it. The language in the early part of the revelation reflects John's Gospel, while the testimony of the Baptist relative to the baptism of Christ is also quoted. The heart of the revelation deals with an extract from a record, apparently written by John the Baptist, with the promise that it will yet be restored to the Saints. From that extract we are instructed on the matters of how we are to worship and what we are to worship.

All Who Are Faithful Shall See the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:1-5

93:1 Shall see my face and know that I am. With the restoration of the gospel comes an understanding of its purpose, which has long been lost to the sectarian world. Christ atoned for our sins so that we might be reconciled to God and receive of his fulness. When the principle of revelation and the authority of the Priesthood was restored, we learned that the privi lege of communication with our divine Father is not limited to the world to come, nor is the privilege of standing in his presence, as attested by the experience of many prophets in ancient days.

93:2 "The Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that he may know good from evil" (Moroni 7:16). In this manner, the light of Christ illuminates the course of everyone born into this world. Thus all are accountable to accept and live gospel principles. All are born with the ability to discern right from wrong, light from darkness (D&C 84:46-54; 88:5-13).

93:3 The Father and I are one. To know Jesus Christ is to know the Father. The Father is manifested through the Son by means of his attributes and perfection. The Savior explained to his disciples: "If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. . . . he that hath seen me hath seen the Father. . . . the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works" (John 14:7, 9-10). The words and works of the Son are the same words that the Father would utter and the same works that the Father would do in the same circumstances. They are one in that they have the same purpose in all things: to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39).

93:4 The Father because he gave me of his fulness. Jesus Christ is the Father because in all things he is one with the Father, because he enjoys the power and knowledge of the Father, because he is in the image and likeness of the Father, because he has received the fulness of the Father. This verse is a summary statement of Abinadi's teaching in Mosiah 15:1-7. See commentary on Lectures on Faith 5:2-3, page 842.

The Son because I . . . made flesh my tabernacle. Before the Savior was born into mortality, he was identified as "the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are" (Ether 4:7; emphasis added). Note that he was not spoken of as our Father in heaven, but, rather, the Father of heaven. He is spoken of as Father because of his role in the Creation. Hence, he was known as "Christ the Lord, who is the very Eternal Father" to Book of Mormon prophets (Mosiah 16:15). Yet, when he took upon him a mortal body, he was spoken of as "Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning" (Mosiah 3:8). He did not cease to be the Father, but because he came into mortality, he became the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. Christ was referred to as the Only Begotten before his mortal birth because of his foreordained mission as the Savior of the world (Moses 1:6, 5:7; Alma 5:48).

How the Son of God Obtained the Fulness of His Father

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:6-11

93:6 John saw and bore record of the fulness of my glory. In this revelation John the Baptist tells of a vision in which he was shown the power, acts, and glory of Christ in the premortal realms. Likewise, Abraham saw in vision the noble and great spirits whom God appointed to be his rulers "and there stood one among them that was like unto God" (Abraham 3:24). Christ was the most intelligent of all of the heavenly hosts of our Father's children. Indeed, he was like unto God the Father in intelligence and glory, knowing all truth. His knowledge extended to comprehending "things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to come" (v. 24).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "The great Jehovah contemplated the whole of the events connected with the earth, pertaining to the plan of salvation, before it rolled into existence, or ever 'the morning stars sang together' for joy; the past, the present, and the future were and are, with Him, one eternal 'now;' He knew of the fall of Adam, the iniquities of the antediluvians, of the depth of iniquity that would be connected with the human family, their weakness and strength, their power and glory, apostasies, their crimes, their righteousness and iniquity; He comprehended the fall of man, and his redemption; He knew the plan of salvation and pointed it out; He was acquainted with the situation of all nations and with their destiny; He ordered all things according to the council of His own will; He knows the situation of both the living and the dead, and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 220).

This same Christ, Creator and Redeemer of the earth, took upon him a tabernacle of flesh and became a citizen of a fallen world. Here he "descended below all things"; here he was "despised and rejected of men"; here he became "a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief"; here "he was bruised for our iniquities"; and here he advanced, as each one of us must advance, from one grace to a greater grace until he obtained the resurrection and thus became an heir to the fulness of the glory of his Father (D&C 88:6; Isaiah 53:3, 5).

John's record. It appears that the record being spoken of was written by John the Baptist. Similarities between this revelation and the testimony of the Gospels, especially that of the apostle John, indicate that the Gospel writers may have included some of John the Baptist's record with their own (Matthew 3:13-17; Mark 1:4-11; Luke 3:1-22; John 1:1-14, 29-34).

Bruce R. McConkie noted: "From latter-day revelation we learn that the material in the forepart of the gospel of John (the Apostle, Revelator, and Beloved Disciple) was written originally by John the Baptist. By reve lation the Lord restored to Joseph Smith part of what John the Baptist had written and promised to reveal the balance when men became sufficiently faithful to warrant receiving it (D&C 93: 6-18) . . .

"Even without revelation, however, it should be evident that John the Baptist had something to do with the recording of events in the forepart of John's gospel, for some of the occurrences include his conversations with the Jews and a record of what he saw when our Lord was baptizedall of which matters would have been unknown to John the Apostle whose ministry began somewhat later than that of the Baptist's. There is little doubt but that the Beloved Disciple had before him the Baptist's account when he wrote his gospel. The latter John either copied or paraphrased what the earlier prophet of the same name had written. The only other possibility is that the Lord revealed to the gospel author the words that had been recorded by the earlier messenger who prepared the way before him" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:70-71).

Both John Taylor and Orson Pratt joined in the opinion that it is the record of the Baptist for which we look rather than another record written by John the Revelator as some have supposed (Taylor, Mediation and Atonement, 55; and Journal of Discourses, 16:58).

93:8 He was the Word. God the Father committed into Christ's hands the responsibility to bring to pass the plan of salvation. Jesus Christ is the God of our fathers. He revealed to them the means by which they could be saved and return to live in the presence of the Father. The message of salvation comes only through him and those servants that he appoints to declare his word. The meaning of his being "the Word" is illustrated by the Father's declaration: "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him" (Joseph Smith-History 1:17; JST Matthew 3:46; Matthew 17:5; Mark 9:7; Luke 9:35; 3 Nephi 11:7). We could quite properly say that the gospel is the word, and because the gospel (or the word) comes to us through Christ, he becomes the personification of the gospel or the Word.

The messenger of salvation. This is an equivalent expression to that of Malachi, who stated: "The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in" (Malachi 3:1; emphasis added). We properly say that salvation is in Christ, that it is in the covenant, or that it is in the word. In each instance we are essentially saying the same thing, which is that all things that pertain to our salvation center in Christ.

93:9 The Spirit of truth. Christ is here spoken of as "the Spirit of truth," a title given to him in the premortal life. Thus he is the revealer and dispenser of all the truths of salvation. "My voice," he said, "is Spirit; my Spirit is truth; truth abideth and hath no end; and if it be in you it shall abound" (D&C 88:66; emphasis added). The resurrected Christ declared, "The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth" (D&C 93:26).

It should be noted that holy writ also applies this name title to the Holy Ghost to identify his mission in guiding the truth seeker to the light of the gospel (Moroni 10:5). The Holy Ghost is the "Comforter . . . the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive" (John 14:16-17), for he manifests himself only to those who keep the commandments. His mission is to testify of Christ (John 15:26).

"When he, the Spirit of truth, is come," our Lord said to the apostles of old, "he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you" (John 16:13-14; D&C 6:15).

93:10 Men were made by him. Regarding the creation of man, the Lord revealed: "And I, God, said unto mine Only Begotten, which was with me from the beginning: Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (Moses 2:26). In all other works of creation the Savior acted with the noble and great spirits under the delegated authority of the Father (Abraham 3:22-24). However, in the act of creating the first man and woman there was no delegation to the Son and his fellow servants. Moses was taught, "And I, God, created man in mine own image, in the image of mine Only Begotten created I him; male and female created I them" (Moses 2:27). That is to say, "All human beingsmale or female are created in the image of God. Each is a beloved spirit son or daughter of heavenly parents, and, as such, each has a divine nature and destiny" ("Family: A Proclamation to the World"). Christ is not the father of our spirits or our earthly bodies, these were fathered by God. Thus, when our text says "men were made by him," having reference to Christ, we understand this to be an expression of the doctrine of divine investiture of authority by which Christ or those holding the holy priesthood are invited to stand in the place or stead of our eternal Father.

All things were made by him, and through him, and of him. Referring to his infinite creations, God revealed to Moses: "Worlds without number have I created . . . and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten" (Moses 1:33). The vision shown to Abraham tells us that others were involved in creating the world under the direction of the Savior. After being shown many of the great and noble spirits, Abraham saw that "there stood one among them that was like unto God, and he said unto those who were with him: We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell" (Abraham 3:24). Thus, Christ, acting under the direction of the Father, directed the council of the Gods in the creation of the heavens and the earth.

John Bore Record That the Son of God Went from Grace to Grace Until He Received a Fulness of the Glory

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:12-18

93:12 He received not of the fulness at the first. The apostle Paul wrote concerning the Lord's condescension to mortality: "Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no reputation" (Philippians 2:5-7). Here, the English translation of "He made himself of no reputation" is a derivative of the Greek word kenosis, which means "to make empty." Bible scholars render Paul's writings to literally say that Jesus "emptied himself" (Jerusalem Bible and Revised Standard Version), or "laid aside his mighty power and glory" (Living New Testament). When Jesus was born into mortality, "over His mind had fallen the veil of forgetfulness common to all who are born to earth," wrote Elder James E. Talmage, "by which the remembrance of primeval existence is shut off" (Jesus the Christ, 111). "When Jesus lay in the manger, a helpless infant" further attested President Lorenzo Snow, "He knew not that He was the Son of God, and that formerly He created the earth. When the edict of Herod was issued, He knew nothing of it; He had not power to save Himself; and His father and mother had to take Him and fly into Egypt to preserve Him from the effects of that edict. Well, He grew up to manhood, and during His progress it was revealed unto Him who He was, and for what purpose He was in the world. The glory and power He possessed before He came into the world was made known unto Him" (Conference Report, April 1901, 3).

Received grace for grace. The grace of which John the Baptist wrote is that which comes and grows in doing the work of God. The Savior bore witness to Nicodemus, "He that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God" (John 3:21). Grace is divine help, or in other words, enabling power and strength that comes from God. The Savior increased in grace as he lived the commandments of God and blessed the lives others. His growth was accelerated above that of his fellowmen because of the reciprocal nature of receiving strength of the Spirit when extending grace. That is, he called upon his Father for power and strength to bless others in their need. In answer to his prayers, he was empowered and grew beyond his previous abilities, thus, receiving grace for grace. Christ was foremost in reaching out in compassion to others. Therefore, he received greater grace from God in his efforts than any other person. He increased his capacity to give with each experience, continuing "from grace to grace" (D&C 93:13; emphasis added).

93:13 Until he received a fulness. The point of emphasis here is that Christ came into mortality as a helpless infant, knowing no more than any other child at birth. It was then for him to grow up into a perfect knowledge of the principles of salvation, doing so in such a manner as to mark the path that all others seeking the same end could follow.

93:15 "And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water; and John saw, and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and lighting upon Jesus. And lo, he heard a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him" (JST Matthew 3:45-46; emphasis added).

The Holy Ghost descended upon him in the form of a dove. The Holy Ghost is a spirit son of God and as such "is a personage of Spirit" (D&C 130:22). Joseph Smith said: "The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It [he] does not confine itself [himself] to the form of the dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 276). John saw the Holy Ghost descend upon Christ in "a bodily shape like a dove" (Luke 3:22), that is, the personage of the Holy Ghost descended upon Christ with the grace of a dove, which imagery is chosen because the dove was presentit being the visible or outward sign of the presence of the Holy Ghost.

93:16 It was only in and through the resurrection that Christ was able to obtain the fulness of the Father. In the Sermon on the Mount, he gave the command, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect" (Matthew 5:48). In the New World counterpart of this sermon, which followed his resurrection, he said, "I would that ye should be perfect even as I, or your Father who is in heaven is perfect" (3 Nephi 12:48).

93:18 Orson Pratt explained: "John the Baptist is said by the highest authority to be one of the greatest Prophets ever born of a woman; but we have very little written in the Jewish record concerning him. We have a revelation in the Doctrine and Covenants concerning the record of John, that great Prophet. And we are promised that if we are faithful as a people, the fullness of the record of John shall hereafter be revealed to us. When we get this, I think we shall have still more knowledge in regard to doctrine and principle, and things that are great and marvelous, of which we know very little, if anything about" (Journal of Discourses, 19:218). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 93:6.

Faithful Men, Going from Grace to Grace, Shall Also Receive the Fulness of the Father

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:19-20

93:19-20 The preceding verse contains a brief extract from a Gospel written by the Baptist. The thoughtful student must ask, Why did the Lord think it necessary for us to have this extract restored to us during the very infancy of the restored Church? The answer is found in verses 19 and 20. Here we are told that the foregoing was restored so that we might know "what" it is that we worship and "how" it is that we are to worship. From these verses it could be said that we worship the Father, who sent his Son to mark the path that we are to follow if we desire to obtainas Christ did the fulness of the Father. That path embraces the ordinances of baptism and the receipt of the Holy Ghost. It also includes our advancing from grace to grace as the Savior did. Thus, both the "what" and "how" of worship center in our being followers of Christ, in emulating his example, in learning to think as he thinks, believe as he believes, do as he would do, and thus experience what he would experience. As Latter-day Saints we are to understand that salvation is not to be found in the profession of Christ alone, nor is it to be found in compliance with certain sacraments or ordinances, but rather in our following the path marked by the Savior. We must advance from grace to grace, we must become as "a smooth and polished shaft in the quiver of the Almighty" through laboring for the gospel cause. Ours must be lives consecrated to the blessing of family and the building up of the kingdom of God (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 304).

"Here, then, is eternal lifeto know the only wise and true God," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith; "and you have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves, and to be kings and priests to God, the same as all Gods have done before you, namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one; from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation. . . . To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same. . . .

"When you climb up a ladder, you must begin at the bottom, and ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles of the Gospelyou must begin with the first, and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But it will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 346-48). See commentary on King Follett Discourse 6:2, page 1090.

Those Who Are Begotten through Christ Are the Church of the Firstborn

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:21-22

93:21 In the beginning. In scripture this phrase is consistently used to refer to our premortal estate.

The Firstborn. In 1909 the First Presidency stated: "Jesus . . . is the firstborn among all the sons of God the first begotten in the spirit, and the only begotten in the flesh. He is our elder brother, and we, like Him are in the image of God" (Clark, Messages, 4:203).

93:22 Church of the Firstborn. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:11.

Christ Received a Fulness of All Truth, and Man by Obedience May Do Likewise

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:23-28

93:23 Ye were also in the beginning with the Father. The announcement here is that Jesus existed before this mortal life, and so did weall the children of men lived first in a premortal estate. "I made the world, and men," the Lord declared, "before they were in the flesh" (Moses 6:51; v. 29).

93:24 Our word true is derived from the Old English treowe, which meant "faithful," "trustworthy," or "covenant" (Partridge, Origins, 740). To be true was to be "constant," "steadfast," and "faithful." The standard dictionary of Joseph Smith's day stated that "the primary sense of the root is to make close and fast, to set, or to stretch, strain, and thus make straight and close." (Webster, Dictionary, 1828). This understanding gives greater meaning to the testimony of Nephi, in which he speaks of the words of Christ as being "true and faithful" (2 Nephi 31:15), or to the testimony of the Lord himself in which he declares that the prophecies and promises in the Doctrine and Covenants "are true and faithful" (D&C 1:37). That is, they are trustworthy; and obedient acceptance of them constitutes a covenant with God that he cannot break (D&C 82:10).

In the Hellenistic or Greek tradition, truth comes from a root meaning "to be hidden" and came to signify the unveiling of reality. In Semitic tradition, however, it meant to be solid or stable; one who was truthful was one who could be trusted. For the Greek, the opposite of truth was error or deception. But for the household of faith, truth was light; and its opposite consisted of the breaking of covenants with God. Truth was something to be done rather than something to be learned. Thus, we find the Savior reasoning that he who does evil "hateth the light, neither cometh to the light," that his deeds might be hidden, while "he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God" (John 3:20-21; emphasis added). Again, John writes: "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth" (1 John 1:5-6; emphasis added).

Of the Gospel writers, it is John who uses the word truth in its highest spiritual sense. John, for instance, preserves the Savior's self-characterization that he is "the way, the truth, and the life" and that no man can come unto the Father but through him (John 14:6). The testimony of John's Gospel is that Christ is light, that light is truth, that salvation is in truth, and that we obtain salvation by acquiring light and truth. Thus, salvation is the process of becoming Christlike; it is the process of learning to think as he thought, feel as he felt, and do as he did.

The scholar can define the gospel as "all truth," but the prophet cannot. Prophetic knowledge is not the result of abstract learning. It is not a mastery of theosophic principles or subtle theories. It is something found more naturally in service than in sequestered study. It is more the product of callused hands than of a furrowed brow. It is more the child of the simple heart than the sire of eloquence of speech. It is something that rests closer to the heart than to the intellect.

93:25 Whatsoever is more or less than this is the spirit of that wicked one. The idea here is that divine truth is neither to be embellished nor pruned. It is not in the province of man to add to or take from the gospel message. The revelation continues by stating that no man can receive the fulness of such truths without keeping the commandments. The person who keeps the commandments is promised that he receiveth "truth and light" until he is "glorified in truth and knoweth all things" (vv. 27-28). It is an experiential knowledge of which the revelation speaks. Just as we cannot describe colors to a man born blind, so we cannot convey the truths of heaven to those who have not been born of the Spirit.

If, by truth, we have in mind merely "accurate information," truth is as much the servant of sin as it is the friend of righteousness. As there are no wars in which brothers have not been called upon to fight each other, so the great conflict between the sons of darkness and the sons of light finds such truth (information) a weapon common to both armies. Soldiers in both camps quote scriptures, profess a love of God, and claim a heri tage of dreams and revelations, of prophets and angels. Regarding angels, we know that the scriptures generally assume the responsibility to identify an angel's nature. This is particularly true of the Bible texts. The scriptural pattern is to say that "an angel of the Lord," "an angel of God," or "an angel of his presence" has appeared with a message. It is not enough that it be an angel; it must be an angel from the divine presence. So it is with truth. Truth alone has no salvation in it. Again, we note from the scriptural pattern that truth must have its proper companions. Common scriptural phrases include the following:

"goodness and truth"

"sincerity and truth"

"kindness and truth"

"mercy and truth"

"right and truth"

"peace and truth"

"light and truth"

"truth and meekness"

"truth and uprightness"

"faithfulness and truth"

"truth and righteousness"

"grace and truth"

"spirit and in truth"

"truth and soberness"

"truth in the law"

"truth and holiness"

"goodness, righteousness, and truth"

"grace, equity, and truth"

"wisdom, mercy, and truth"

Accurate information is one thing; the truths of salvation are entirely another. Those who interpret the marvelous statement "the glory of God is intelligence" to mean that salvation is found in living in harmony with correct principles have missed the point of the revelation. Let us read it again: glory of God is intelligence, or, in other words, light and truth. Light and truth forsake that evil one" (vv. 36-37; emphasis added). The truths of salvation do not stand alone. Paul said, "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord" (1 Corinthians 11:11). It might also be said, "Neither is truth without light, nor light without truth, in the Lord." Joseph Smith taught that one cannot have faith without its "train of attendants"meaning "apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, wisdom, knowledge, miracles, healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, and so on. It may also be said that one cannot have truth without its train of attendants meaning goodness, mercy, peace, uprightness, faithfulness, grace, holiness, light, and so on.

93:26 He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth. Christ received the fulness of his Father, and so must we. Teaching this same principle, Paul said that Christ "gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ" (Ephesians 4:11-13). The salvation of which Paul here speaks to the Ephesian Saints is one in which they are to advance from grace to grace, obtaining a perfection in Christ or the "fulness of Christ" that they with him might enjoy the fulness of the Father as the present text suggests.

In John 3:36 we read, "He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." The idea here being that salvation centers in our belief in Christ. We note an interesting amplification of the text in the Joseph Smith Translation of this verse. There it reads: "And he who believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; and shall receive of his fulness. But he who believeth not the Son, shall not receive of his fulness; for the wrath of God is upon him" (emphasis added). This concept of salvation is expanded from that of belief to that of receiving or becoming as Christ and God are.

Man Was in the Beginning with God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:29-32

93:29 Man was also in the beginning with God. Reference is to our first estate, or the premortal life, where we were schooled and trained for the experiences that would be ours in mortality.

Intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made. "Some of our writers have endeavored to explain what an intelligence is," observed Joseph Fielding Smith, "but to do so is futile, for we have never been given any insight into this matter beyond what the Lord has fragmentarily revealed. We know, however, that there is something called intelligence which always existed. It is the real eternal part of man, which was not created nor made. This intelligence combined with the spirit constitutes a spiritual identity or individual" (Progress of Man, 11).

The God of the Latter-day Saints, unlike the God of the sectarian world, cannot and did not create anything out of nothing. In the creative act he gave form and order to extant element (D&C 131:6-7; King Follett Discourse 10:3, page 1095).

93:30 All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it. Once God has created a particular thing and placed it in its intended sphere of activity, it functions independently. It needs no supervision. We take as an illustration the law of gravity. Having been designed by God to function in a particular way on this earth, it does so in an absolutely consistent manner. It remains unchanged by the light of day or the dark of night. It functions with indifference to the season of the year or the attention or lack of attention given to it. Neither righteousness nor wickedness has any effect on it. Unlike the mechanical devices of men, it will not wear out nor do we need to concern ourselves with the possibility of it breaking down. All truths of salvation function with the same undeviating consistency. They are irrevocable; when we comply with them we have claim upon their blessings, which no power in heaven or on earth can deny to us. To violate them is to be left without such a promise (D&C 130:20-21; 82:10).

Otherwise there is no existence. The existence of all things requires opposites. Explaining this principle, Lehi said: "For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so . . . righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness nor misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility. Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the wisdom of God and his eternal purposes, and also the power, and the mercy, and the justice of God" (2 Nephi 2:11-12).

This verse appears to be a summary statement of the principles taught by Lehi in 2 Nephi 2:11-13.

93:31 That which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them. No one in this mortal sphere will ever be taught any principle of truth that was not first known to him or her in the premortal estate. Individuals are not converted, for example, in the sense that they surrender old views for new and better ones. What happens is that the missionaries declare the truths of salvation to people who innately respond by saying, "Yes, that is right! It is what I have always believed." They do so because its truths have been planted in their hearts and, upon hearing them again, it is like recognizing an old friend. The conversion process would be better described as "a coming home," "an awakening," or "a distant memory." The gospel brings with it a familiar spirit attended with warm feelings, which take us back to a time long before our births when we were first taught its principles and vowed to live by them.

93:32 To reject the light is to be left with darkness. To reject the truth is to be left with falsehood. To reject the blessings of heaven is to be left with condemnation.

The Elements Are Eternal, and Man May Receive a Fulness of Joy in the Resurrection

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:33-35

93:33 For man is spirit. The Gospel of John says, "God is a spirit" (John 4:24). A more accurate or literal translation would be "God is spirit," in the same sense "man is spirit," meaning that both are spirit beings. This does not preclude the fact that both have bodies of flesh and bones.

The elements are eternal. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared, "Anything created cannot be eternal; and earth, water, etc., had their existence in an elementary state, from eternity" (History of the Church, 3:387; D&C 93:29; 131:6-7).

Spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy. Only in a resurrected statethat is, the inseparable union of body and spirit can we become as God is, and only in the state of godhood can we experience the fulness of joy (D&C 138:50).

93:35 The elements are the tabernacle of God. This declaration refutes the sectarian heresy that God is without body or parts. All living things have body, parts, form, and substance.

Man is the tabernacle of God. Man is in the image and likeness of his creator. As God is a personage of tabernacle, so are we.

The Glory of God Is Intelligence

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:36-37

93:36 This text is often used out of context to sustain the idea that the glory of God is in obtaining an education or gaining knowledge. Intelligence as used here is a synonym for "light and truth." Thus, what the text is really telling us is that the glory of God is found in righteousness, purity, and goodness, which virtues stand independent of the learning of men. It is the light of the Spirit to which reference is made here, light that can be had only by obedience to the order of heaven.

93:37 It was Brigham Young who said that light and darkness will never meet, that Christ and Satan will never shake hands (Journal of Discourses, 1:364).

Children Are Innocent before God Because of the Redemption of Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:38-40

93:38 All the spirit children of God were innocent at the time of their spirit birth and again at the time of their entry into mortal life. This means that they were free from guilt or sin. At the time of birth, be it as a spirit or into mortality, the infant child knows neither good nor evil. As the infant becomes a child and the child an adult, innocence is lost in the countless choices that must be made. Alma describes the premortal estate as one in which both good and evil existed and in which all were called upon to exercise faith (Alma 13:3-9). A great division came among the spirits when Lucifer rebelled against God and sought to depose him and destroy the plan of salvation. A third part of the hosts of heaven chose to follow him. These were cast out of heaven, losing the right to obtain a body or the blessings of salvation. Those that kept their first estatethat is, those who were true to God were granted the privilege of mortality. All such were born into a state of innocence predicated on the atonement of Christ.

93:39 The two greatest enemies of light and truth are disobedience and false traditions. Disobedience causes the light to withdraw; and, thus, what truths are left become distorted by dark shadows. "He that repents not," the Lord said, "from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord of Hosts" (D&C 1:33). False traditions are also antithetical to truth, providing a convenient place to hide from the responsibility to listen, see, and know, thus ostensibly freeing the spiritually lethargic from the responsibility that inevitably follows knowledge of the truth.

The Leading Brethren Are Commanded to Set Their Families in Order

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 93:41-53

93:41-50 There is no office or calling in the Church and kingdom of God that excuses either a father or mother from their responsibilities as a parent. "'No other success can compensate for failure in the home,'" said David O. McKay (quoted in Conference Report, April 1935, 116). Harold B. Lee said, "Remember always that the most important of the Lord's work you and I will ever do will be within the walls of our own homes" (Stand Ye in Holy Places, 255).

In this revelation all three members of the First Presidency are chastened for their failure to properly teach their own children. Paul admonished Timothy that a bishop must be "one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity; (for if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?)" (1 Timothy 3:4-5).

93:53 Hasten to translate my scriptures. At this time Joseph Smith was engaged in the inspired translation of the Old Testament. Earlier, he had interrupted that effort to complete the translation of the New Testament. On 2 February 1833 he began to translate the books between Proverbs and Malachi. At present we are unable to determine exactly where in the Old Testament the Prophet Joseph Smith was working when this revelation was received. That same day, the Lord instructed that a house be built "for the work of the printing of the translation of my scriptures" (D&C 94:10). Some two months later, 2 July 1833, the First Presidency wrote from Kirtland to the brethren in Zion: "We are exceedingly fatigued, owing to a great press of business. We this day finished the translating of the Scriptures, for which we returned gratitude to our Heavenly Father" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:368).

Obtain a knowledge of history, and of countries. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:77-80.
