Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6-9

TRANSLATING THE BOOK OF MORMON

In April 1829 the Prophet recorded four revelations. Each is a part of the same storythe translation of the Book of Mormonand each involves the same two men, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. These sections are the four most important documents extant today from which we can learn how the Book of Mormon was translated.

In Doctrine and Covenants 6 Oliver Cowdery is told that he has been given a special gifteven the gift of revelation by which he may know mysteries and by which he might bring many to a knowledge of the truth (D&C 6:10-12). Oliver is also told that he will be given another gift, the gift of translation, that he might translate even as Joseph (D&C 6:25). He is further told that this is necessary for the process of translation to comply with the divine law of witnesses. Testimony that the Book of Mormon was translated by the gift and power of God would not rest on the word of Joseph Smith alone. Oliver was to be the second witness to the process by which it was translated (D&C 6:28).

Section 7 centers on a difference of opinion between Joseph and Oliver over the meaning of a text in the Gospel of John. They agreed to settle the matter by inquiring of God through the use of the Urim and Thummim. The revelation is a translated version of a parchment written and hidden up by John. The Prophet describes the experience in such a manner as to suggest that the revelation was jointly received. It is surely more than coincidence that in the previous revelation Oliver had been told he would receive the gift of translation and assist in bringing forth ancient scriptural records. This experience, as well as his participation in the translation of the parchment written by John, appears to be orchestrated by the Lord to prepare Oliver for his role in translating the Book of Mormon.

Section 8 affirms that Oliver Cowdery will be granted the opportunity to translate. It instructs him in the manner of receiving revelation, this being fundamental to the process of translation. It will be given you "in your mind and in your heart" (v. 2), he is told. Then the promise is also renewed relative to his second gift, the ability to use the Urim and Thummim. Again he is reminded that he musteven with the use of these divine instrumentsask in faith.

Section 9 affirms that Oliver did in fact translate but that he lost confidence and, like Peter as he walked on water, lost the power to continue translating (Matthew 14:31). Two reasons for his failure are given in this revelation: first, he had not studied or prepared himself properly; second, his fear had caused the moment to be lost to him (vv. 8, 11).

Often in the telling of this story it is general practice to emphasize Oliver's failure to translate rather than point out that for a few glorious moments he did so. Perhaps our purposes would be better served by emphasizing his success rather than his failure. With Peter as a point of reference, we ask, Is not the fact that he actually walked on water of greater significance than the fact that he feared for a moment and lost the capacity to do so? That Oliver translatedeven brieflyis of great importance, for it made him a participant in the process of translation. He could now stand at Joseph's side and testify that the Book of Mormon was indeed translated by the gift and power of God and in no other way.
