Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 94

DATE: 6 MAY 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

On 23 March 1833 a council was called to appoint a committee to purchase land in Kirtland to which the Saints could gather in a city-stake of Zion. The committee was appointed and some large farms purchased (Smith, History of the Church, 1:335-36). Once the land had been purchased, a city plat was surveyed, and the Saints began to gather to it. Two days before this revelation was given, Joseph Smith wrote: "A conference of High Priests assembled in Kirtland, to take into consideration the necessity of building a school house, for the accommodation of the Elders, who should come together to receive instruction preparatory for their missions, and ministry, according to a revelation on that subject, given March 8, 1833 [D&C 90], and by unanimous voice of the conference; Hyrum Smith, Jared Carter, and Reynolds Cahoon were appointed a committee to obtain subscriptions, for the purpose of erecting such a building. (History of the Church, 1:342-43).

The building designed to house the "school of the prophets" (D&C 90:7) or "the school of mine apostles," as the Lord called it, was the Kirtland Temple.

A Commandment Relative to the Erection of a House for the Work of the Presidency

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 94:1-9

94:1 Stake of Zion. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 82:13.

The city of the stake of Zion. Each city of the stake of Zion was to be built according to the pattern of the city of Zion in Jackson County, Missouri. Therefore, like the center place in Independence, a stake begins with Saints gathering together in strength, enabling them to build houses for the purpose of furthering the work of the Lord. The Prophet Joseph Smith sent a plat of the city of the New Jerusalem to Independence, Missouri, which served as a model for the cities of the stakes of Zion. He explained that the city stake of the Saints would center on a fifteen-acre block containing "twenty-four buildings to supply them with houses for public worship and schools. These buildings will be temples," each of which was to be of identical dimensions and two stories high. Ten-acre blocks containing twenty equal lots for homes were to extend from the central block, filling the city until it equaled one mile square and providing for fifteen to twenty thousand people. "Lands on the north and south of the city will be laid off for barns and stables for the use of the city," wrote the Prophet, "so there will be no barns or stables in the city among the homes of the people." This allowed everyone, families of businessmen and farmers alike, to enjoy the benefits of public schools, social refinements, worship, and ease of access to commerce. "When this square is thus laid off and supplied, lay off another in the same way," wrote the Prophet to those to whom the city plat was sent, "and so fill up the world in these last days, and let every man live in the city, for this is the city of Zion" (Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:311-12).

Beginning at my house. The city was to be laid out with the temple as the starting point, and the rest of the city being built in relation to it. This pattern was followed by Brigham Young in laying out Salt Lake City. He first identified the spot upon which the temple would be built and paralleled all the streets out from what is called Temple Square.

94:3 A house for the presidency. This building was intended to be the administrative headquarters of the Church. Here the First Presidency would have a place to conduct their business and to communicate with the Lord. Today, administrative buildings in Salt Lake City fill this function, while ward houses and stake centers provide offices for stake presidencies and bishoprics to accomplish similar purposes in the discharge of their duties.

94:4-5 These dimensions are the same as those of the Kirtland Temple (D&C 95:15-17).

94:6 Dedicated unto the Lord from the foundation thereof. To be dedicated to the Lord is to be consecrated or set apart for his purpose. Thus, the "temples"those buildings to be used as schools or for other public purposes in a city of Zionwere to be dedicated "from the foundation" or from their very inception to the purposes of the Lord. Formal dedicatory services are held at the ground breaking and completion of such buildings. There is also a formal ceremony for the laying of the cornerstone at the dedication of temples.

According to the order of the priesthood. "If the strict order of the Priesthood were carried out in the building of Temples," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith, "the first stone would be laid at the south-east corner, by the First Presidency of the Church. The south-west corner should be laid next. The third, or north-west corner next; and the fourth, or north- east corner last. The first Presidency should lay the south-east corner stone and dictate who are the proper persons to lay the other corner stones.

"If a Temple is built at a distance, and the First Presidency are not present, then the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles are the persons to dictate the order for that Temple; and in the absence of the Twelve Apostles, then the Presidency of the Stake will lay the south- east corner stone; the Melchisedec Priesthood laying the corner stones on the east side of the Temple, and the Lesser Priesthood those on the west side" (History of the Church, 4:331).

94:8 Ye shall not suffer any unclean thing to come in unto it. This is the first reference in the Restoration that entrance to sacred buildings is to be restricted to worthy individuals. The leaders of the Church have taken this responsibility seriously. One purpose of temple recommends is to meet the obligations the Lord has placed on the Saints to see that the unworthy do not inhibit the Spirit of God from being poured out on those in the Lord's house.

My presence. The Spirit of the Lord is referred to in this verse as his glory and presence. Anciently, the presence of the Lord was marked by the fire of the burning bush or a bright cloud that attended the appearance of the Lord and dwelt between the mercy seat of the ark of the covenant in the Holy of Holies (Exodus 3:1-6; 24:15-18; Leviticus 16:2).

A Printing House to Be Built

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 94:10-12

94:10-12 The printing office described was never built. The Lord commanded that before this or the office for the presidency be built, the Kirtland Temple be finished. Debts, apostasy, and persecution prevented any further building in Kirtland in fulfillment of this revelation. However, before the temple in Kirtland could be finished, it was decided in council "to erect a house for the printing office, which is to be thirty by thirty-eight on the ground; the first story to be occupied for the School of the Prophets this winter [1833], and the upper story for the printing press" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:418), located near the temple. The reason for this decision appears to be the destruction of the printing office and theft of the Church's press in Independence, Missouri (see commentary on D&C 98). Stewardship for the printing office was given to Oliver Cowdery and Frederick G. Williams (D&C 104:28-29).

"The second lot south of this building was to be dedicated for the building of another house where the printing for the Church could be done and the translation of the scriptures, on which the Prophet had been working off and on for many months, could be published. . . . This house also was to be dedicated to the service of the Lord, and set apart for the printing" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:404).

94:11-12 See commentary on verses 4 through 6 for similar instructions regarding the office of the presidency and the printing office.

Certain Inheritances Are Assigned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 94:13-17

94:15 To be a committee to build mine houses. Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter were appointed as a committee to oversee the completion of the "temples" or buildings spoken of in this revelation. To aid them in their assignment, the Lord gave them land adjacent to the temple lot.

Because the building of the Kirtland Temple exhausted the means of the Church in Kirtland, the office for the First Presidency and the building to print the Joseph Smith Translation were never built.

94:16 The temple in Kirtland was to be built before the house for the presidency or the printing office.
