Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 95

DATE: 1 JUNE 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

On 1 June 1833 the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote that "great preparations were making to commence a house of the Lord; and notwithstanding the Church was poor, yet our unity, harmony and charity abounded to strengthen us to do the commandments of God. The building of the house of the Lord in Kirtland was a matter that continued to increase in its interest in the hearts of the brethren, and the building committee issued . . . [a] circular to the different branches of the Church" calling for contributions to build the temple in Kirtland (History of the Church, 1:349). That same day, by revelation, the Lord chastened the Saints for their neglect in building his house that he might fulfill the promise of the Father unto them.

The Saints Are Chastened for Their Failure to Build the House of the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 95:1-6

95:1 Whom I love I also chasten. To chasten in love is a divine characteristic born of genuine love and concern for others. It is required of all parents that they discipline their children. So it is that when we err, the Lord chastens us. The Lord stated in the preface to the Book of Commandments that his revelations were given in part to make known error, offer instruction, and chasten those that sin, that they might repent (D&C 1:25-27). We ought to take to heart the words of Eliphaz to Job: "Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty" (Job 5:17).

Teaching this principle, Spencer W. Kimball said, "We are concerned that too many times the interviewing leader in his personal sympathies for the transgressor, and in his love perhaps for the family of the transgressor, is inclined to waive the discipline which that transgressor demands.

"Too often a transgressor is forgiven and all penalties waived when that person should have been disfellowshipped or excommunicated. Too often a sinner is disfellowshipped when he or she should have been excommunicated. . . .

"Do you remember what was said by the prophet Alma? 'Now,' he said, 'repentance could not come unto men except there were a punishment.' (Alma 42:16.)

"Ponder on that for a moment. Have you realized that? There can be no forgiveness without real and total repentance, and there can be no repentance without punishment. This is as eternal as is the soul. . . .

"Please remember these things when somebody comes before you who has broken the laws of God.

"It is so easy to let our sympathies carry us out of proportion; and when a man has committed sin, he must suffer. It's an absolute requirementnot by the bishopbut it's a requirement by nature and by the very part of a man" (Conference Report, April 1975, 116).

Brigham Young said: "At times I may to many of the brethren appear to be severe. I sometimes chasten them; but it is because I wish them to so live that the power of God, like a flame of fire, will dwell within them and be round about them. These are my feelings and desires" (Journal of Discourses, 8:62).

With the chastisement I prepare a way for their deliverance. Leaun G. Otten and C. Max Caldwell explained: "We learn from this revelation that when the chastisement ceases, the chastiser is responsible to show the one who has erred how to proceed to correct his mistake. . . . It is one thing to tell a person that he is wrong. It is quite another to show him how to do things right.

"When the saints failed to begin to build the Kirtland temple, the Lord not only chastised them for their failure, but He also revealed to them how to proceed in the accomplishment of their assigned task (see D&C 95:13-17)" (Sacred Truths, 2:151).

95:4 I design to prepare mine apostles. "Apostles" as used in this text has reference to those who go forth at the direction of the Lord to testify of his restored gospel. It does not refer to the office of apostle, which had not yet been restored. It was in the Kirtland Temple that the elders were instructed in the principles of the gospel and endowed with the power of God. Both experiences were fundamental to their preparation to represent the Lord.

Prune my vineyard for the last time. This phrase alludes to Zenos's allegory of the olive trees. The last pruning of the vineyard represented the final call to Israel to return to the true Messiah before the burning of the vineyard, or the burning of the wicked at the second coming of Christ (Jacob 5).

That I may bring to pass my strange act. The language is that of Isaiah (Isaiah 28:21-22). It was quoted by Moroni to Joseph Smith on their first meeting. The idea that it conveys is that the gospel will appear "strange," and the things the Lord does or has his people do will appear as a "strange act" to those so given up to the things of the world that they have lost all spiritual discernment or sensitivity.

That I may pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. The Spirit testifies of truth. Thus, the Lord pours out his Spirit when the gospel is taught. Given that the truth of the gospel must fill the earth, the Lord through his servant Joel said, "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit" (Joel 2:28-29).

95:5-6 But few of them are chosen. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 121:34.

95:6 Walking in darkness at noon-day. The rebuke here centers in the failure to complete the temple in Kirtland. Again, the temple was to perform two important functions for those called to the ministry: (1) they were to attend the School of the Prophets, where they could be more thoroughly instructed in the doctrines of the kingdom, and (2) they were to be endowed with power from on high. To proceed without such light would be to walk in "darkness at noon-day."

Christ Is the Lord of Sabaoth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 95:7-10

95:7 The Lord of Sabaoth. The Hebrew meaning of Sabaoth is literally "hosts." Often the word is used in conjunction with hosts of soldiers organized for war. Bible scholars explain that "since the realms of earth and heaven were closely related in ancient thought, it was believed that the same kind of organized military array was found in the heavenly sphere" (Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 2:655). This text expands our understanding of those who marched in the heavenly army. It describes the Lord of Sabaoth as the "creator of the first day, the beginning and the end." In earlier revelations Christ is referred to as "the Great I Am, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the same which looked upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made" (D&C 38:1). Again, we are told to give "ear to him who laid the foundation of the earth, who made the heavens and all the hosts thereof" (D&C 45:1). We would understand the heavenly host to be the righteous spirits who had marched in the army of the Lord against Lucifer and his legions (D&C 29:36).

95:8-9 I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 39:15, "And from thence men shall go forth into all nations."

95:10 The school of the prophets. This school was organized by command of the Lord on 23 January 1833 (D&C 88:127-41). The brethren involved met in a room above the Newel K. Whitney store in Kirtland, Ohio. It was here that the Lectures on Faith were given.

The House Is to Be Dedicated As a Place of Worship and for the School of the Apostles

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 95:11-17

95:11 If you keep my commandments you shall have power to build it. The building of temples is never without opposition. From the laying of the foundation of the Lord's house in Kirtland to the present day, this has always been the case. The announcement of the temple in Missouri had the anticipated effect: Satan unleashed his wrath against the Saints there. Mobs drove the Saints from their property in Missouri and effectively stopped any work on the temple. Those in Kirtland and the surrounding regions, including the Prophet Joseph Smith, were called upon to march to Zion, where they would reclaim the lands from which their fellow Saints had been driven. This delayed the building of the temple there. Upon the return of those that traveled to Zion, the Saints in Kirtland had to exert every effort to accomplish the task given to them by the Lord to build his house.

At this time the brethren were laboring night and day to build the house of the Lord. Heber C. Kimball recorded: "Our women were engaged in spinning and knitting in order to clothe those who were laboring at the building; and the Lord only knows the scenes of poverty, tribulation and distress which we passed through to accomplish it. My wife had toiled all summer in lending her aid towards its accomplishment. She took a hundred pounds of wool to spin on shares, which, with the assistance of a girl, she spun, in order to furnish clothing for those engaged in building the temple; and although she had the privilege of keeping half the quantity of wool for herself, as a recompense for her labor, she did not reserve even so much as would make a pair of stockings, but gave it for those who were laboring at the house of the Lord. She spun and wove, and got the cloth dressed and cut and made up into garments, and gave them to the laborers on the temple. Almost all the sisters in Kirtland labored in knitting, sewing, spinning, etc., for the same purpose; while we went up to Missouri to endeavor to reinstate our brethren on the lands from which they had been driven.

"Elder Rigdon, when addressing the brethren upon the importance of building this house, spake to this effect: That we should use every effort to accomplish this building by the time appointed; if we did the Lord would accept it at our hands; and on it depends the salvation of the Church, and also of the world. Looking at the sufferings and poverty of the Church, he frequently went upon the walls of the building, both by night and day, and wept, crying aloud to the Almighty to send means whereby we might accomplish the building.

"After we returned from our journey to the West, the whole Church united in this great undertaking, and every man lent a helping hand. Those who had not teams went to work in the stone quarry and prepared the stones for drawing to the house.

"The Prophet being our foreman, would put on his tow frock and tow pantaloons and go into the quarry. The Presidency, High Priests, and Elders all alike assisting. Those who had teams assisted in drawing the stone to the house. These all laboring one day in the week, brought as many stones to the house as supplied the masons through the whole week. We continued in this manner until the walls of the house were reared. The committee who were appointed by revelation to superintend the building were Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon, and Jared Carter. They used every exertion in their power to forward the work" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 67-69). The Lord was true to his promise, and the Saints were able to finish the temple in Kirtland before Satan again exerted his influence, and they were driven from Ohio.

95:12 The Savior told his disciples, "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15). Their love for him would be measured by their obedience. In turn he said, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John 14:21). "He that is righteous is favored of God," Nephi declared (1 Nephi 17:35).

95:14 Built after the manner which I shall show unto three of you. If the house is the Lord's, the design must be his also. Anciently, he commanded Moses regarding the holy tabernacle, saying: "Let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them. According to all that I shew thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle" (Exodus 25:8-9). In fulfillment of the Lord's promise, the First Presidency were shown in vision the temple they had been commanded to build. Concerning the construction, Truman O. Angell, an early convert to the Church, recorded in his journal: "About this time Frederick G. Williams, one of President Smith's counselors, came into the Temple when the following dialogue took place in my presence:

"Carpenter Rolph said, 'Doctor, what do you think of the House?' He answered, 'It looks to me like the pattern precisely.' He then related the following:

"'Joseph received the word of the Lord for him to take his two counselors, [Frederick G.] Williams and [Sidney] Rigdon, and come before the Lord and He would show them the plan or model of the House to be built. We went upon our knees, called on the Lord, and the Building [Kirtland Temple] appeared within viewing distance. I being the first to discover it. Then all of us viewed it together. After we had taken a good look at the exterior, the Building seemed to come right over us, and the Makeup of this Hall seemed to coincide with what I there saw to a minutia'" ("His Journal," [1967] 198).

The Prophet Joseph Smith's mother, Lucy Mack Smith, wrote regarding a council meeting held to discuss the building of the house of the Lord in Kirtland: "In this council Joseph requested each of the brethren to rise and give his views, and when they were through, he would give his opinion concerning the matter. They all spoke. Some thought that it would be better to build a frame house. Others said that a frame house was too costly, and the majority concluded upon putting up a log house and made their calculations about what they could do towards building it. Joseph rose and reminded them that they were not making a house for themselves or any other man, but a house for God. 'And shall we, brethren, build a house for our God of logs? No, I have a better plan than that. I have the plan of the house of the Lord, given by himself. You will see by this the difference between our calculations and his idea of things.'

"He then gave them the full plan of the house of the Lord at Kirtland" (History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 321-22).

95:15-17 The temple at Kirtland was mainly a house of worship. Ordinances such as endowments, sealings, baptisms, and other vicarious work for the dead were not revealed until the Saints were commanded to build a temple in Nauvoo, Illinois. In addition, the Kirtland Temple was built that the keys for performing these ordinances might be restored. The physical layout of the temple met the purpose for which it was built. The lower part of the Lord's house in Kirtland, or the main floor, was used for church services similar to the chapels in church buildings today. Congregations met to worship and partake of the sacrament. The congregational seating of the building followed the custom of the day, which included enclosed pews. The benches in the pews were movable, allowing the congregation to sit facing either direction. The distinction that separates this building apart from other church meetinghouses is the three tiers of pulpits at each end of the inner court, each row set a little higher than the previous one. In addition, the pulpits had three seats behind an enclosed breastwork, with a fourth row on ground level behind a hinged table that extended when lifted and upon which the emblems of the sacrament were placed. The west pulpits were designated for the presiding officers of the Higher, or Melchizedek, Priesthood. Those on the east were for the presidencies of the Lesser, or Aaronic, Priesthood. The breastwork of the pulpits at each end had lettering that designated the proper seating for the various offices.

The second floor had pulpits at each end similar to those on the main floor. This was a visible designation that the activities of the school held there were under the direction of the priesthood (D&C 90:7, 13-15). It was unusual for the times to have a school as part of a church building. This floor served a missionary training center at which secular as well as religious instruction was offered. The third floor was in the attic of the building. It was divided into five rooms, which were utilized as offices for the presiding quorums and officers. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:77-81.

95:16 Dedicated unto me. Elder Boyd K. Packer has written: "Consider the definition of the word dedication as it applies to temples. When a developer prepares a tract of land for the building of homes, he makes provision for streets. But the streets will not be the property of homeowners. These are deeded to the community. The process of deeding that property to the community is called dedication. A street that is 'dedicated' becomes the property of the community, which has some responsibility to maintain it and to set the conditions under which the public might use it. In simple terms, the developer gives his ownership of that property to the community.

"Something similar to that happens when we dedicate a temple. While members of the Church may have contributed the money to build the temple and may themselves have labored to construct it, it is not theirs once it is dedicated. The dedication of a temple, in a real way, gives the building and all of the landscaping and structures related to the temple site to the Lord. The temple itself becomes literally the house of the Lord. The word temple comes from the word templum, which is defined as the abode of Deity or simply the house of the Lord.

"Elder James E. Talmage defines the temple as 'a building constructed for and exclusively devoted to sacred rites and ceremonies' (Talmage, The House of the Lord, 1).

"After a temple is dedicated we do not feel we own it. It is the Lord's house. He directs the conditions under which it may be used. He has revealed the ordinances that should be performed therein and has established the standards and conditions under which we may participate in them" (Holy Temple, 34-35).

Orson Pratt explained: "By and by we will have Temples, with a great many things contained in them which we now have not; for with them, as with all other things, the Lord begins little by little; he does not reveal everything all at once. He gave the pattern of these things in Kirtland, Ohio, as the beginning; but there were not rooms for the washings, no rooms such as we have now, and such as were prepared in the Nauvoo Temple; and in other respects, there was something added to the Nauvoo Temple. Why; Because we had greater experience, and were prepared for greater things. There was no font in the basement story of the Kirtland Temple, for baptismal purposes in behalf of the dead? Why not! Because that principle was not revealed. But in the Nauvoo Temple this font was prepared, which was something in advance of the Kirtland Temple. We have, of late, constructed a Temple at St. George. Blessings have been administered in that Temple, that were totally unknown in the two former Temples, namely, endowments for the dead. Again, by and by, we build a Temple in Jackson County, Missouri. Will it be built according to the pattern of our present Temples? No. There will be, according to the progress of this people, and the knowledge they receive, and the greatness of the work that is before them, many things, pertaining to the pattern, that will then be given, which will differ materially, or will be, at least, in addition to that which is in these Temples now built. I think if you will go and search in the Church Historian's office, you will find a plan of a Temple, that is to be built in Jackson County, which will be very different from the little Temples we now build" (Journal of Discourses, 19:19).

95:17 Son Ahman. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:20.
