Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 96

DATE: 4 JUNE 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

As more and more Saints gathered to the Kirtland area, the need arose to purchase lands for their settlement. In April 1833 the Church purchased a 103-acre farm from Peter French. This farm extended south from the Kirtland flats, near the Newel K. Whitney home and store, and rose up the hill to the lot upon which the Kirtland Temple now stands. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "A conference of High Priests convened in the translating room in Kirtland . . . and took into consideration how the French farm should be [distributed]. The conference could not agree who should take charge of it, but all agreed to inquire of the Lord; accordingly we received the following" (History of the Church, 1:352). The revelation deals with concerns that were specific to the historical context in which it was received.

The Kirtland Stake of Zion Is to Be Made Strong

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 96:1

96:1 This stake that I have set for the strength of Zion. In this scriptural imagery Zion is likened to a tent with stakes as its support. If the stakes are driven securely into the ground the stake will be secure. The expression comes from Isaiah, who wrote, "Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken" (Isaiah 33:20). And again the ancient prophet wrote, "Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes" (Isaiah 54:2).

Responding to the misuse of this imagery among the Saints, Joseph Fielding Smith reminded us: "Isaiah speaks of Zion as a tent, or tabernacle, having in mind the Tabernacle which was built and carried in the wilderness in the days of Moses, and the cords are the binding cables and extend from the tent, or tabernacle, to the stakes which are fastened in the ground. Now the Lord revealed that Zion was to be built and surrounding her would be the stakes helping to bind and keep her in place. This figure of speech has almost been lost through the intervening years, but it retains its significance, or beauty. To speak of Zion, the New Jerusalem, or even that section where the city will be built, as a stake of Zion, is a sad mistake. Zion is the tent, the stakes of Zion are the binding pegs that support her. Zion, therefore, cannot be a stake, it would be as improper to call a tent a stake as to apply this term to Zion" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:321-22). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 94:1.

The Bishop Is to Divide the Inheritances for the Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 96:2-5

96:2 Newel K. Whitney was the bishop in Kirtland and as such would have responsibility there similar to that of Edward Partridge, who was the bishop of the Church in Independence, Missouri. They were the only two bishops in the Church at that time and functioned in their respective stakes much as the presiding bishop would today. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:17.

96:4 Mine order, for the purpose of bringing forth my word. The reference is to the Literary Firm, which was composed of Church leaders given stewardship over the revelations and their publication. The needs of those who labored for the Literary Firm were to be provided for so that their labors could continue expeditiously. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 70:3.

96:5 My word should go forth unto the children of men. The greatest of truths are of no value as long as they remain unknown. It is the primary responsibility of the Church and its members to do all within their power to share the truths of the restored gospel. This makes the publication of the revelations of the Restoration of paramount importance.

Preaching of the word of the Lord has a great "tendency to lead the people to do that which [is] justyea, it [has] more powerful effect upon the minds of the people than the sword, or anything else" (Alma 31:5). Likewise, the Spirit of God attends the written word and is able to influence readers to do good.

John Johnson Is to Be a Member of the United Order

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 96:6-9

96:6 My servant John Johnson. Prior to this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith and his wife, Emma, had lived with John and his wife, Elsa, on their farm in Hiram, Ohio. It was on this farm that the leading elders of the Church met in conference and determined to publish a selection of the revelations which had been received, known as the Book of Commandments (D&C 67). It was there that Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon received the visions of the three degrees of glory while engaged in the translation of the Bible (D&C 76) and were later tarred and feathered. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:9.

96:7 He is a descendant of Joseph. Reference is to Joseph of Egypt, who received the promise that it would be his posterity that would assume the responsibility to gather Israel in the last days and who would lead them again to the temple of the Lord and the covenants that God had made with their fathers (Deuteronomy 33:13-17; JST Genesis 50:24-38; Isaiah 2:2-3; D&C 133:26-34).

96:8 He should become a member of the order. The order of which John Johnson was to become a member was composed of some of the leading elders of the Church and was referred to as the united order, or United Firm. Members of this order oversaw Church- owned properties. As members of the order, they covenanted to consecrate their surplus property and business profits for the poor and needy of the Church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:3-4.

96:9 He shall seek diligently to take away incumbrances. At this time, as indicated in the introduction, the Church had negotiated the purchase of a farm from Peter French, which included a house or inn. The Lord commanded John Johnson to supply funds to help pay the debt the United Firm incurred in the purchase of the farm.

This simple passage in the Doctrine and Covenants had a profound influence in the life of John Johnson and the history of the Church. John gave liberally of his means for the building of the kingdom and eventually sold his home and farm in Hiram, Ohio, as part of honoring the covenant he had made as a member of the order. His offerings were combined with the money of the order and used to pay the mortgage on the Peter French farm. It was upon a portion of this land that the Kirtland Temple was built. This temple and the resulting blessings, namely the preparatory endowment ordinances (washings and anointings), many great spiritual manifestations, and the long awaited restoration of priesthood keys held by Moses, Elias, and Elijah were made possible due, in part, to this one man's offering.

The house named among you. Refers to the Peter French Inn, located on the Kirtland flats on the lot south of Newel K. Whitney's home.
