Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 97

DATE: 2 AUGUST 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

On 20 July 1833 an armed mob, approved by the state Lieutenant Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, demanded that all Mormons remove from Jackson County, Missouri. They ransacked the home of William W. Phelps and destroyed the unbound sheets of the Book of Commandments that were in the printing office above his home. The printing press was destroyed, and Brother Phelps's personal belongings were plundered. Bishop Edward Partridge and another member, Charles Allen, were taken into the county courthouse square where they were stripped of their clothing, tarred, and feathered. Sidney Gilbert was forced to agree to close his mercantile store. Three days later, leaders among the Saints signed a treaty with the mob that they would leave the county.

During the summer of 1833 the Saints in Kirtland had devoted much of their attention to building the temple, as commanded by the Lord. On 23 July, the very day that the treaty was signed in Missouri, "the corner stones of the Lord's House were laid in Kirtland, after the order of the Holy Priesthood" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:400). The Prophet, who was in Kirtland, was without knowledge of what was happening in Missouri. On 2 August he received the following revelation, which warned the inhabitants of Zion to observe the commandments or be visited "with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire" (D&C 97:26).

Many of the Saints in Zion (Jackson County, Missouri) Are Blessed for Their Faithfulness

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 97:1-9

97:3 I, the Lord, am well pleased that there should be a school in Zion. Concerning his labors in the School of the Elders in Zion, Parley P. Pratt wrote: "In the latter part of the summer and in the autumn [1833], I devoted almost my entire time ministering among the churches; holding meetings; visiting the sick; comforting the afflicted, and giving counsel. A school of Elders was also organized, over which I was called to preside. This class, to the number of about sixty, met for instruction once a week. The place of meeting was in the open air, under some tall trees, in a retired place in the wilderness, where we prayed, preached and prophesied, and exercised ourselves in the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Here great blessings were poured out, and many great and marvelous things were manifested and taught. The Lord gave me great wisdom, and enabled me to teach and edify the Elders, and comfort and encourage them in their preparations for the work which lay before us. I was also much edified and strengthened. To attend this school I had to travel on foot, and sometimes with bare feet at that, about six miles. This I did once a week, besides visiting and preaching in five or six branches a week" (Autobiography, 75-76).

97:5 I will bless him with a multiplicity of blessings, in expounding all scriptures and mysteries. It is the privilege of those appointed to teach in the kingdom to receive inspiration from God and, if they are faithful in teaching the scriptures, to have the mysteries of godliness unfolded to them. The blessing extends to all who are called to teach, whether it be in Primary, Sunday School, Relief Society, the quorums of the priesthood, or the Church Educational System. The promise extends to tens, even hundreds of thousands who have been so called. According to the apostle Paul, these teachers rank second only to apostles and prophets in their importance in the Church. "And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers" (1 Corinthians 12:28).

There is no thought here that the right to teach or to receive the appropriate revelation for the particular teaching assignment to which one has been called is limited to those holding high office or position. All who have been baptized and had the gift of the Holy Ghost conferred upon them have received not just the right but the responsibility to receive revelation. Joseph Smith said, "No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328).

97:7 The axe is laid at the root of the trees. John the Baptist used this expression in his condemnation of the Pharisees and Sadducees, who viewed with scorn the doctrine he taught and the baptism he performed. To them he said, "Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance: and think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire" (Matthew 3:8-10; Luke 3:8). That is, the axe is laid to the tree of formalism and Mosaic performances, to the tree of tortured interpretations of the scriptures, and self- serving religious observances, for all trees that bring not forth good fruit will be cut down and burned. So it was that John had been sent to overthrow the corrupt kingdom of the Jews (D&C 84:28).

Thus, those in the School of the Elders who, like their ancient counterparts in the nation of the Jews, had not brought forth good works, whose private lives did not match their public professions, stood in danger of being cut down and destroyed.

A House Is to Be Built in Zion in Which the Pure in Heart Shall See God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 97:10-17

97:10 A house should be built unto me in the land of Zion. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:3.

Like unto the pattern which I have given you. The instructions sent to Zion indicate that the temple to be built at this time in Independence, Missouri, was identical in style to the temple in Kirtland, Ohio, except that the dimensions were larger (Roberts, Comprehensive History, 1:359). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 95:15-17.

97:11 By the tithing of my people. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 64:23.

97:12 For the salvation of Zion. Because the Saints in Zion had not lived worthily of the Lord's blessing, they were unable to build the temple in Jackson County as they had been commanded. Rather than redeem Zion according to the ancient promises, they were driven from it.

Bruce R. McConkie said: "Time and time again the early saints in this dispensation were offered the precious privilege of building up Zion, of establishing the New Jerusalem, and of crowning that Holy City with the temple of temples. But always the promises were conditional. Always the divine provisos set forth the need for faith, obedience, righteousness, and complete conformity to the high, holy, and heavenly law. Sad to say, the Lord's people failed to gain the promised blessing. Obeying only in part, they received only a partial reward. Failing to live the fulness of the divine law, they were denied an inheritance in the Holy City in the days of their mortal probation.

"It was with the Latter-day Saints as it had been with their ancestors in the days of Moses. The Lord Jehovah offered ancient Israel the fulness of his eternal gospel; by the mouth of Moses and others of the prophets, he pled with his people to sanctify themselves and receive the fulness of his glory while in the wilderness and again after they entered their promised Canaan. A few in Israel gained wondrous gifts and powers, but the generality of the people, obeying only in part, rose no higher in spiritual stature than provided for in the lesser law. And yet in that law, always and everlastingly, there was a call to higher things. The very law itself was a schoolmaster to prepare the people for the fulness of the gospel.

"And so it has been among us. Though the newly called saints of the nineteenth century failed to build their promised Zion, yet they retained the glorious gospel, with all its hopes and promises. They were left in that state which now exists among us. What we now have is a schoolmaster to prepare us for that which is yet to be. We are now seeking to build Zion in our hearts by faith and personal righteousness as we prepare for the day when we will have power to build the city whence the law will go forth when He rules whose right it is" (New Witness, 610-11). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 103.

97:13-17 Instructions and promises regarding the house of the Lord in Kirtland were repeated for the Saints in Missouri (D&C 88:68, 77-78, 118-19; 94:15-17). Regarding the promises to those in Kirtland, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and establish a school for the Prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will obey: as on conditions of our obedience He has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His own presence. We greatly fear before the Lord lest we should fail of this great honor, which our Master proposes to confer on us; we are seeking for humility and great faith lest we be ashamed in His presence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 19).

97:13 A place of instruction. The temple in the New Jerusalem was, like the Kirtland Temple, to house the School of the Prophets, or the School of the Elders. It was in effect to perform the function now assumed in our Missionary Training Centers.

97:16 All the pure in heart that shall come into it shall see God. The psalmist asked, "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place?" (Psalm 24:3). His response: "He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face" (Psalm 24:4-6). After recounting the visions received by prophets of past ages, Joseph Smith taught, "And, fellow sojourners upon earth, it is your privilege to purify yourselves and come up to the same glory, and see for yourselves, and know for yourselves" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 13). The promise is given to the pure in heart that enter the house of the Lord that they shall see him. Those entering the temple with a pure heart have been baptized and have so lived as to receive a remission of sins. They have had hands laid upon their heads and been commanded to receive the Holy Ghost and have responded to that command. Thus they have been baptized by fire as the dross of sin has been purged from their souls. In the temple they have been washed and anointed and properly clothed so that they might stand in the presence of the Holy One, which becomes their privilege as they prepare themselves for it. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:68; 93:2.

Zion Is the Pure in Heart

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 97:18-21

97:18 Very terrible. "And it shall be said among the wicked: Let us not go up to battle against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore we cannot stand" (D&C 45:70).

97:21 This is Zionthe pure in heart. Zion is a state of being, a state of purity of heart that entitles one to be known as a member of the household of faith. President Brigham Young spoke of the Saints having Zion in their hearts: "Unless the people live before the Lord in the obedience of His commandments," he said, "they cannot have Zion within them." Further, "As to the spirit of Zion, it is in the hearts of the Saints, of those who love and serve the Lord with all their might, mind, and strength" (Young, Journal of Discourses, 2:253).

Zion Shall Escape the Lord's Scourge If She Is Faithful

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 97:22-28

97:25-28 A few months previous to receiving this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith had written to William W. Phelps concerning the Saints in Missouri: "The Lord will have a place whence His word will go forth, in these last days, in purity; for if Zion will not purify herself, so as to be approved of in all things, in His sight, He will seek another people; for His work will go on until Israel is gathered, and they who will not hear His voice, must expect to feel His wrath. Let me say unto you, seek to purify yourselves, and also the inhabitants of Zion, lest the Lord's anger be kindled to fierceness.

"Repent, repent, is the voice of God to Zion; and strange as it may appear, yet it is true, mankind will persist in self- justification until all their iniquity is exposed, and their character past being redeemed, and that which is treasured up in their hearts be exposed to the gaze of mankind. I say to you (and what I say to you I say to all), hear the warning voice of God, lest Zion fall, and the Lord swear in His wrath the inhabitants of Zion shall not enter into His rest.

"The brethren in Kirtland pray for you unceasingly, for, knowing the terrors of the Lord, they greatly fear for you. . . . Our hearts are greatly grieved at the spirit which is breathed both in your letter and that of Brother Gilbert's, the very spirit which is wasting the strength of Zion like a pestilence; and if it is not detected and driven from you, it will ripen Zion for the threatened judgments of God. Remember God sees the secret springs of human action, and knows the hearts of all living" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 18-19).

97:25 Zion shall escape if. God's designs always honor the agency of his children. Although the Lord foreordained that Zion in all her beauty should fill the earth, he has not predestined such to be the course for any particular set of people. The early Saints were given a choice; they could participate in the building up of Zion in her glory or suffer affliction, pestilence, plague, and the sword. The determining factor was obedience to all of God's commands, for the Lord "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance" (D&C 1:31). The inhabitants of geographical Zion cannot be accepted simply because of the location of their earthly dwelling place. They must live the laws of Zion. Satan had stirred up the hearts of the citizens of Jackson County in anger against the Saints. Apparently, there was a window of opportunity still available to the Saints in which the Lord could turn away the wrath of their enemies. It required immediate and complete obedience to the laws and covenants the Lord had given them. We may never know before the Lord comes and reveals all things what the history of Zion might have been had the Saints hearkened to the Lord's Spirit and word at this time.
