Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98

DATE: 6 AUGUST 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Seventeen days after the mobbing of the Saints in Missouri the Prophet received this revelation in which the Lord said that the prayers of the Saints were heard in heaven, and counsel was given them to be patient in their afflictions and not seek vengeance against their enemies. Although some news of the problems in Missouri had undoubtedly reached the Prophet in Kirtland (nine hundred miles away), he could have known the seriousness of the situation at this time only by the revelation. See introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 97.

Afflictions of the Saints Shall Be for Their Good

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:1-3

98:2 Your prayers have entered into the ears of the Lord. Given that we have repetitiously been commanded to pray to the Father in the name of the Son, this text raises the question as to why it would be said that our prayers were being heard by "the Lord" rather than his Father? Though our petitions in prayer are directed to the Father and answers come from him alone, this does not preclude Christ from having a perfect knowledge of all the desires of our hearts. As our advocate and intercessor with the Father, Christ must be fully aware of our petitions, desires, and needs.

Lord of Sabaoth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 95:7.

98:3 All things wherewith you have been afflicted shall work together for your good. We came to the earth to be tested. This does not occur so that God will know how to judge us, for his knowledge of all thingspast, present, and futureis perfect, but so that we can gain the strength and faith that comes from the test. Chief among those things that will rise with us in the resurrection will be the wisdom and strength gained in affliction. Well might it be said that affliction is a master teacher. It was Paul who said, "Tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope" (Romans 5:3-4). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 122:7.

The Saints Are to Befriend the Constitutional Law of the Land

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:4-8

98:4-7 As Latter- day Saints, "We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers, and magistrates, in obeying, honoring, and sustaining the law" (Article of Faith 12). The "law" to which reference is made in this verse is that law established by the Constitution of the United States. The question may well be asked, What is the duty of a Latter- day Saint when the law of the land is in conflict with the law of God? To which we would respond: To have saving power, the authority and doctrines of the Church must stand independent of the laws of men; until that millennial day when Christ himself will rule and reign, there must be a strict separation of church and state. We need no other reminder of the importance of this principle than the rebellion of Lucifer in the councils of heaven when he sought to control the hearts and minds of all of the hosts of heaven by using the authority of the priesthood to force compliance with his designs and desires. The moment compulsion begins, true religion ends.

Regarding the relationship of the Church and the state, none have stated the matter better than James E. Talmage, who wrote: "In the case of a conflict between the requirements made by the revealed word of God, and those imposed by the secular law, which of these authorities would the members of the Church be bound to obey? In answer, the words of Christ may be appliedit is the duty of the people to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's and unto God the things that are God's. At the present time the kingdom of heaven as an earthly power, with a reigning King exercising direct and personal authority in temporal matters, has not been established upon the earth. The branches of the Church as such, and the members composing the same, are subjects of the several governments within whose separate realms the Church organizations exist. In this day of comparative enlightenment and freedom there is small cause for expecting any direct interference with the rights of private worship and individual devotion; in all civilized nations the people are accorded the right to pray, and this right is assured by what may be properly called a common law of humankind. No earnest soul is cut off from communion with his God; and with such an open channel of communication, relief from burdensome laws and redress for grievances may be sought from the power that holds control of nations.

"Pending the overruling by Providence in favor of religious liberty, it is the duty of the saints to submit themselves to the laws of their country. Nevertheless, they should use every proper method, as citizens or subjects of their several governments, to secure for themselves and for all men the boon of freedom in religious service. It is not required of them to suffer without protest imposition by lawless persecutors, or through the operation of unjust laws; but their protests should be offered in legal and proper order. The saints have practically demonstrated their acceptance of the doctrine that it is better to suffer evil than to do wrong by purely human opposition to unjust authority. And if by thus submitting themselves to the laws of the land, in the event of such laws being unjust and subversive of human freedom, the people be prevented from doing the work appointed them of God, they are not to be held accountable for the failure to act under the higher law" (Articles of Faith, 422-23).

While imprisoned at Liberty Jail, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "The Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner; it is to all those who are privileged with the sweets of liberty, like the cooling shades and refreshing waters of a great rock in a thirsty and weary land. It is like a great tree under whose branches men from every clime can be shielded from the burning rays of the sun" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 147). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:21-23.

98:5 Principle of freedom . . . belongs to all mankind. "It is one of the first principles of my life," said Joseph Smith, "and one that I have cultivated from my childhood, having been taught it by my father, to allow every one that liberty of conscience. I am the greatest advocate of the Constitution of the United States there is on the earth. In my feelings I am always ready to die for the protection of the weak and oppressed in their just rights" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 326).

98:8 I, the Lord God, make you free. Without freedom there can be no salvation. To compel choice is to deny choice. Agency, which is the power to act on choices that have been freely made, was the gift of God to each of his spirit children at the time of their spirit birth (Moses 4:3) and is the God-given right of every soul born into this world (2 Nephi 2:26-27). It can be set down as an eternal principle that that which enhances the freedom of choice comes from God and that which enslaves and limits the power of action comes from the prince of darkness.

The law also maketh you free. Every law that has come from God and every wise and just law found in the governments of men has been established to preserve and protect the freedom of those for whom it was given.

Honest, Wise, and Good Men Should Be Supported for Secular Offices

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:9-10

98:9-10 As a book cannot exceed the wisdom and spirit of its writer, so will the system of government given a particular people never rise above the character of those chosen to lead. This principal was emphasized by King Mosiah when he related that monarchy is a good form of government if the king is righteous: "Therefore, if it were possible that you could have just men to be your kings, who would establish the laws of God, and judge this people according to his commandments, yea, if ye could have men for your kings who would do even as my father Benjamin did for this peopleI say unto you, if this could always be the case then it would be expedient that ye should always have kings to rule over you" (Mosiah 29:13). On the other hand, he also emphasized the power of a wicked king: "He enacteth laws, and sendeth them forth among his people, yea, laws after the manner of his own wickedness; and whosoever doth not obey his laws he causeth to be destroyed; and whosoever doth rebel against him he will send his armies against them to war, and if he can he will destroy them; and thus an unrighteous king doth pervert the ways of all righteousness" (Mosiah 29:23).

In an official statement of the First Presidency, issued January 1928, President Heber J. Grant and his counselors proclaimed: "Laws which are enacted for the protection of society have no value except when they are administered in righteousness and justice, and they cannot be so administrated if dishonest men occupy administrative offices.

"The Lord says: 'When the wicked rule, the people mourn.' Wise men, good men, patriotic men are to be found in all communities, in all political parties, among all creeds. None but such men should be chosen.

"Without beneficent laws, righteously administered, the foundations of civilization crumble, anarchy reigns, decay and dissolution follow.

"We call upon all members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints throughout the world to honor the laws of God, and obey and uphold the law of the land; and we appeal to good men and women everywhere, regardless of creed, party affiliation, race or condition, to join with us in an effort to put into operation the words of Lincoln, the great emancipator, that our country may continue to be a light to the world, a loyal, law-abiding, God- fearing Nation" (Clark, Messages, 5:258).

Those Who Lay Down Their Lives in the Lord's Cause Shall Have Eternal Life

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:11-15

98:11 Forsake all evil. The command is to forsake "all evil," for, regardless of how small or innocuous it may appear, evil is a disease that both grows and fosters other evils.

Live by every word. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:45-46.

98:12 All must grow up into the principles of the gospel. The house of our understanding must be built one brick at a time. The process proves a trial for many. In teaching this principle, Mormon tells the reader of the Book of Mormon that he wrote only the "lesser part of the things" which Christ taught the nation of the Nephites. This, he said, was "expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them. And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation. Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of my people" (3 Nephi 26:8-11; emphasis added).

98:13 Whoso layeth down his life in my cause . . . shall find . . . life eternal. The promise of eternal life is given to those who become martyrs for the faith. It does not apply to the likes of Joseph and Hyrum Smith alonewho sealed their testimonies with their blood in the Carthage Jailbut also to the faithful pioneers who lost their lives crossing the plains or those who lost or endangered their lives to rescue them. Brigham Young teaches this principle in the following: "Contrary to the anticipation of these poorly clad people, the fall and early winter of 1856 were unusually stormy and merciless. A winter blizzard broke upon Willie's Company at the Sweetwater, and it struck Martin's group that was struggling across the alkaline waste lands above the last crossing of the Platte.

"The frigid, two- day storm, covering the country with more than a foot of snow, smashed tents and wagon covers. Ten, twelve, and sometimes as many as fifteen deaths came in a day. Shallow graves were scraped out. At night packs of marauding wolves howled or fought at the burial places. From all appearances these two companies were doomed to perish on the eastern slopes of the Rockies, three hundred miles from Zion.

"When the storm subsided, the companies made a fresh start but moved only a few miles a day. It was under these trying conditions that two horsemen, riding ahead of the rescue parties from Salt Lake City, met Willie's Company October 28, 1856 on the Sweetwater River.

"John Chislett, a member of Willie's Company, expressing his overwhelming joy, exclaimed:

"'More welcome messengers never came from the courts of glory than these two young men were to us. They lost no time, after encouraging us all they could to press forward, but sped further to convey their glad news to Edward Martin, the fifth handcart company, who had left Florence about two weeks after us, and who it was feared were even worse off than we were. As they went from our view, many a hearty "God bless you," followed them.'

"Dan W. Jones, one of the rescuing party, gives a distressing picture of Martin's company: 'The train was strung out for three or four miles. There were old men pulling and tugging at their carts, and children, six and eight years of age, struggling through the snow and mud. As night came on the mud and snow froze to their clothing.'

"After Martin's Company had lost almost one fourth of its number in 'Martin's Ravine,' it moved forward to the Sweetwater River a hundred feet wide, waist deep, and filled with floating ice. At the sight of this barrier, many Saints sank by their carts. In this helpless condition they were found by three sturdy young men who had pushed ahead of the supply wagons. These brawny rescuers heroically waded the river and began carrying the sick and feeble across. This human fording continued back and forth, trip after trip through those chilling waters until every person and his cart had been safely landed upon the opposite shore.

"President Young, upon learning of this valorous service, wept freely. And while reporting it to the Saints in General Conference, predicted: 'That act alone will insure David P. Kimball, George W. Grant, and C. Allen Huntington an everlasting salvation in the Celestial Kingdom of God, worlds without end.'

"With the coming of 104 relief outfits from Salt Lake City, the emigrants abandoned their carts. Those who were unable to walk were loaded into the wagons. Death from freezing and exposure, nevertheless, continued daily. Before the last survivors arrived in Salt Lake City, Sunday, November 30, 222 of these valiant pioneers had found graves by the roadside" (Bennion, Conference Report, April 1954, 99-100).

In like manner Joseph Smith is recorded as having given the promise of salvation to the many martyrs who lost their lives that we might have the privilege of owning and reading the Bible. Edward Stevenson records the Prophet as saying "I have, by the aid of the Urim and Thummin, seen those martyrs, and they were honest, devoted followers of Christ, according to the light they possessed, and they will be saved" (Stevenson, Remi niscences of Joseph, the Prophet, 6).

98:14 I will prove you in all things. Dallin H. Oaks said: "Satan uses every possible device to degrade and enslave every soul. He attempts to distort and corrupt everything created for the good of man, sometimes by diluting that which is good, sometimes by camouflaging that which is evil. We generally think of Satan attacking us at our weakest spot. Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Quorum of the Twelve described this technique when he said: 'Lucifer and his followers know the habits, weaknesses, and vulnerable spots of everyone and take advantage of them to lead us to spiritual destruction' . . .

"But weakness is not our only vulnerability. Satan can also attack us where we think we are strong in the very areas where we are proud of our strengths. He will approach us through the greatest talents and spiritual gifts we possess. If we are not wary, Satan can cause our spiritual downfall by corrupting us through our strengths as well as by exploiting our weaknesses" ("Our Strengths," 12).

Renounce War and Proclaim Peace

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:16-18

98:16 Turn the hearts of the children to their fathers. The Latter-day Saint of our generation associates this language with the sealing ordinances of the temple. This, however, is not the way the text is being used in this instance. In 1833 when this revelation was received, the Lord had not yet revealed anything to them on that subject. The thought here is one of establishing a spirit of harmony and peace among all peoples and in all families that they might see in the actions of the Saints a fulfillment of the promises and prophecies made by the ancient fathers (patriarchs) and prophets.

Gabriel appropriated the same kind of language ("the hearts of the fathers to the children") to describe the ministry of John the Baptist in preparing the way for Christ. John's mission was to point the attention of the "disobedient" children of the prophets to the wisdom of their "just" fathers, who had prophesied the ministry of Christ (Luke 1:17). Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "The hearts of the fathersthe prophets and patriarchs of former ageshad been centered on their children when these great Messianic prophecies were recorded. Such of the children of the prophets as believed the witness of John and the utterances of their inspired ancestors would attain unity of heart with their forebears. The hearts of all men, of whatever age, who believe and obey the same everlasting gospel truths are always united perfectly in one, whether those men are on earth, in the paradise of God, or in the kingdoms of glory" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:80).

98:17 As with the preceding verse, the language is that of Malachi. The command is for the Jews to turn their hearts to the promises made to their fathers. They were to return to the land of their ancient inheritance where the temple of the Lord was once again to be built and the ordinances of salvation performed therein lest the "whole earth be cursed." See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:38-39, page 24; Doctrine and Covenants 133:7-16.

The Saints in Kirtland Are Reproved and Commanded to Repent

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:19-22

98:19-22 Here the Lord assures the Saints in Missouri that he is no respecter of persons and that their counterparts in Ohio are accountable to the same standard that they are. If the Ohio Saints do not repent they will reap the same devastation that the Missouri Saints are experiencing.

98:20 The pride of their hearts, and their covetousness. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 104:4, "Broken the covenant through covetousness."

The Lord Reveals His Laws Governing the Persecutions and Afflictions Imposed on His People

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:23-32

98:23 Bear it patiently and revile not against them. At least some of the Saints in Missouri were willing to endure their afflictions not only "patiently" but also courageously. One such was Edward Partridge, who recalled, "I was taken from my house by the mob, George Simpson being their leader, who escorted me about half a mile, to the court house, on the public square in Independence; and then and there, a few rods from said court house, surrounded by hundreds of the mob, I was stripped of my hat, coat and vest and daubed with tar from head to foot, and then had a quantity of feathers put upon me; and all this because I would not agree to leave the county, and my home where I had lived two years.

"Before tarring and feathering me I was permitted to speak. I told them that the Saints had suffered persecution in all ages of the world; that I had done nothing which ought to offend anyone; that if they abused me, they would abuse an innocent person; that I was willing to suffer for the sake of Christ; but, to leave the country, I was not then willing to consent to it. By this time the multitude made so much noise that I could not be heard: some were cursing and swearing, saying, 'call upon your Jesus,' etc.; others were equally noisy in trying to still the rest, that they might be enabled to hear what I was saying.

"Until after I had spoken, I knew not what they intended to do with me, whether to kill me, to whip me, or what else I knew not. I bore my abuse with so much resignation and meekness, that it appeared to astound the multitude, who permitted me to retire in silence, many looking very solemn, their sympathies having been touched as I thought; and as to myself, I was so filled with the Spirit and love of God, that I had no hatred towards my persecutors or anyone else" (History of the Church, 1:390-91).

Three years later, after the Saints had resettled in Clay County, Missouri, new troubles arose with the inhabitants of that county. The Prophet Joseph Smith and other leaders of the Church wrote in counsel: "We are sorry that this disturbance has broken out, but we do not consider it our fault. You are better acquainted with circumstances than we are, and, of course, have been directed by wisdom in your moves relative to leaving the county. . . . We advise that you be not the first aggressors. Give no occasion, and if the people will let you, dispose of your property, settle your affairs, and go in peace. . . . You know our feelings relative to not giving the first offense, and also of protecting your wives and little ones in case a mob should seek their lives. . . . Be wise; let prudence dictate all your counsels; preserve peace with all men, if possible; stand by the Constitution of your country; observe its principles; and above all, show yourselves men of God, worthy citizens, and we doubt not, the community, ere long, will do you justice, and rise in indignation against those who are the instigators of your sufferings and afflictions" (History of the Church, 2:455-56). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:30.

98:25-32 Those standing for the truth will always be countered by those who oppose it. In every age and dispensation the Saints have been called on to suffer for their faith (D&C 138:12-13). This revelation restores to us the revealed principles by which they were to govern their response to the actions of their enemies. Of the Nephites Mormon recorded: "Nevertheless, the Nephites were inspired by a better cause, for they were not fighting for monarchy nor power. . . . And they were doing that which they felt was the duty which they owed to their God; for the Lord had said unto them, and also unto their fathers, that: Inasmuch as ye are not guilty of the first offense, neither the second, ye shall not suffer yourselves to be slain by the hands of your enemies. . . . Ye shall defend your families even unto bloodshed. Therefore for this cause were the Nephites contending with the Lamanites, to defend themselves, and their families, and their lands, their country, and their rights, and their religion" (Alma 43:46-47).

It was not intended that the Saints in Missouri allow their enemies to destroy them. They were to defend their lives against mob-armies that came against them. Like the Nephites, they were "to defend themselves against their enemies, even to the shedding of blood if it were necessary; yea, and they were also taught never to give an offense, yea, and never to raise the sword except it were against an enemy, except it were to preserve their lives" (Alma 48:14).

War Is Justified Only When the Lord Commands It

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:33-38

98:33-38 The covenant people of the Old Testament are often viewed as "cruel and vengeful, but the Lord says they went out to battle when they were guided by prophets and the spirit of revelation when the Lord commanded them. If any nation, tongue or people, came against them they first lifted up a standard of peace, and if this standard was not accepted the first, second or third time, these testimonies stood against their enemies. The fourth time the Lord justified his people in going to battle. This law is given 'as an ensample' unto us" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:435). In the meager record we have of the Lord's words to ancient Israel, he declared: "When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that is found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee. And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it" (Deuteronomy 20:10-12).

During World War II, President David O. McKay reminded the Saints that they were to renounce war and proclaim peace.

"There are, however, two conditions which may justify a truly Christian man to entermind you, I say enter, not begin a war: (1) An attempt to dominate and to deprive another of his free agency, and, (2) Loyalty to his country. Possibly there is a third, viz., Defense of a weak nation that is being unjustly crushed by a strong, ruthless one.

"Paramount among these reasons, of course, is the defense of man's freedom. An attempt to rob man of his free agency caused dissension even in heaven. Scriptures tell us: 'Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him . . .'

"So fundamental in man's eternal progress is his inherent right to choose, that the Lord would defend it even at the price of war. Without freedom of thought, freedom of choice, freedom of action within lawful bounds, man cannot progress. . . .

"As a Church: 'We believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to laws, and relief afforded' (D&C 134:11).

"Even though we sense the hellish origin of war, even though we feel confident that war will never end war, yet under existing conditions we find ourselves as a body committed to combat this evil thing. With other loyal citizens we serve our country as bearers of arms, rather than to stand aloof to enjoy a freedom for which others have fought and died" (Conference Report, April 1942, 72-73).

The Saints Are to Forgive Their Enemies, Who, If They Repent, Shall Also Escape the Lord's Vengeance

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 98:39-48

98:39-42 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 64:8-9.

98:44 They shall not be blotted out until he repent and reward thee four-fold. True repentance requires restitution for the wrongs committed. Both the victim of the offense and the perpetrator need to do all within their power to mend the wrongs that have occurred between them. The victim should not refuse just offers for recompense made by the offender. The erring party must show contrition and desire to repair all wrongs and injuries. An example of such restitution is illustrated in the Lord's command to ancient Israel: "If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep" (Exodus 22:1). In following this law, the repentant Zacchaeus, chief publican in Jericho, said unto the Lord, "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold" (Luke 19:8).

98:46-47 Children are responsible for their own transgressions and not the sins of their fathers. However, wounds from wrongs of previous generations may be passed from one generation to another. To heal these wounds, it is often necessary that the children acknowledge and make reparation for the wrongs of their parents. This principle is illustrated in the course followed by the Lamanites converted by the sons of Mosiah. Their king declared the necessity of reconciliation between his people and the Nephites after generations of hatred and wars. "We will go down unto our brethren," he said, "and we will be their slaves until we repair unto them the many murders and sins which we have committed against them" (Alma 27:8).
