Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 99

DATE: 29 AUGUST 1832

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

This revelation called John Murdock to serve as a missionary in the eastern states. He had joined the Church in 1830, having been baptized by Parley P. Pratt. He would yet be a part of Zion's Camp and serve on the high council in both Far West, Missouri, and in the Salt Lake Valley. He was ordained a bishop in Nauvoo in 1842. He opened the mission in Australia and served as a patriarch.

This section is out of chronological order in the Doctrine and Covenants due to an error in the 1876 edition in which the date was listed as August 1833. If it were in its proper place it would have been placed between sections 83 and 84.

John Murdock Is Called to Proclaim the Gospel, and Those Who Receive Him Receive the Lord and Shall Obtain Mercy

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 99:1-8

99:1 The eastern countries. Reference is to the eastern states.

99:2 Who receiveth you receiveth me. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 39:5.

You shall have power . . . in the demonstration of my Holy Spirit. The gospel is a living thing, not simply a list of precepts. Although we speak of the Bible and the Book of Mormon as containing the fulness of the gospel, in the true and proper sense the gospel can be found only in the lives of those who live it. We would not attempt to argue that a particular society had laws simply because they had a book on law. In like manner, we would not say that by giving a man who was incarcerated a copy of the Constitution we had given him freedom. The laws of which we speak exist only if they are lived, music exists only if it is heard, freedom exists only to those who enjoy the same. So it is with the gospel. It is a living thing. Thus we find the apostle Paul writing to the Thessalonian Saints, saying, "For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake" (1 Thessalonians 1:5). That is, we have taken the gospel to a people only when they have a faith and power that lives. We cannot take the gospel to a people without taking the power to communicate with the heavens and receive revelation, entertain angels, heal the sick, administer the ordinances of salvation, work miracles, and raise the dead. All such activities are inseparably associated with the companionship of the Holy Ghost.

99:4 Cleanse your feet in the secret places by the way for a testimony against them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:8; 24:15.

99:5 As it is written of me in the volume of the book. This appears to be a reference to the Bible, wherein are written the judgments that are to come upon the wicked.

99:6 Sent up kindly. The word kindly at the time of Joseph Smith meant more than just to perform an act with kindness. It meant "in the way suitable or appropriate . . . ; properly, fittingly." It also meant to do something "with natural affection" or "in a way that is pleasant or agreeable to the recipient or object" (Oxford English Dictionary, s. v. "kindly").

John Murdock, at the time of this missionary call, was a widower left to bring up five children at the death of his wife, Julia, who had died in giving birth to twins. About this same time, Emma Smith had also given birth to twins, both of whom died within hours. John, having no relatives who had accepted the fulness of the restored gospel and to whom he could entrust the babies, took his motherless twins to Emma for her to nurse and rear as her own. The twins, a baby boy and a baby girl, were named Joseph and Julia. By the time this revelation was received in August 1832, the baby Joseph had become the first martyr for the gospel (see commentary on D&C 78:9). John Murdock was on a mission at the time. When he returned, he recorded in his journal: "[I] arrived in Ohio, in the Church in the month of June, about 12 months after leaving my children. . . . arrived there about the 1st of June, found my little son Joseph had died. I had left my eldest son Orrice with Benjamin Bragg and John with Philo Judd and Phebe with Syrenus Burnet. I had to pay them all full price for keeping my children during my absence. But my daughter was still doing well with Bro. [Brother] Joseph, the Prophet."

At this time, Orrice was seven years; John, six years; and Phebe four years old. These then were the children whom, in obeying the instructions contained in the revelation, John Murdock was to send to Zion to stay with the family of Bishop Edward Partridge. Again, referring to John's journal: "I then continued with the church preaching to them and strengthening them and regaining my health till the month of Aug. when I received the Revelation recorded in the Book of Covenants [Doctrine and Covenants], page 206, at which time I immediately commenced to arrange my business and provide for my children and send them up to the Bishop in Zion."

John Murdock was commanded to leave his three young motherless children in the care of Bishop Partridge. The children also sacrificed that their father might faithfully fulfill his mission. They were among those driven out of Jackson County by the Missouri mobs. When the Lord called for an army to march to Missouri to aid the Saints who had been driven from their homes and property (D&C 103:22, 29-30), John Murdock quickly volunteered, hoping to reunite with his children, whom he had not seen in more than a year. When those enlisted in Zion's Camp were discharged, John wrote the following: "On the 30th [of June, 1834] word came to me that my daughter Phebe was sick nigh unto Death, of Cholera, and Bro. [Brother] A. [Algernon] S. [Sidney] Gilbert with whom she lived was dead. I immediately went and took care of her till July 6th when the Spirit left the body just at the break of day, being 6 years 3 months 27 days old" (Murdock, "Journal," 25). She is worthy of the Lord's promise: "Whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal" (D&C 98:13). The two older boys lived to adulthood and served faithfully in the Church. His youngest, John Jr., served as a stake president in Beaver, Utah. He was the last surviving member of the Church to have actually lived in Jackson County during the initial settlement of Zion.
