Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 100

DATE: 12 OCTOBER 1833

PLACE: PERRYSBURG, NEW YORK

One week previous to receiving this revelation, at a time when the enemies of the Church in Missouri were preparing for an assault on the Church there, the Lord inspired Joseph Smith to leave Kirtland, Ohio, to do missionary work in the eastern states and in Canada. The Prophet recorded that Sidney Rigdon and Freeman Nickerson, who hailed from Perrysburg, New York, were his companions. The day previous, Joseph had recorded in his journal: "I feel very well in my mind. The Lord is with us, but have much anxiety about my family" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:419 n). In this revelation the Lord responded to the Prophet and Sidney's concern for their families and gave them additional instructions.

Joseph and Sidney to Preach the Gospel for the Salvation of Souls

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 100:1-4

100:3-4 The Lord knows the hearts of all people. As difficult as it may have been for the Prophet Joseph Smith to leave his family at this time, it was necessary that he and Sidney proclaim the gospel and open the doors for missionaries in this area of New York and in Canada. Milton Backman recounted that "on Sunday, October 13, Joseph and Sidney preached to a 'large congregation' in western New York. The next day they continued their journey, arriving three days later at Mount Pleasant, upper Canada, at the home of Eleazer Nickerson, the second son of Freeman Nickerson. During the remainder of the week, with the land covered with a fresh mantle of snow, the two missionaries sought to spread the warmth of the gospel, teaching and preaching in Mount Pleasant, Brantford, Colburn, and Weathersford.

"One of the highlights of this missionary experience occurred on Sunday, October 27, after Joseph and Sidney had preached to a group gathered in the Nickerson home. Twelve converts were baptized, including Freeman Nickerson's two adult sons, Moses and Eleazer, and Lydia Bailey, who later married Newel Knight in Kirtland. That evening, the Prophet conducted a confirmation meeting. After partaking of the sacrament, the missionaries laid their hands on the heads of the converts and bestowed the gift of the Holy Ghost. The success of the missionaries' labors continued the following day when they baptized two additional converts and confirmed them near the water's edge. That night they held their last meeting in the area, during which they ordained Eleazer Nickerson an elder and witnessed one of the sisters speaking in tongues. . . .

"Missionary work in upper Canada continued after Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon left that region. Writing to Sidney Rigdon on December 20, 1833, Moses Nickerson observed: 'Your labors while in Canada have been the beginning of a good work: there are 34 members attached to the Church at Mt. Pleasant, all of whom appear to live up to their profession, five of whom have spoken in tongues and three sing in tongues: and we live at the top of the mountain. For my part, I feel that I cannot be thankful enough for that which I have received: the scriptures have been opened to my view beyond account.'

"Moses Nickerson requested that other missionaries be sent to that area, and John P. Greene was called to serve there. Writing to the editor of the Messenger and Advocate, he reported that he had been received by the Saints with expressions of joy, and many were desirous to be instructed more perfectly in the word of the Lord. 'I labored in this region about two months with a good degree of satisfaction,' he stated, 'and preached the gospel to many hundreds of souls'" (Heavens Resound, 117-18).

This missionary experience left Joseph Smith with a special love for the Saints in Mount Pleasant, Canada: "I remember Brother Freeman and wife, Ransom also, and Sister Lydia, and little Charles, with all the brethren and sisters. I entreat for an interest in all your prayers before the throne of mercy, in the name of Jesus. I hope the Lord will grant that I may see you all again, and above all that we may overcome, and sit down together in the kingdom of our Father" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 29-30).

It Shall Be Given Them in the Very Hour What They Shall Say

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 100:5-8

100:5 Speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts. The admonition given here to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon applies alike to all who have been called to labor in the Lord's name. It is a perfect expression of how the spirit of revelation operates. In Doctrine and Covenants 8 the spirit of revelation was defined as that which the Lord tells us in our minds and in our hearts (vv. 2-3). Precious few of the reve lations given in the history of humankind have involved the audible voice of the Lord or personal instruction from angels. For the most part, the Lord places thoughts and feelings in our hearts, leaving the manner in which they are clothed in words to our discretion. Many of these revelations, like the scriptures we have already been given, go unheeded because we lack the courage to trust the Spirit and respond to its prompting. The more closely we learn to listen the more frequently the Spirit will take the occasion to speak.

100:6 "Neither take ye thought beforehand what ye shall say; but treasure up in your minds continually the words of life, and it shall be given you in the very hour that portion that shall be meted unto every man" (D&C 84:85).

100:7 In the spirit of meekness. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 52:15-21.

100:8 When we speak those truths the Lord has given us to declare to all the nations of the earth and when we speak those things the Lord places in our hearts to say, then we have the assurance that the Holy Ghost will carry our words to the hearts of those to whom we speak. They in turn will know of the truthfulness of that which we have spoken. Indeed, it is not an uncommon thing for those who give a listening ear to the words of the servants of the Lord to hear more than was said and to hear it more eloquently than it was spoken.

Sidney Is to Be a Spokesman and Joseph Is to Be a Revelator and Mighty in Testimony

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 100:9-12

100:9 Sidney, should be a spokesman. With time and experience Joseph Smith became a powerful orator, though he was not always such. In a revelation given the day the Church was organized, the Lord called Oliver Cowdery "the first preacher of this church unto the church, and before the world, yea, before the Gentiles" (D&C 21:12). Thus, he, and not Joseph Smith, preached the first gospel discourse of this dispensation. The Prophet relied heavily upon him particularly in the early months after the Church's organization. When Sidney Rigdon joined the Church, he was a powerful and articulate speaker. The Lord felt to take full advantage of his experience and ability. In these early years of the Church's history, both Oliver Cowdery and Sidney Rigdon were better public speakers than the Prophet.

The calling of Sidney Rigdon to be the spokesman for the Prophet is often associated with a prophecy relative to a spokesman made by Joseph of Egypt and quoted by Lehi in the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 3:18-19). A closer reading of the text suggests that Joseph Smith is the spokesman to whom reference is being made, not Sidney Rigdon.

The prophecy in question speaks of one who is to assume a special role in writing the word of the Lord and another who is to play a special role in proclaiming that which has been written. To Joseph of old, the Lord said, "I will raise up unto the fruit of thy loins; and I will make for him a spokesman" (2 Nephi 3:18). Just as Moses wrote and Aaron proclaimed the law given in the Old World, so too was someone in the New Worldsomeone of the seed of Josephto write the Lord's law, and another, "a spokesman," was to declare it. Bruce R. McConkie explained: "In this case the writer and the spokesman are not identified by name; rather, we are left, based on our knowledge of what has transpired in this and previous dispensations, to identify those whose missions were of such import as to have them revealed thousands of years before the events transpired. Mormon wrote the Book of Mormon, quoting, condensing, and summarizing from many ancient records as the Spirit directed. And Joseph Smith translated the ancient word by the gift and power of God and proclaimed it to all men, and to the seed of Joseph in particular, as the mind and will and voice of Him by whom salvation comes.

"With this in mind, note these words of the Lord: 'And I, behold, I will give unto him [Mormon] that he shall write the writing of the fruit of thy loins [the Nephites], unto the fruit of thy loins [the Lamanites]; and the spokesman of thy loins [Joseph Smith] shall declare it.' That is, Mormon wrote the Book of Mormon, but what he wrote was taken from the writings of the Nephite prophets; and these writings, compiled into one book, were translated by Joseph Smith and sent forth by him unto the Lamanites unto whom, as the title page of the Book of Mormon attests, they were originally written. And further, they are sent forth to all the seed of Joseph, whether in the Lamanite branch of Israel or not.

"'And the words which he [Mormon] shall write shall be the words which are expedient in my wisdom should go forth unto the fruit of thy loins.' They were selected by inspiration, and they contain that portion of the word that is designed to bring fallen Israel again into the true sheepfold, where they will be taught the deeper doctrines, including the mysteries of the kingdom. 'And it shall be as if the fruit of thy loins [the Nephites] had cried unto them [their Lamanite brethren, in particular] from the dust; for I know their faith.' Many were the ancient Book of Mormon prophets who pled with the Lord that the gospel might go in due course and in his providences to the remnant of Lehi's seed.

"'And they [the Nephites] shall cry from the dust [for as a nation they have been destroyed and have no living voice with which to speak]; yea, even repentance unto their brethren, even after many generations have gone by them. And it shall come to pass that their cry [in the Book of Mormon] shall go, even according to the simpleness of their words. Because of their faith their words [in the Book of Mormon] shall proceed forth out of my mouth'the Book of Mormon is the word of the Lord; it is as though the words fell from his own lips'unto their brethren [the Lamanites] who are the fruit of thy [Joseph's] loins; and the weakness of their words will I make strong in their faith, unto the remembering of my covenant which I made unto thy fathers.' (2 Nephi 3:4-21.) With Joseph's fathersAbraham, Isaac, and Jacobthe Lord covenanted that in them and in their seed all generations shall be blessed. These blessings are now available to the seed of Joseph because of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon and the restoration of the gospel" (New Witness, 425-27).

100:10-11 Sidney was to be blessed with the gift to testify of the truths of the Restoration with great power. Joseph, in turn, who as the prophet, seer, and revelator stood at the head of the Church and kingdom of God, was the one through whom those truths were to be revealed.

The Lord Will Raise Up a Pure People, and the Obedient Shall Be Saved

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 100:13-17

100:13 Zion shall be redeemed. The gospel could not be restored without asking those who gathered to its standard to redeem Zion and to build the long promised New Jerusalem and the great temple that is to crown the Holy City. All promises to this effect are of course conditional. Only a worthy and obedient people can accomplish such a work. The city of God cannot be built upon any principles other than those that come from God. These early attempts to build Zion fell short, for far too many Saints had their hearts set too much upon the things of the world. These were eventually betrayed by their avarice and pettiness of soul. Obeying only in part, they received only in part. The fulness of God's blessings can be given only to those who live the fulness of his law.

It was with modern Israel as it had been with their ancient counterparts in the days of Moses. The God of heaven offered ancient Israel the fulness of his gospel by the mouth of a great prophet who had stood in his presence. This prophet pleaded with his people to sanctify themselves and receive the fulness of God's glory while in the wilderness and again after they entered their promised Canaan. A few obeyed, but most declared such blessings to be too much for them and opted for a lesser law in their stead, a lesser law whose purpose was to prepare them for something greater. As it was then, so it has been in our day.

Though the early Saints of our day failed to redeem Zion, they yet retained the gospel with all its hopes and promises. Although we have grown in understanding and stability over the ensuing years, we still fall short of the faith and devotion necessary to lay claim to those promises. Thus we remain, as did ancient Israel, under a schoolmaster. We labor to find the faith to redeem families and wards. The day may come when we can redeem stakes and regions and thus gain rightful claim to the inheritance promised our great-grandfathers.

"Thus, on February 24, 1834, after the Saints had been scattered and driven from their lands in Jackson County, the Lord gave these words of comfort and counsel to his people: 'I will give unto you a revelation and commandment . . . concerning the salvation and redemption of your brethren, who have been scattered on the land of Zion; being driven and smitten by the hands of mine enemies, on whom I will pour out my wrath without measure in mine own time.' Those who persecute the Saints and oppose the cause in which they are engaged are the enemies of God. Whether their opposition is directed against the Lord or against his servants, it is the same. And when the great and dreadful day arrives and the Lord returns to take vengeance upon the ungodly, then his wrath will be poured out upon them without measure" (McConkie, New Witness, 610-12).

"I cannot learn from any communication by the Spirit to me," Joseph Smith said, "that Zion has forfeited her claim to a celestial crown, notwithstanding the Lord has caused her to be thus afflicted, except it may be some individuals, who have walked in disobedience, and forsaken the new covenant; all such will be made manifest by their works in due time. I have always expected that Zion would suffer some affliction, from what I could learn from the commandments which have been given. But I would remind you of a certain clause in one which says, that after much tribulation cometh the blessing. By this, and also others, and also one received of late, I know that Zion, in the due time of the Lord, will be redeemed; but how many will be the days of her purification, tribulation, and affliction, the Lord has kept hid from my eyes; and when I inquire concerning this subject, the voice of the Lord is: Be still, and know that I am God; all those who suffer for my name shall reign with me, and he that layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 34).

100:14 Soon after Oliver Cowdery arrived from Missouri in late August or early September with news of mob action in Independence, "arrangements were made to dispatch Elders Orson Hyde and John Gould to Jackson county, Missouri, with advice to the Saints in their unfortunate situation, through the late outrage of the mob" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:407). After arriving, "Elders W. W. Phelps and Orson Hyde were dispatched to the Governor of Missouri, residing at Jefferson City, the capital of the state," with a petition for aid from Governor Daniel Dunklin (Smith, History of the Church, 1:410).
