Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101

DATE: 16 DECEMBER 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Following the mob violence of July 1833 (see introduction to D&C 97), the Saints petitioned the governor of Missouri for aid in protecting their lives and property in Jackson County, Missouri. They complied with his instructions to obtain legal counsel to aid them in their quest for justice. Upon learning that the Saints intended to appeal to law, their enemies responded with further illegal outrage, which resulted in further loss of life and property.

The History of the Church records: "Thursday, November 7th, the shores of the Missouri river began to be lined on both sides of the ferry, with men, women and children; goods, wagons, boxes, chests, and provisions; while the ferrymen were busily employed in crossing them over. When night again closed upon the Saints, the wilderness had much the appearance of a camp meeting. Hundreds of people were seen in every direction; some in tents, and some in the open air, around their fires, while the rain descended in torrents. Husbands were inquiring for their wives, and women for their husbands; parents for children, and children for parents. Some had the good fortune to escape with their families, household goods, and some provisions; while others knew not the fate of their friends, and had lost all their effects. The scene was indescribable, and would have melted the hearts of any people upon earth, except the blind oppressor, and the prejudiced and ignorant bigot. Next day the company increased, and they were chiefly engaged in felling small cottonwood trees, and erecting them into temporary cabins, so that when night came on, they had the appearance of a village of wigwams, and the night being clear, the occupants began to enjoy some degree of comfort" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:437).

The Prophet Joseph Smith learned of the Saints' grave situation from Elders Orson Hyde and John Gould when they returned to Kirtland from Missouri and from letters by Church leaders in Missouri. Joseph repeatedly petitioned the Lord for answers concerning the reasons for the Saints' sufferings. Earlier he wrote: "Now, there are two things of which I am ignorant; and the Lord will not show them unto me, perhaps for a wise purpose in HimselfI mean in some respectsand they are these: Why God has suffered so great a calamity to come upon Zion, and what the great moving cause of this great affliction is; and again, by what means He will return her back to her inheritance, with songs of everlasting joy upon her head" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 34). Finally, on 16 December 1833 he wrote, "I received the following . . ." (Smith, History of the Church, 1:458).

The Saints Are Chastened and Afflicted Because of Their Transgressions

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:1-8

101:2 They have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions. Had the Lord not chastened the Saints for their transgressions, he would have denied justice. Earlier, he had warned: "Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her. But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire" (D&C 97:25-26). The Saints were responsible for their behavior. Parents contribute to the delinquency of their children when they warn them but then fail to follow through on their warning after their children's dis obedience. The Lord is a caring parent. He did not condone the actions of the Missouri mobs, but neither did he excuse the transgressions of those who were called by his name. The strivings of the Spirit had not penetrated the hearts of the transgressors to turn them to the Lord. Like the children of Israel in Moses' day, they required chastening to teach them that only a pure people can build Zion.

101:3 In that day when I shall come to make up my jewels. This phrase comes from Malachi 3:17. It means that the Lord, in the day of his return, will set apart the faithful among his people as special treasures. To the wicked he will come as a judge; to the righteous he will come as a loving father.

101:4 Chastened. To make pure by correction.

Tried, even as Abraham. If we are to receive the blessings of Abraham, we must first have the faith of Abraham. Bible history accords no more soul- wrenching test than that given our ancient father when God commanded him to offer his son, Isaac, in place of a ram as a sacrifice. Surely every feeling of Abraham's heart must have cried out in protest and anguish. This cannot be so! This is not right! This violates every principle of heaven! And yet Abraham schooled his feelings and offered to the Lord not just his son but his own heart and soul. He held nothing back. All his hopes and dreams lay with Isaac upon an altar built to his God. In the providence of heaven, Abraham's hand was withheld. His son and his hopes were returned to him, and he received an inheritance that reaches to the endless bounds of eternity.

Why was such a test necessary? Was it to amuse God or to bless Abraham? Of this there can be no question. To Abraham was given the promise of eternal life and an endless seed. To him was given the promise that his posterity would find in its numbers all who would follow him as faithful witnesses of the God of heaven and all who would hold the priesthood and be called upon to declare the gospel of salvation to the nations of the earth. Abraham's faith was to become their faith, and his promises were to become their promises. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110:12.

101:6 "Those who cannot endure persecution," stated the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and stand in the day of affliction, cannot stand in the day when the Son of God shall burst the veil, and appear in all the glory of His Father, with all the holy angels" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 42).

101:7 The Saints in Missouri reaped as they had sown. They ignored the Lord's warnings and now he would ignore their petitions. Abinadi taught this principle to King Noah's people, saying, "Except this people repent and turn unto the Lord their God, they shall be brought into bondage; and none shall deliver them, except it be the Lord the Almighty God. Yea, and it shall come to pass that when they shall cry unto me I will be slow to hear their cries; yea, and I will suffer them that they be smitten by their enemies. And except they repent in sackcloth and ashes, and cry mightily to the Lord their God, I will not hear their prayers, neither will I deliver them out of their afflictions; and thus saith the Lord" (Mosiah 11:23-25).

The Lord's People Will Be Gathered and Comforted

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:9-15

101:9-11 The Lord looked compassionately upon his children in their suffering. He had cleansed the inner vessel first, even though the outer vessel was more filthy by comparison. The Saints were first chastened for their transgressions, even though mob members in Jackson County were more filthy than the Saints. The day of judgment was not far distant for the Saints' enemies, as the Civil War would witness.

101:9 I will not utterly cast them off. The covenant people had not been cast off by the Lord; rather, they were cast out of Zion by the mobs, who represented the chastening hand of the Lord. The Lord had dealt similarly with ancient Israel. Through the prophet Isaiah he declared, "O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation" (Isaiah 10:5-6). The ten tribes of Israel were taken from the land of their inheritance by the Assyrians and scattered among all the nations of the earth. Yet the Lord covenanted that they would be gathered in the latter days, when they would again return to him. Like their ancestors of old, the Saints will suffer the rod of the Lord's chastening hand until they learn obedience by the things they suffer (Hebrews 5:8). Only then can they obtain their inheritance in Zion.

101:10 The decree hath gone forth by a former commandment. See Doctrine and Covenants 1:13.

101:12 This text considers all the covenant people to be watchmen upon the tower; all have a responsibility to their neighbor. "It becometh every man who hath been warned to warn his neighbor" (D&C 88:81).

Zion and Her Stakes Will Be Established

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:16-21

101:17 Zion shall not be moved out of her place. The place of Zion remains the same, and in some future day the Saints of the Almighty will possess it.

101:18 They that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return. Lands of inheritance are an everlasting possession and as such will be the rightful possession of the "pure in heart" in the eternal world. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:17.

101:20 There is none other place appointed. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:1-3.

101:21 They shall be called stakes. The kingdom of God has continued to grow and be organized throughout the earth. Wherever sufficient numbers of Saints have gathered together, geographical areas have been appointed as stakes of Zion, and presiding officers have been designated and set apart. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 82:13; 101:63-67.

The Nature of Life during the Millennium Is Set Forth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:22-31

101:22 Worship me according to mine everlasting gospel. It is not for men to ordain the system of worship or to determine the conditions of salvation. It is the Lord's church, and he runs it. The terms of salvation are not negotiable. We are neither to add to, nor take from, the word of the Lord.

Gather together, and stand in holy places. The holy places are the stakes of Zion to which the pure in heart have gathered. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:32.

101:23 The veil of the covering of my temple. Anciently, a veil hung between the two holy chambers of the tabernacle (Exodus 26:31-33). Its presence in Herod's temple is supported by the statement in each of the synoptic gospels that at the time of Christ's death the veil of the temple was rent from top to bottom (Matthew 27:51; Mark 15:38; Luke 23:45). Christ, by his sacrificial death, opened a way for the faithful to enter the holiest place, meaning the celestial kingdom, "through the veil, that is to say, his flesh" (Hebrews 10:20). The present text, drawing on this imagery, suggests that the veil separating us from the presence of the Lord will be rent, and all will be able to see what otherwise would remain hidden to them.

101:24-25 When the Lord comes again, "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (Article of Faith 10). Isaiah prophesied of "a new earth" during the Millennium (Isaiah 65:17). All that is corruptibleeverything of a telestial orderwill be destroyed, for a terrestrial or Edenic law will rule during the Millennium. This text affirms that when Adam fell, the whole earth fell including everything in the plant and animal kingdoms. Prior to the fall of Adam there was neither death nor corruption of any sort in these kingdoms or in any other place in the world that Adam inhabited. With the return of Christ, all things will return to a state like that known in Eden.

101:26 Men will learn peace, and all men and animals will live together in harmony. Further, "there will be no wild animals," explained Bruce R. McConkie. "The coyote will not stalk the deer, and the wolf will not kill the sheep, and all forms of life will be the friends and servants of men.

"Isaiah gives us these poetically phrased particulars about animal life during the Millennium. 'The wolf and the lamb shall feed together,' he says, 'and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock.' Implicit in this pronouncement is the fact that man and all forms of life will be vegetarians in the coming day; the eating of meat will cease, because, for one thing, death as we know it ceases. There will be no shedding of blood, because man and beast are changed (quickened) and blood no longer flows in their veins. 'And dust shall be the serpent's meat,' meaning, as we suppose, that they shall no longer eat mice and vermin and animal life. 'They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord' (Isaiah 65:25). And further: 'The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the suckling child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' [adders'] den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain' (Isaiah 11:6-9)" (Millennial Messiah, 658).

101:27 "And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear" (Isaiah 65:24).

101:28 Satan shall not have power to tempt any man. A change will come upon the inhabitants of the earth similar to that experienced by the three Nephite disciples who were translated. By revelation Mormon learned that "there was a change wrought upon them, insomuch that Satan could . . . not tempt them; and they were sanctified in the flesh, that they were holy" (3 Nephi 28:39). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 43:17.

101:29 There is no death. Those on the earth during the Millennium will be like the Three Nephites, for "there must needs be a change wrought upon their bodies, or else it needs be that they must taste of death; Therefore, that they might not taste of death there [will be] a change wrought upon their bodies, that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow" (3 Nephi 28:37-38). Those living during the Millennium will live in a state akin to translation: their bodies will be changed so that they are not subject to disease or death as we know it.

101:30 The age of a tree. Isaiah identified this as one hundred years (Isaiah 65:20).

101:31 Changed in the twinkling of an eye. No graves will be dug during the Millennium. Death and suffering as we now know them will not exist. The body and the spirit will no longer separate for a long period of time. For now the body returns to the dust while the spirit awaits in a world of spirits for the day of its reunion with a perfected body, but in that day the body will not see corruption, and the spirit will not go to a spirit world. The separation of body and spirit will be virtually instantaneous and their reunion inseparable. "Children shall grow up until they become old; old men shall die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye" (D&C 63:51). The Lord told the Three Nephites: "Ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I shall come in my glory ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality; and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my Father" (3 Nephi 28:8).

Shall be caught up. Those changed "in the twinkling of an eye" will not remain on the earth. The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: "Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 268). Some people will not be caught up after their death. Joseph taught, "There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 268-69). The wicked will not be caught up to a glorious rest. Isaiah prophesied that during the Millennium "there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed" (Isaiah 65:20).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "Isaiah's description of life and death during the Millennium seems to preserve the concept that even theneven in that blessed day when Satan is bound and righteousness overflows even then men are free to come out in open rebellion and, as sinners, suffer the fate reserved for the sons of perdition. Manifestly, they, being accursed, would die the death with which we are familiar, for their resurrection is destined to be in that final day when those shall come forth 'who shall remain filthy still' (D&C 88:102)" (Millennial Messiah, 646).

The Saints Shall Be Blessed and Rewarded in the Millennium

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:32-42

101:32-34 During the Millennium the mysteries of creation will be revealed. It is apparent from these verses that men will not know the answers to questions concerning creation before that time. In large measure such questions will answer themselves. When we live in a terrestrial or paradisiacal world a world in which there is no death, aging, decay, or disease we will, by mere observation, be able to deduce much relative to the true nature of creation. This will be a world much like that known to Adam and Eve before the Fall. Whereas our earth now abides a telestial law, millennial earth will abide a much higher order. It is possible that many scientific conclusions based on our telestial order will have no meaning or relevance there.

Until the day comes when "the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea" (Isaiah 11:9), it would be wise for us to hearken to the counsel of Elder Harold B. Lee: "I appeal to you again as teachers, let's use those three precious words that ought to be used more often by teachers of religion, 'I don't know.' And we don't know very much because the Lord has not told us. We have these speculations, these theories that if you want to have them in your mind as something to ponder, and something that you never can find a full answer to, go ahead and think about them, but label them for what they are, and do not teach them as facts until the Lord tells us about the details, which presently must be considered in the realm of theory" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 456).

101:38 Seek the face of the Lord always. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 93:1.

101:39-40 Salt that has lost its savor, we are told, is good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under foot. Salt does not dissipate with age; it carries no expiration date. Savor is lost through mixture and contamination only diluting salt with impure substances can cause it to lose its capacity to season food.

In ancient times salt was acquired in its natural state. It had to be washed before it could be used for seasoning food or for other purposes. After it had been cleansed, the residue or tailings were tossed upon walkways to be trodden down by the feet of men. How powerful the imagery! Once we have been gathered, we are washed and cleansed and our impurities are discarded. As Saints, we have a duty to serve as a savor, to bring out the best, to elicit all that is good. This is a power lost to us only if we choose to contaminate ourselves with things of the world.

101:41 But not all. Regarding the faithful among the suffering Saints in Missouri, the Prophet wrote: "When I contemplate upon all things that have been manifested, I am aware that I ought not to murmur, and do not murmur, only in this, that those who are innocent are compelled to suffer for the iniquities of the guilty; and I cannot account for this, only on this wise, that the saying of the Savior has not been strictly observed: 'If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; or if thy right arm offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee.' Now the fact is, if any of the members of our body is disordered, the rest of our body will be affected with it, and then all are brought into bondage together; and yet, notwithstanding all this, it is with difficulty that I can restrain my feelings when I know that you, my brethren, with whom I have had so many happy hours sitting, as it were, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; and also, having the witness which I feel, and ever have felt, of the purity of your motives are cast out, and are as strangers and pilgrims on the earth, exposed to hunger, cold, nakedness, peril, swordI say when I contemplate this, it is with difficulty I can keep from complaining and murmuring against this dispensation; but I am sensible that this is not right, and may God grant that notwithstanding your great afflictions, and sufferings, there may not anything separate us from the love of Christ" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 34-35).

Parable of the Nobleman and the Olive Trees, Signifying the Troubles and Eventual Redemption of Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:43-62

101:43-62 In this parable the Lord is the nobleman and his vineyard is Zion, or Jackson County, Missouri. The servants are the Saints who have settled in Zion, and their settlements are the olive trees. Had they built the toweror temple as directed, it would have been a spiritual watchtower. From it Church leaders could have seen by revelation the movements of the enemy from afar and gained foreknowledge that would have saved Zion when the enemy attacked. But because the Saints had a spirit of discord, they were unable to build either the temple or Zion.

While the Saints in Missouri procrastinated, the enemy came and drove them from the land of their inheritance. The Lord rebuked the Saints but commanded one of his servants, Joseph Smith (v. 55; D&C 103:21), to gather the "strength of mine house" and rescue the lands and possessions of those driven from Jackson.

Two months later the Lord revealed further instruction concerning these verses. "Let my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., say unto the strength of my house, my young men and the middle aged Gather yourselves together unto the land of Zion, upon the land which I have bought with money that has been consecrated unto me" (D&C 103:22). An assembly of brethren known as Zion's Camp was instructed to try to obtain land in Missouri without using force. Zion's Camp, if necessary, was to be the power of the priesthood.

The parable states that all things will be fulfilled "after many days" (v. 62), indicating that a long period of time will pass before the redemption of Zion. Though Zion was not redeemed at the time of Zion's Camp, we may look for its redemption in the due time of the Lord (D&C 136:18).

101:56-58 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:23-30.

The Saints Are Commanded to Continue Gathering Together

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:63-75

101:63-67 The gathering to the holy places, or stakes of Zion, is likened to wheat that is gathered in bundles. After the wheat has ripened, it is gathered together and bound. Likewise, as the kingdom gains sufficient strength throughout the world, stakes are organized. This is done in preparation for the redemption of Zion in Independence, Missouri, and for the burning of the earth at the Second Coming. The gathering embraces participation in the ordinances of salvation. As the work of the Lord spreads throughout the world, many stakes will yet be organized and many temples will be built wherein the faithful will be "secured in the garners to possess eternal life" (v. 65).

101:68 Let not your gathering be in haste. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 63:24.

101:70-71 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:4.

101:72-74 During the few years immediately following this revelation, failure to abide the Lord's counsel in these verses led to many Saints gathering far too quickly in Kirtland, Ohio. The large numbers gathering to Kirtland led to rising real estate prices as the demand for property increased. The possibility of becoming rich tempted the Saints with speculative land ventures. Covetousness entered the Church and infected members of even the presiding quorums with its debilitating spirit. A simi lar scenario occurred in northern Missouri, resulting in the Saints' being sorely tried by opportunities to seek riches in real estate. John Whitmer and W. W. Phelps, members of the presidency of the Church at Far West, embezzled Church funds to purchase lands, hoping to make a profit selling the land to the gathering Saints. Their covetous desires took them out of the Church; both were excommunicated.

The Lord Established the Constitution of the United States

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:76-80

101:77-80 Without freedom of religion, there is no salvation. The war in heaven raged over the principle of free choice (Moses 4:1-3). Governments that restrict their citizens' freedom of choice do so under satanic influence. The Lord foreordained the establishment of a nation that granted freedom of religion in the latter days. He fired the heart of Columbus to set out to sea in a quest that brought knowledge of the ancient promised land to Europeans. He inspired men and women to seek religious liberty and planted in their breasts the desire to seek that freedom in the Americas. He sent to mortality choice spirits who craved freedom of conscience for all mankind so they could exert their influence in establishing laws guaranteeing freedom to all citizens. President Ezra Taft Benson explained: "Before the gospel could again shine forth its resplendent light, religious and political freedom first had to be restored. This land had been preserved as a continent apart from the religious oppression, tyranny, and intolerance of Europe. In time, emigrants came to the new land and established colonies. By and large, they were a God-fearing people. A war was fought for their independence, and by God's intervention, victory was achieved. (See 1 Nephi 13:16-19.) By that same omnipotent power the Constitution was born (see D&C 101:80), which guaranteed religious and political liberty (see D&C 98:5-8). Only then was the time propitious for the kingdom of Godthat 'stone cut out without hands' to be restored (see Daniel 2:34)" (Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson, 109). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 98:4-8.

101:78 Moral agency. A moral agent is someone who is obligated to act morally. To act morally is more than being moral. All infants are moral beings; they simply cannot knowingly do things that are wrong. They are not, however, moral agents because they do not have power to act or to change their behavior based on an understanding of right and wrong. The more mature children are, the greater their agency. They grow into the ability to act for themselves and to make their own choices.

Similarly, as we grow in intelligence (light and knowledge), obedience, and faith, our agency grows proportionately. To increase in faith and knowledge of spiritual things is to increase in agency. God is the perfect example of a moral agent. No one has greater power to act in a responsible and moral manner than he.

Salvation can only be granted to moral agents. Only moral agents have the ability to distinguish between right and wrong, and they alone have the capacity to be righteous.

101:79 Agency, which is the power to act for ourselves, is, next to life itself, the greatest gift of God. Only with unfettered freedom of choice can we become as God is. Slavery in any form, be it physical, mental, or spiritual, is antithetical to salvation in the kingdom of God. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 134:12.

101:80 I established the Constitution of this land. "In recognizing God as the source of their rights," taught President Ezra Taft Benson, "the Founding Fathers declared Him to be the ultimate authority for their basis of law. This led them to the conviction that people do not make law but merely acknowledge preexisting law, giving it specific application. The Constitution was conceived to be such an expression of higher law. And when their work was done, James Madison wrote: 'It is impossible for the man of pious reflection not to perceive in it a finger of that Almighty hand which has been so frequently and signally extended to our relief in the critical stage of the revolution' (The Federalist, no. 37)" (Constitution: A Heavenly Banner, 23).

Wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose. Brigham Young declared: "We consider that the men in the Revolution were inspired, by the Almighty, to throw off the shackles of the mother government, with her established religion. For this cause were Adams, Jefferson, Franklin, Washington, and a host of others inspired to deeds of resistance to the acts of the King of Great Britain, who might also have been led to those aggressive acts, for aught we know, to bring to pass the purposes of God, in thus establishing a new government upon a principle of greater freedom, a basis of self- government allowing the free exercise of religious worship.

"It was the voice of the Lord inspiring all those worthy men who bore influence in those trying times, not only to go forth in battle, but to exercise wisdom in council, fortitude, courage, and endurance in the tented field, as well as subsequently to form and adopt those wise and efficient measures which secured to themselves and succeeding generations, the blessing of a free and independent government" (Journal of Discourses, 2:170).

The Saints Are to Importune for the Redress of Grievances

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 101:81-101

101:86-89 "We believe that men should appeal to the civil law for redress of all wrongs and grievances, where personal abuse is inflicted or the right of property or character infringed, where such laws exist as will protect the same; but we believe that all men are justified in defending themselves, their friends, and property, and the government, from the unlawful assaults and encroachments of all persons in times of exigency, where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws, and relief afforded" (D&C 134:11).

101:89 Vex the nation. The cold disregard of human rights among government officials who rejected the Latter- day Saint appeal for redress in Missouri did much to bring about the Civil War.

101:95 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 95:4, "That I may bring to pass my strange act."

101:99 The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to the Saints in Missouri: "It is better in the eyes of God that you should die, than that you should give up the land of Zion, the inheritances which you have purchased with your moneys; for every man that giveth not up his inheritance, though he should die, yet, when the Lord shall come, he shall stand upon it, and with Job, in his flesh he shall see God. Therefore, this is my counsel, that ye retain your lands, even unto the uttermost, and employ every lawful means to seek redress of your enemies; and pray to God, day and night, to return you in peace and in safety to the lands of your inheritance: and when the judge fail you, appeal unto the executive; and when the executive fail you, appeal unto the president; and when the president fail you, and all laws fail you, and the humanity of the people fail you, and all things else fail you but God alone, and you continue to weary Him with your importunings, as the poor woman did the unjust judge, He will not fail to execute judgment upon your enemies, and to avenge His own elect that cry unto Him day and night" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 35-36).

101:101 Of the millennial day Isaiah wrote: "And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them" (Isaiah 65:21-23).

And again, "Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city: Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks; Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field. And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places" (Isaiah 32:13-18).
