Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 102

DATE: 17 FEBRUARY 1834

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 102 consists of the minutes of the meeting at which the first stake high council was organized. It is not a revelation, though the principles out of which it grows were revealed to the Prophet.

In ancient times the Church, or earthly kingdom of God, was governed by councils. This system of government was patterned after the order of heaven. It was essential in the restoration of all things that this divinely ordained system be restored in this dispensation. As the Church grew in numbers, the necessity of a system of governing the Saints grew with it. As early as 1832, the Lord had directed that a stake be organized in Kirtland, Ohio (D&C 82:13). With the organization of this first stake, the idea was formalized for a council of high priests assembled to settle difficult matters. A council of twelve high priests had assembled for this purpose previously, though it had served only on an ad hoc basis (Journal of Discourses, 11:7).

On 17 February 1834 approximately sixty members of the Church gathered at the home of Joseph Smith in a special meeting to call twelve high priests to serve as members of the high council in what was the first stake organized in this dispensation.

The minutes of the meeting include the following: "Bro Joseph then said he would show the order of councils in ancient days as shown to him by vision. The law by which to govern the Council in the Church of Christ. Jerusalem was the seat of the Church Council in ancient days. The apostle Peter was the president of the Council and held the keys of the Kingdom of God on the earth. [He] was appointed to this office by the voice of the Savior and acknowledged in it by the voice of the Church. . . . It was not the order of heaven in ancient councils to plead for and against the guilty as in our judicial courts (so called) but that every councilor when he arose to speak, should speak precisely according to evidence and according to the teaching of the Sprit of the Lord, that no councilor should attempt to screen the guilty when his guilt was manifest. That the person accused before the High Council had a right to one half the members of the council to plead his cause, in order that his case might be fairly presented before the president that a decision might be rendered according to truth and righteousness. . . . Bro Joseph said that this organization was an ensample to the high priests in their councils abroad. . . . It was then voted by all present that they desired to come under the present order of things which they all considered to be the will of God" (Kirtland Council Minute Book, 24-25; spelling and punctuation as in original).

In a meeting held five days earlier the Prophet had observed: "In ancient days councils were conducted with such strict propriety, that no one was allowed to whisper, be weary, leave the room, or get uneasy in the least, until the voice of the Lord, by revelation, or the voice of the council by the Spirit, was obtained, which has not been observed in this Church to the present time. It was understood in ancient days, that if one man could stay in council, another could; and if the president could spend his time, the members could also; but in our councils, generally, one will be uneasy, another asleep; one praying, another not; one's mind on the business of the council, and another thinking on something else.

"Our acts are recorded, and at a future day they will be laid before us, and if we should fail to judge right and injure our fellow-beings, they may there, perhaps, condemn us; there they are of great consequence, and to me the consequence appears to be of force, beyond anything which I am able to express. Ask yourselves, brethren, how much you have exercised yourselves in prayer since you heard of this council; and if you are now prepared to sit in council upon the soul of your brother" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:25-26).

The High Council Is to Settle Important Difficulties that Arise in the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 102:1-8

102:3 Joseph Smith, Jun., Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams were acknowledged presidents by the voice of the council. "The Kirtland high council was a unique body in the history of the Church, not only because it was the firstand for a while the onlyhigh council, but also because the First Presidency served as the stake presidency of this 'standing' high council. Later the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was formed as a 'traveling' high council, and on July 7, 1834, the Prophet organized a second high council in Clay County, Missouri, with David Whitmer as president and William W. Phelps and John Whitmer as counselors. These first two high councils were constituted before there were wards and before stake presidents presided over bishops and quorums of high priests" (Backman, Heavens Resound, 245).

A standing council. A "standing council" is a council that has authority in a specified area, in this instance the Kirtland Stake. A "traveling council" is not confined by such boundaries. Today we refer to those whose authority is not limited to a specific area as "general authorities" or general officers of the Church.

102:5 These forty-three people, chosen from the sixty who attended the meeting held at the home of the Prophet on 17 February, in turn nominated the twelve men who were called to serve as the first high council in the Church.

102:6 The high council has no authority to act unless seven of the twelve members are present.

102:7 As an illustration of the procedure being announced here, if some members of a stake high council could not attend a church disciplinary council, other worthy high priests could be invited to substitute for them.

Procedures for Hearing Cases

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 102:9-18

102:9 The president of the church, who is also the president of the council. Today all high councils are presided over by the president of their respective stakes.

102:11 Counselors to a president may preside in the absence of the president if they have been directed to do so by the president. Counselors have no authority independent of the president. When the president is released they are also released.

102:12-17 In a Church disciplinary council, the members of the high council draw lots. Those drawing even numbers (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12) assume the obligation to look after the interests of the one for whom the council is being held. Those drawing odd numbers (1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11) assume the obligation to look after the interests of the Church. This, however, does not suggest that an adversarial relation exists. We misunderstand the spirit of the council if we suppose that half its members act as prosecutors while the other half act as defenders. Rather, all twelve men, in concert with the presiding three members of the presidency, unite as one to determine truth and establish right or justice.

102:18 In 1840 the Prophet gave this counsel relative to the holding of church disciplinary councils: "That the Council should try no case without both parties being present, or having had an opportunity to be present; neither should they hear one person's complaint before his case is brought up for trial; neither should they suffer the character of any one to be exposed before the High Council without the person being present and ready to defend him or herself; that the minds of the councilors be not prejudiced for or against any one whose case they may possibly have to act upon" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:154).

The President of the Council Renders the Decision and Appellate Procedure Set Forth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 102:19-34

102:19-23 The principles here stated, if followed, will assure that what is right and proper and in the best interest of both the accused and the Church will be made manifest. Church disciplinary councils do not center on an effort to define points of law but rather in a quest for the direction of the Spirit to assure the preservation of justice and truth.

102:23 Obtain the mind of the Lord. The decision of every disciplinary council should be sustained by the Spirit of revelation. It is customary in such councils for the presiding officers of the council to retire for prayer, in which they seek the confirmation of heaven on their decision.

102:24-26 Where stakes of Zion have been established throughout the world, this instruction would be obsolete.

102:27 Those against whom judgment is rendered in a Church disciplinary council are always accorded the right of appeal to the First Presidency of the Church.

102:30-32 The Prophet added these verses to this section in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. Their purpose is to place the newly formed Quorum of the Twelve above the stake high council in authority. The Twelve have the right to review and overturn, if necessary, decisions of a stake high council.
