Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 103

DATE: 24 FEBRUARY 1834

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

During the first week of November 1833 the Saints were driven across the Missouri River from Jackson County to Clay County, where they were received with some degree of kindness. Parley P. Pratt recalled: "After making our escape into the county of Claybeing reduced to the lowest poverty I made a living by day labor, jobbing, building, or wood cutting, till some time in the winter of 1834, when a general Conference was held at my house, in which it was decided that two of the Elders should be sent to Ohio, in order to counsel with President Smith and the Church at Kirtland, and take some measures for the relief or restoration of the people thus plundered and driven from their homes. The question was put to the Conference: 'Who would volunteer to perform so great a journey?'

"The poverty of all, and the inclement season of the year made all hesitate. At length Lyman Wight and myself offered our services, which were readily accepted. I was at this time entirely destitute of proper clothing for the journey; and I had neither horse, saddle, bridle, money nor provisions to take with me; or to leave with my wife, who lay sick and helpless most of the time" (Autobiography, 87).

Elder Wight, responding to Bishop Partridge's inquiry about his situation, said "his wife lay by the side of a log in the woods with a child three days old, and he had three days' provisions on hand; so he thought he could go very well" (Millennial Star, 27:455).

Continuing his account of these events, Elder Pratt said, "Nearly all had been robbed and plundered, and all were poor. As we had to start without delay, I almost trembled at the undertaking; it seemed to be all but an impossibility; but 'to him that believeth all things are possible.' I started out of my house to do something towards making preparation;

I hardly knew which way to go, but I found myself in the house of brother John Lowry, and was intending to ask him for money; but as I entered his miserable cottage in the swamp, amid the low, timbered bottoms of the Missouri river, I found him sick in bed with a heavy fever, and two or three others of his family down with the same complaint, on different beds in the same room. He was vomiting severely, and was hardly sensible of my presence. I thought to myself, 'well, this is a poor place to come for money, and yet I must have it; I know of no one else that has got it; what shall I do?' I sat a little while confounded and amazed. At length another Elder happened in; at that instant faith sprung up in my heart; the Spirit whispered to me, 'is there anything too hard for the Lord?' I said to the Elder that came in: 'Brother, I am glad you have come; these people must he healed, for I want some money of them, and must have it.'

"We laid hands on them and rebuked the disease; brother Lowry rose up well; I did my errand, and readily obtained all I asked. This provided in part for my family's sustenance while I should leave them. I went a little further into the woods of the Missouri bottoms, and came to a camp of some brethren, by the name of Higbee, who owned some horses; they saw me coming, and, moved by the Spirit, one of them said to the other, 'there comes brother Parley; he's in want of a horse for his journeyI must let him have old Dick;' this being the name of the best horse he had. 'Yes,' said I, 'brother, you have guessed right; but what will I do for a saddle?' 'Well,' says the other, 'I believe I'll have to let you have mine.' I blessed them and went on my way rejoicing.

"I next called on Sidney A. Gilbert, a merchant, then sojourning in the village of Libertyhis store in Jackson County having been broken up, and his goods plundered and destroyed by the mob. 'Well,' says he, 'brother Parley, you certainly look too shabby to start a journey; you must have a new suit; I have got some remnants left that will make you a coat,' etc. A neighboring tailoress and two or three other sisters happened to be present on a visit, and hearing the conversation, exclaimed, 'Yes, brother Gilbert, you find the stuff and we'll make it up for him.' This arranged, I now lacked only a cloak; this was also furnished by brother Gilbert.

"Brother Wight was also prospered in a similar manner in his preparations. Thus faith and the blessings of God had cleared up our way to accomplish what seemed impossible. We were soon ready, and on the first of February we mounted our horses, and started in good cheer to ride one thousand or fifteen hundred miles through a wilderness country. We had not one cent of money in our pockets on starting.

"We travelled every day, whether through storm or sunshine, mud, rain or snow; except when our public duties called us to tarry. We arrived in Kirtland early in the spring, all safe and sound; we had lacked for nothing on the road, and now had plenty of funds in hand. President Joseph Smith and the Church in Kirtland received us with a hospitality and joy unknown except among the Saints; and much interest was felt there, as well as elsewhere, on the subject of our persecution" (Autobiography, 87-89).

Elders Wight and Pratt left Clay County on 12 January and arrived in Kirtland on 22 February 1834. After receiving their report of the conditions and sufferings of the Saints in Missouri, the Prophet received this section, which, alluding to the parable in section 101, directed him to organize a body of men to journey to Missouri to redeem the land. Eight men, mentioned in verses 37-40, were to enlist volunteers to make the trip to Missouri.

Heber C. Kimball described the situation thus: "Brother Joseph received a revelation concerning the redemption of Zion, part of which remains yet to be fulfilled. He sent Messengers to the East and to the West and to the North and to the South, to gather up the Elders, and He gathered together as many of the brethren as he conveniently could, with what means they could spare to go up to Zion, to render all the assistance that we could to our afflicted brethren. We gathered clothing and other necessaries to carry up to our brethren and sisters who had been plundered; and putting our horses to the wagons and taking our firelocks and ammunition, we started on our journey; leaving only Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon and a few aged workmen who were engaged at the Temple; so that there were very few men left in Kirtland" (cited in Cook, Revelations, 209).

Why the Lord Permitted the Saints in Jackson County to Be Persecuted

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 103:1-4

103:3 That they might fill up the measure of their iniquities. We learn by revelation that the Lord allows atrocities on the part of wicked people that they might merit the judgment he has in store for them. When the wicked inhabitants of Ammonihah destroyed faithful women and children by fire, Amulek asked Alma whether they should exercise power to save them. "The Spirit constraineth me that I must not stretch forth mine hand;" answered Alma, "for behold the Lord receiveth them up unto himself, in glory; and he doth suffer that they may do this thing, or that the people may do this thing unto them, according to the hardness of their hearts, that the judgments which he shall exercise upon them in his wrath may be just; and the blood of the innocent shall stand as a witness against them, yea, and cry mightily against them at the last day" (Alma 14:11).

The wicked determine the severity of their own suffering. The Lord has declared that "the things which they are willing to bring upon others, and love to have others suffer" will come upon them "to the very uttermost" (D&C 121:13).

103:4 Chastened for a little season. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 101:2.

The Saints Will Prevail If They Keep the Commandments

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 103:5-10

103:5-10 Here the Saints are promised that if they will heed the counsel of the Lord they will prevail over all the kingdoms of the world, even to subduing them under their feet until the earth becomes their rightful inheritance. Refusal to heed the Lord's counsel, however, reverses the promise, and it will be their lot, like salt that has lost its savor, to be trodden under the foot of those they sought to emulate. The principle is eternal: To follow the counsel of the Lord is to enjoy the protection of the Lord; to refuse his counsel is to become the heir of all the sorrows and difficulties from which the Lord seeks to protect them.

The Redemption of Zion Will Come by Power, and the Lord Will Go before His People

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 103:11-20

103:11-20 Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "In this instruction the Lord gave them [the Saints driven out of Jackson County] the opportunity to obtain the redemption of Zion and for the exiles to be reinstated in their possessions. Had they remained faithful he would have fulfilled his promise to them. They understood the warnings and that through their continued unfaithfulness the redemption would have to be postponed and they themselves would be thrown down. There have been some who have criticized this, and other revelations, claiming that the word of the Lord failed, for he promised them that if they would gather their forces and go to Zion, he would fight their battles and they would be reinstated and the redemption would immediately come. This promise is not found in any of these revelations. To the contrary, the promise is made that they would have to be obedient in all things and keep inviolate their covenants, or these blessings would be indefinitely postponed. The fact that the Lord declared here once again that the redemption was not to come until after much tribulation indicates that he was fully aware that the time for Zion's redemption had not come, although it could have come if the commandments were fulfilled" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:483).

The redemption of Zion will come only when the Saints are worthy of the Lord's divine power. On 21 January 1836, after attending to the ordinance of anointing in the upper west school room of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded that he the redemption of Zion. . . . My scribe also received his anointing with us, and saw, in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and many things which I saw" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:381). It is also important to note that throughout all of the revelations concerning inheritances in Zion the Lord indicated that the Saints were to obtain them by purchase (D&C 42:35; 45:65-66; 48:4-5; 57:4-6; 58:49-52; 63:27-30; 101:70-71; 103:23; 105:28-30).

103:12 After much tribulation . . . cometh the blessing. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:3-5.

103:16 Like as Moses. The Lord revealed that "the President of the office of the High Priesthood is [called] to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses" (D&C 107:91). When the day comes that the Saints are permitted to redeem their inheritances in Zion, it will be under the direction of the president of the Church.

103:18 As your fathers were led . . . even so shall the redemption of Zion be. The initial thought upon reading such a prophesy is that a modern Moses will lead the army of Israel back to their promised inheritance, with the powers of heaven attending as they did Moses at the parting of the Red Sea, bringing water from a rock, and feeding the people with manna from heaven. Such thinking, however, misses the point of this and the attendant revelations that deal with the eventual redemption of Zion. Moses took his people to Sinai and there sought to sanctify them that they might stand in the presence of their God. His people, however, proved themselves emotionally, mentally, and spiritually unready for such an experience and refused it. The Lord in response took from them the Melchizedek, or higher, Priesthood with its attendant ordinances and blessings. They were then consigned to wander in the wilderness for forty years before a new generation could arise with sufficient faith to follow their leaders into the promised land. In likening the events of our day to those of Moses' day, we as a people still appear unwilling and unready to redeem Zion. We have not yet sanctified ourselves that we might stand in the presence of God, and we have not obtained the discipline and faith necessary to live the law of consecration. When a sanctified generation comes, the Lord will call a modern Moses who will lead the armies of Israel with the same power in his priesthood as that known to his ancient counterpart from whom we received the keys of the gathering of Israel.

103:20 In time ye shall possess the goodly land. "It appears from this declaration that the redemption of Zion was not to come immediately," explained Joseph Fielding Smith, "but was to be postponed to some future day. Moreover, that day would not come until the members of the Church were willing to keep their covenants and walk unitedly, for until the members of the Church learn to walk in full accord and in obedience with all of the commandments, this day cannot come. It may be necessary in order to bring this to pass for the Lord to use drastic measures and cleanse the Church from everything that offends. This he has promised to do when he is ready to redeem Zion" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:484).

The Saints Are to Gather to Zion, and Those Who Lay Down Their Lives Will Find Them Again

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 103:21-28

103:21-28 These verses call to arms the young and middle-aged men of the Church, directing them to gather upon the land of Zion and "avenge" the Lord of his "enemies" (v. 25). See Doctrine and Covenants 101:55.

103:24 Ye shall curse them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 24:15.

103:24-26 While the members of Zion's Camp marched nearer to Jackson County, Missouri, the mob element there met to propose means of stopping them from entering the district. The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded several instances in which the power of the Lord was manifest. "The Jackson mob to the number of about fifteen, with Samuel C. Owens and James Campbell at their head, started for Independence, Jackson county, to raise an army sufficient to meet me, before I could get into Clay county. Campbell swore, as he adjusted his pistols in his holsters, 'The eagles and turkey buzzards shall eat my flesh if I do not fix Joe Smith and his army so that their skins will not hold shucks, before two days are passed.' They went to the ferry and undertook to cross the Missouri river after dusk, and the angel of God saw fit to sink the boat about the middle of the river, and seven out of twelve that attempted to cross, were drowned. Thus, suddenly and justly, went they to their own place. Campbell was among the missing. He floated down the river some four or five miles, and lodged upon a pile of drift wood, where the eagles, buzzards, ravens, crows, and wild animals ate his flesh from his bones, to fulfill his own words, and left him a horrible example of God's vengeance. He was discovered about three weeks after by one Mr. Purtle. Owens saved his life only, after floating four miles down the stream, where he lodged upon an island, 'swam off naked about day light, borrowed a mantle to hide his shame, and slipped home rather shy of the vengeance of God'" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:99-100).

Two days after the recording of the previous incident, the Prophet wrote further: "During this day, the Jackson county mob, to the number of about two hundred, made arrangements to cross the Missouri river, above the mouth of Fishing river, at Williams' ferry, into Clay county, and be ready to meet the Richmond mob near Fishing river ford, for our utter destruction; but after the first scow load of about forty had been set over the river, the scow in returning was met by a squall, and had great difficulty in reaching the Jackson side by dark.

"When these five men were in our camp, swearing vengeance, the wind, thunder, and rising cloud indicated an approaching storm, and in a short time after they left the rain and hail began to fall. The storm was tremendous; wind and rain, hail and thunder met them in great wrath, and soon softened their direful courage, and frustrated all their designs to 'kill Joe Smith and his army.' Instead of continuing a cannonading which they commenced when the sun was about one hour high, they crawled under wagons, into hollow trees, and filled one old shanty, till the storm was over, when their ammunition was soaked, and the forty in Clay county were extremely anxious in the morning to return to Jackson, having experienced the pitiless pelting of the storm all night; and as soon as arrangements could be made, this 'forlorn hope' took the 'back track' for Independence, to join the main body of the mob, fully satisfied, as were those survivors of the company who were drowned, that when Jehovah fights they would rather be absent. The gratification is too terrible.

"Very little hail fell in our camp, but from half a mile to a mile around, the stones or lumps of ice cut down the crops of corn and vegetation generally, even cutting limbs from trees, while the trees, themselves were twisted into withes by the wind. The lightning flashed incessantly, which caused it to be so light in our camp through the night, that we could discern the most minute objects; and the roaring of the thunder was tremendous. The earth trembled and quaked, the rain fell in torrents, and, united, it seemed as if the mandate of vengeance had gone forth from the God of battles, to protect His servants from the destruction of their enemies, for the hail fell on them and not on us, and we suffered no harm, except the blowing down of some of our tents, and getting wet; while our enemies had holes made in their hats, and otherwise received damage, even the breaking of their rifle stocks, and the fleeing of their horses through fear and pain.

"Many of my little band sheltered in an old meetinghouse through this night, and in the morning the water in Big Fishing river was about forty feet deep, where, the previous evening, it was no more than to our ankles, and our enemies swore that the water rose thirty feet in thirty minutes in the Little Fishing river. They reported that one of their men was killed by lightning, and that another had his hand torn off by his horse drawing his hand between the logs of a corn crib while he was holding him on the inside. They declared that if that was the way God fought for the Mormons, they might as well go about their business" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:103-5).

103:27-28 The Savior declared, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends" (John 15:13). Those who volunteered to march to Missouri placed their lives on the line to help the Saints in Zion. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 98:11-14; 105:19.

Various Brethren Are Called to Organize Zion's Camp

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 103:29-40

103:29-40 "Parley P. Pratt and Lyman Wight, the messengers from the land of Zion, were commanded not to return until they had obtained companies to go up unto the land of their brethren. The companies were to be by tens, or by twenties, or by fifties, or by hundreds, until they had obtained the number of five hundred men. If they could not obtain five hundred, they were to seek diligently to get three hundred, and if they could not obtain three hundred, then they were to obtain one hundred. They were not, however, to go up to the land of Zion until they had obtained at least one hundred. The Prophet Joseph was to go up with them and preside in their midst, for, 'all victory and glory is brought to pass unto you through your diligence, faithfulness and prayer of faith.' Parley P. Pratt was to go with Joseph Smith the Prophet; Lyman Wight with Sidney Rigdon; Hyrum Smith with Frederick G. Williams; Orson Hyde with Orson Pratt, on this mission to raise funds and volunteers to undertake this journey to assist their exiled brethren in the land of Zion" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:485). This assembled army is known today as Zion's Camp.

The assigned brethren traveled throughout the branches of the Church and raised a sizeable army to redeem Zion. The Prophet Joseph Smith led a group to Missouri and eventually presided over the united army. By the time all the companies met together, ZionCamp consisted of "207 men, 11 women, 11 children, and 25 baggage wagons" (Church History in the Fulness of Times, 143). After the small army reached Fishing River, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith that the Saints were not yet prepared spiritually to redeem Zion (D&C 105:1-10), and the camp was disbanded.

103:35 Establish the children of Zion upon the laws and commandments. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 103:20.
