Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6

DATE: APRIL 1829 (ON OR AFTER 7 APRIL)

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

While teaching school in the community of Palmyra, New York, in the year 1829, Oliver Cowdery heard reports about Joseph Smith and his gold plates. Because the families that sent children to the school were expected to provide lodgings for the teacher, Oliver looked forward to staying with the Smiths, where he hoped to gain the truth of the story. Upon coming to live with the Smith family, Oliver gained the confidence of the Prophet's father and learned about the labor in which Joseph was involved. With that knowledge came an impression that he must go and write for Joseph. As soon as he could be excused from his obligations as a teacher, Oliver traveled to Harmony with the Prophet's younger brother Samuel. They arrived Sunday evening, 5 April 1829. Oliver was then able to receive a firsthand account of the events of the Restoration. He began his labors as the Prophet's scribe on Tuesday, 7 April.

Mother Smith recorded that after Oliver's conversation with Joseph Smith Sr., Oliver indicated that the matter had worked upon his bones, and he couldn't get it out of his mind. Finally, he resolved to accompany Samuel, who was apparently going to Harmony to help Joseph with his spring planting. "I have made it a subject of prayer, and I firmly believe that if it is the will of the Lord that I should go, and that there is a work for me to do in this thing, I am determined to attend to it" (as cited in Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 182). Oliver and Samuel covered the 140 miles on foot together.

Further, Mother Smith notes that "[Joseph] had been so hurried with business and writing, etc., that he could not proceed with the work as fast as it was necessary for him to do. There was also another disadvantage under which he had to labor. Emma had so much of her time taken up with the care of her house that she could write but little for him. Accordingly, two or three days before the arrival of Oliver and Samuel, Joseph called upon his Heavenly Father to send him a scribe as the angel had promised, and he was informed that the same should be forthcoming in a few days.

"When Oliver was introduced to Joseph, he said, 'Mr. Smith, I have come for the purpose of writing for you.' This was not at all unexpected to Joseph, for although he had never seen Mr. Cowdery before, he knew that the Lord was able to perform, and that he had been faithful to fulfill, all his promises" (History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 184).

Of these events, the Prophet recorded: "The Lord appeared unto a young man by the name Oliver Cowdery and shewed unto him the plates in a vision and also the truth of the work and what the Lord was about to do through me, his unworthy servant. Therefore he was desirous to come and write for me to translate" (Jessee, Papers of Joseph Smith, 1:10; spelling standardized).

Laborers in the Lord's Field Gain Salvation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6:1-5

6:1 A great and marvelous work is about to come forth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 4:1.

6:2 It is not the voice of God of which we speak here but the word of God. There is power in the word the truth, which is light. It can cut through the darkness of ignorance and unbelief; it can pierce the soul, cut to the core, bring the mighty to their knees, and humble the proud. Describing the Spirit that attends the word of God, Joseph Smith said it "pierceth all things, and often times it maketh my bones to quake" (D&C 85:6). It lifts, edifies, inspires, enlightens, ennobles, and empowers. "For the word of the Lord is truth, and whatsoever is truth is light, and whatsoever is light is Spirit, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ" (D&C 84:45; see Hebrews 4:12; D&C 11:2; 12:2; 14:2; 33:1).

6:3 The field is white. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 4:4.

6:5 The promise that those who ask will receive is given to those who have taken up the sickle to harvest for the Lord. Those who are in the Lord's service have special claim on his attention.

Salvation Is the Greatest of God's Gifts

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6:6-13

6:9 Say nothing but repentance unto this generation. Repentance is the doctrine that marks the true messenger of the Lord. Jeremiah identified the distinguishing doctrine of false prophets when he said, "They say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you" (Jeremiah 23:17). Thus the Lord typified apostate religion, saying, "For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant; they seek not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which shall fall" (D&C 1:15-16).

This expression does not indicate that the gospel consists of the doctrine of repentance alone; rather, the implication is that without the doctrine of repentance one cannot have the true gospel. No gospel principle can be properly understood without the purity of heart and soul that must first come from repentance (D&C 11:9; 19:21).

6:10-12 Oliver Cowdery had been given two gifts. The first was the gift of revelation by which he could obtain a knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom, and the second was the gift to translate (D&C 6:25-28). In the realm of spiritual things, few men have been so richly favored.

6:13 The gift of salvation. Salvation in its fullest meaning is synonymous with exaltation, or eternal life. To be saved is to obtain a place in the celestial kingdom. In most instances, this is the way the word is used in scripture. This is the salvation the Saints seek, and it is of this which the Lord says, "There is no gift greater than the gift of salvation" (D&C 6:13).

The Witness of Truth Comes by the Spirit

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6:14-24

6:14-15 These verses, which describe the experience of Oliver Cowdery as he was led by the Spirit to assume the important role that would be his in the translation of the Book of Mormon, also typify the experience of countless truth seekers. The Spirit leads seekers of truth to the places where they will hear the truths of salvation preached. But even as their prayers are answered, they often do not know it. It is only as they grow in the things of the Spirit that they are able to look back on a sequence of events and begin to realize how completely their course was directed by the powers of heaven.

Here the Lord affirms for Oliver Cowdery that his prayers have been answered. It is in effect a revelation, telling him that he has been receiving revelations. Similar experiences are common among those who are growing up spiritually. We are told that the Lamanites, after their conversion, "were baptized with fire and with the Holy Ghost, and they knew it not" (3 Nephi 9:20). Christ's companions on the road to Emmaus did not realize who it was who taught them until the day's end and his departure from them. Only then did one of them say to the other, "Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures" (Luke 24:32).

6:14 Though he did not realize it, Oliver had been led by the hand of providence to Palmyra, where he was teaching school. From there he was led to take lodgings with the Smith family. Responding to this Spirit that guided his destiny as sure as the star of heaven guided the wise men of old to the child JesusOliver was led to Harmony, Pennsylvania, where he offered his services to Joseph as a scribe.

6:16 God alone, in the full sense of the word, knows the hearts of men. This, however, does not suggest that the prince of darkness cannot discern friend from foe or that he cannot sense men's susceptibility to yield to temptations.

6:17 The effect of this revelation was to affirm for Oliver that Joseph Smith was a prophet. That in turn would add to his confidence relative to the Book of Mormon. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 17:6; 18:2.

6:19 Admonish him in his faults. Nothing in any of the revelations of the Restoration suggest that Joseph Smith was either above the law, infallible, or not subject to any of the foibles common to men in this fallen world (D&C 3:4).

6:23 Did I not speak peace to your mind? Those seeking to become conversant in the language of the Spirit, who wish to know when their prayers are being answered and when the Spirit is directing them, must learn to identify the feelings of peace, comfort, and assurance that are characteristic of the spirit of revelation. Each time Oliver had prayed, he had experienced a quiet assurance. Unfamiliar with the nature of such prompting, he had not recognized that those feelings came in response to his prayers. His experience is instructive to all who are in the process of growing up in the things of the Spirit.

Oliver Is Granted the Key of Translation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6:25-28

6:25 A gift . . . to translate, even as . . . Joseph. Here Oliver is promised that he will have the gift of translation in the same portion and manner as enjoyed by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

6:27 This promise found a partial fulfillment in the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 7.

6:28 Keys of this gift. Both Joseph and Oliver had been given the gift to translate. The imagery of keys suggests the ability to unlock that which would otherwise remain hidden.

The mouth of two or three witnesses. According to divine plan, both Joseph and Oliver were to be involved in the process of translating the Book of Mormon. Thus, both men would be able to testify that the book had been translated by the gift and power of God. Oliver did, in fact, translate a small portion of the book. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 9:5.

Look to Christ and Do Good Continually

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 6:29-37

6:29-37 In these verses both Joseph and Oliver are admonished to be faithful in the labors to which they have been called. The Lord, who knows the unspoken thoughts of our hearts, understood Joseph and Oliver's anxiety about the translation and its acceptance in an unbelieving world. The Lord assures them that if men reject his message, Joseph and Oliver will still be blessed. He also reminds them of his own rejection and suffering at the hands of men. They are told that should men accept the Book of Mormon there will be great cause to rejoice and though they are only two in number, he will be with them. Joseph and Oliver need but do that which is good, and in so doing they will reap that which is good.
