Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104

DATE: 23 APRIL 1834

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Destruction of the Saints' property in Jackson County, Missouri, by lawless mobs contributed to a financial crisis for the Church. Earlier the Lord had given responsibility for the Church's properties to leaders within an organization known as the United Firm. Members of the United Firm were called by revelation and included prominent Saints in both Ohio and Missouri. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:3-4.

At a meeting of the United Firm on 30 April 1832 in Independence, Missouri, it was "resolved that the firm [secure a] loan [of] fifteen thousand dollars for five years or longer at six per cent annually or semi- annually . . . , and that N. K. Whitney & Co. be appointed to negotiate the same" (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 48). In late October 1832 the Prophet Joseph Smith and Newel K. Whitney traveled together to New York City. Brother Whitney purchased goods on credit for the mercantile businesses of the United Firm. These goods were used to stock the Newel K. Whitney store in Kirtland, Ohio, and, most probably, the A. Sidney Gilbert store in Independence, Missouri (D&C 57:8; 63:42-43; 64:26). In addition, the United Firm incurred debt for the purchase of the Peter French farm in Kirtland, Ohio (D&C 96), and possibly for land in Jackson County, Missouri. Profits from Church- owned businesses and consecrated funds from the Saints were to pay off these debts. This plan met with difficulties in the fall of 1833 when the Saints in Missouri, specifically members of the United Firm, were unable to contribute financially to the Church because mobs had driven them from their farms and businesses in Jackson County. See introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 97 and 101.

In addition, in Kirtland, Ohio, an apostate named Philastus Hurlburt brought a lawsuit against Hyrum Smith to obtain property owned by the United Firm. As a result, funds of the United Firm were further drained to pay court costs and lawyer fees, as well as travel expenses. The Prophet Joseph Smith felt that he could not journey to Missouri at the head of Zion's Camp until the problems concerning the United Firm's debts were resolved. But he realized that "if I do not go [to Missouri], it will be impossible to get my brethren in Kirtland, any of them, to go" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:48). Thus, the success of Zion's Camp in restoring the Saints' property in Jackson County, Missouri, was connected to the needs of the United Firm.

Donations were sought from members of the Church, but it soon became evident that sufficient funds would not be raised to pay the notes that were due. Members of the Firm in Kirtland had been meeting for months, counseling with one another and petitioning the Lord to show the way whereby they might free themselves from debt. On 7 April the Prophet wrote, "Bishop Whitney, Elder Frederick G. Williams, Oliver Cowdery, Heber C. Kimball, and myself, met in the council room, and bowed down before the Lord, and prayed that He would furnish the means to deliver the Firm from debt, that they might be set at liberty; also, that I might prevail against that wicked man, Hurlburt, and that he might be put to shame" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:47-48). Three days later the Prophet recorded that "it was agreed that the Order should be dissolved, and each one have his stewardship set off to him" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:49). By such a plan the property of the Church managed by the United Firm could be protected. The creditors would have claim on property held by the United Firm, not on property owned by individuals. This move was not made to escape responsibility for paying debts but rather to give the Church more time to gather needed funds and to allow the Prophet to travel with Zion's Camp to Missouri.

The actual division of the property was postponed for two weeks in the hope that such a course might not be necessary. When the council met again on 23 April, the Lord confirmed by revelation that he approved their decision to assign properties to individuals, but rather than allow the council to dissolve the United Firm, the Lord commanded that they reorganize into two separate orders in Ohio and Missouri. He also gave instructions regarding the Church's assets and the obligation of members of the United Firm to pay their debts.

Saints Who Transgress against the United Order Shall Be Cursed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:1-10

104:1 The order which I commanded to be organized and established. This reference is to the literary and mercantile establishments organized under the titles of Literary Firm and United Firm. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 70:3; 78:3-4.

104:4 Inasmuch as some of my servants have not kept the commandment. Apparently the commandment referred to here is recorded in section 98, which reads: "Behold, I, the Lord, am not well pleased with many who are in the church at Kirtland; For they do not forsake their sins, and their wicked ways, the pride of their hearts, and their covetousness, and all their detestable things, and observe the words of wisdom and eternal life which I have given unto them. Verily I say unto you, that I, the Lord, will chasten them and will do whatsoever I list, if they do not repent and observe all things whatsoever I have said unto them. And again I say unto you, if ye observe to do whatsoever I command you, I, the Lord, will turn away all wrath and indignation from you, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against you" (D&C 98:19-22).

Broken the covenant through covetousness. The kingdom of God can only be built on the principles of selflessness and sacrifice. "Covetousness" and "detestable things" can have no place in such a kingdom. Those entering into a covenant community such as those established by the Saints in Ohio and Missouri were required to do so with all their heart and soul. Such people must "seek first the kingdom of God and its righteousness" with the confidence that in pursuing such a course their own needs would be met. Those entering a united order for personal gain inevitably found reason to be disgruntled and unhappy. The spirit of such people is not difficult to identify, as illustrated by the following recollection of Brigham Young.

"In the fall of 1833, many of the brethren had gathered to Kirtland, and not finding suitable employment, and having some difficulty in getting their pay after they had labored, several went off to Willoughby, Painesville, and Cleveland. I told them I had gathered to Kirtland because I was so directed by the Prophet of God, and I was not going away to Willoughby, Painesville, Cleveland, nor any where else to build up the Gentiles, but I was going to stay here and seek the things that pertained to the kingdom of God by listening to the teachings of his servants, and I should work for my brethren and trust in God and them that I would be paid" (Watson, Manuscript History of Brigham Young, 7).

The Saints in Missouri brought upon themselves the tribulations suffered at the hands of mobs in Jackson County because of their "covetous desires" (D&C 101:6). Nephi, speaking to those of our day, taught that "the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish" (2 Nephi 26:31).

A. Sidney Gilbert, manager of the mercantile branch of the United Firm in Independence, Missouri, was specifically warned of the punishments that would befall him if he did not repent of his covetousness. On 14 January 1833, Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith wrote in behalf of a conference of twelve high priests in Kirtland to Bishop Partridge and the Saints in Zion: "There is manifestly an uneasiness in Brother Gilbert, and a fearfulness that God will not provide for His Saints in these last days, and these fears lead him on to covetousness. This ought not so to be; but let him do just as the Lord has commanded him, and then the Lord will open his coffers, and his wants will be liberally supplied. But if this uneasy, covetous disposition be cherished by him, the Lord will bring him to poverty, shame, and disgrace" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:319).

Feigned words. Words spoken falsely for personal gain.

I have cursed them with a very sore and grievous curse. God's law dictates prosperity for those who keep the commandments; for those who disobey, he warned, "Instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings, wrath, indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your follies, and by all your abominations, which you practise before me, saith the Lord" (D&C 124:48).

104:5 He shall be cursed in his life. As the keeping of covenants brings the blessings of heaven, so the breaking of covenants brings sorrows of all kinds. And as affirmed by a host of scriptures, the curses that flow from disobedience are both temporal and spiritual. They include famine, sickness, pestilence, slavery, poverty, war, and death. Those who disobey God hardly need wait for the world to come to reap as they have sown.

104:6-10 Here the Lord reaffirms and amplifies the warning given when the United Firm was first organized. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:12.

The Lord Provides for His Saints in His Own Way

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:11-16

104:11 Appoint every man his stewardship. This command indicated that the United Firm was to be reorganized with individuals receiving stewardships over specific Church- owned property. In so doing the Lord approved of the decisions made by members of the Firm in earlier council meetings (see introduction to this section). Each person was accountable to make his stewardship profitable. The income from Church- owned property was used for printing scriptures and purchasing lands of inheritance for the Saints. In addition, with this command the Lord reemphasized that he was the master of the earth and the Saints were his stewards.

104:14 Stretched out the heavens. This phrase, which comes from Isaiah, conveys the idea that the Lord took of extant materials and created the sun, the moons, and the stars, and placed them in their courses in the heavens (Isaiah 42:5; 45:12).

Built the earth. The notion common to the theology of the historical Christian world is that the universe was brought into being out of nothing by the free act of God. Here the Lord testifies that he "built the earth," that is, it was organized of "chaotic matter," or element that is eternal (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 351; Abraham 3:24).

All things therein are mine. "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein" (Psalm 24:1). All accountable souls are stewards of what the Lord chooses to give them during their mortal sojourn. Each of us will be called upon to give an accounting of what we did with the talents, abilities, opportunities, and earthly wealth given to us to bless others.

104:16 The Lord's means of providing for his Saints was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith when he arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, in February 1831 and constitutes the "law of the Church" (History of the Church, 1:148). The Saints were commanded to consecrate all their property to the Lord and to receive stewardships from the bishop of the Church. The portion of the Lord's law governing earthly property is known as the law of consecration and stewardship. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:30-39.

The poor shall be exalted, in that the rich are made low. Explaining this phrase, Elder Harold B. Lee observed that to be exalted, the poor have to be "stimulated to success and pride, and uplifted because the rich have been made low, or in other words, because the rich have been made humble and willing to give of their substance, their time, and their talent, and their wisdom, and their example that the poor might be thus guided and directed" (Conference Report, October 1941, 113).

Gospel Law Governs Care of the Poor

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:17-18

104:17-18 The earth was created by an all- knowing God who assures us that this world is rich enough to feed, clothe, and house all his children. Standing opposite this declaration are such notions as social Darwinism (survival of the fittest) and the prophets of doom who preach against our having more than one or two children. The testimony of heaven is that the earth is capable of providing the necessities of life for all its inhabitants.

God holds his children responsible for their management and distribution of the earth's riches. Were this done according to gospel principles, there would be no poor or needy, except by choice, among all the nations of the earth.

Having created the earth and placed Adam and Eve on it, the Lord blessed them and said, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth" (Genesis 1:28).

To those of our dispensation the Lord said, "For, behold, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth, is ordained for the use of man for food and for raiment, and that he might have in abundance. But it is not given that one man should possess that which is above another, wherefore the world lieth in sin" (D&C 49:19-20).

"The precepts of men would have you believe that by limiting the population of the world, we can have peace and plenty," Ezra Taft Benson observed. "That is the doctrine of the devil. Small numbers do not insure peace; only righteousness does. After all, there were only a handful of men on the earth when Cain interrupted the peace of Adam's household by slaying Abel. On the other hand, the whole city of Enoch was peaceful; and it was taken into heaven because it was made up of righteous people. . . .

"A major reason why there is famine in some parts of the world is because evil men have used the vehicle of government to abridge the freedom that men need to produce abundantly.

"True to form, many of the people who desire to frustrate God's purposes of giving mortal tabernacles to his spirit children through worldwide birth control are the very same people who support the kinds of government that perpetuate famine. They advocate an evil to cure the results of the wickedness they support" (Conference Report, April 1969, 12).

104:18 Impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel. Having admonished the Saints of his day to be generous with all who were in need, King Benjamin then cautioned that they do so "in wisdom and order" (Mosiah 4:27). The gospel plan requires all to labor according to their ability. Honest toil and labor are as much a part of the gospel as faith and repentance. Any system of giving to those who claim need that reinforces indolence or idleness stands contrary to the gospel plan and will result in evil. Part of the preparation given the Savior for his ministry was to learn a trade at the hand of his earthly father, Joseph. All men, in like manner, should learn to provide for their own, for many of life's greatest lessons will be learned in this process.

He shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell. The rich who covet their property and keep it from those in need are in danger of damnation. They misuse the trust God placed in them by granting them the riches of the earth.

The language of this verse comes from the Savior's parable of Lazarus and the rich man. After his death, angels carried Lazarus to the bosom of Abraham. "The rich man also died, and was buried; And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments" (Luke 16:22-23). For the rich, a great test of character is their willingness to give of their abundance to those in need. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 56:16, "Your riches will canker your souls."

Stewardships and Blessings of Various Brethren Are Designated

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:19-46

104:19-46 The instructions found in these verses replaced previous direction concerning assignments of property to the Church building committee in section 94. By assigning the responsibility to manage Church- owned properties, the Lord emphasized what he had previously taught: those who manage property are his stewards. All individuals who received stewardships over property were members of the United Firm. For years the names of those receiving stewardships and the property that they received were published with substitute names and descriptions. This protected the property from being taken from members of the United Firm before they could obtain means to pay their debts. The original manuscripts of the revelation contained the names and properties as they have been published since the 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. From 1876 to 1981 the correct names followed the substitute names in parentheses.

104:20 Prior to joining the Church, Sidney Rigdon made his living as a tanner and Protestant preacher. The Lord utilized Sidney's talents to bless the Church.

104:26 Martin Harris, as a member of the Literary Firm, was responsible, with other Firm members, for printing the scriptures and other Church publications (D&C 70:1-4). Martin was commanded to use his wealth to see that the revelations were printed, as he had earlier done in the publishing of the Book of Mormon (D&C 19:26).

104:28-29 Following the mob violence in Jackson County, Missouri, W. W. Phelps no longer had a printing press to publish the Book of Commandments or the Church newspaper, The Evening and the Morning Star. The Church purchased a second printing press for use in the printing office in Kirtland, Ohio. Along with Oliver Cowdery, Frederick G. Williams received stewardship over the printing office and became the editor of another Church newspaper, the Star, which succeeded the newspaper in Independence, Missouri.

104:34-35 John Johnson received most of the property purchased from Peter French. See introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 96.

104:39-40 Bishop Newel K. Whitney received as a stewardship the properties he had originally consecrated to the Church. These included his home, store, and an ashery, where soap was made.

104:43 The Prophet Joseph Smith held title to the lot upon which the Kirtland Temple was built. He received a home, located near the temple lot, in which he had been living. Later, the title of the Kirtland Temple, following its completion, was put in his name.

The United Order in Kirtland and the Order in Zion Are to Operate Separately

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:47-53

104:47-53 "The Lord . . . commanded that there should be a separation of the United Order in Zion from the Order in Kirtland," explained Joseph Fielding Smith. "Each was to act henceforth independently of the other. Distance was too great between these places for unity of purpose in all things. Each order was to be organized in the names of the brethren residing in each place, and to do business in their own names. This separation and dissolving of the former order came about also because of transgression and covetousness on the part of some" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:489).

The Sacred Treasury of the Lord Is Set Up for the Printing of the Scriptures

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:54-66

104:58 Even to print my words, the fulness of my scriptures. The Lord's mention of "the fulness of my scriptures" refers to the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired translation of the Bible. At the time the Prophet received this revelation, the work of translation was already completed. On 2 July 1833 the First Presidency wrote from Kirtland to the brethren in Zion: "We are exceedingly fatigued, owing to a great press of business. We this day finished the translating of the Scriptures, for which we returned gratitude to our Heavenly Father" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:368). In June 1835 the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to the Saints: "We are now commencing to prepare and print the New Translation, together with all the revelations which God has been pleased to give us in these last days, and we are in want of funds to go on with so great and glorious a work, brethren, [we] want you [to] donate and loan us all the means or money you can that we may be enable[d] to accomplish the work as a great means towards the salvation of men" (Jessee, Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 343-44). The new translation was to be published as a single volume. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to W. W. Phelps, editor of The Evening and the Morning Star: "It is not the will of the Lord to print any of the New Translation in the Star; but when it is published, it will all go to the world together, in a volume by itself; and the New Testament and the Book of Mormon will be printed together" (History of the Church, 1:341). Lack of financial support from the Saints, persecution, and pressing temporal concerns prevented the new translation of the Bible from being printed during the Prophet's lifetime.

The revelations which I have given unto you. This refers to the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith up to this time, many of which are printed in the Doctrine and Covenants.

The revelations . . . which I shall, hereafter, from time to time give unto you. Latter-day Saints do not believe in a closed canon. "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (Article of Faith 9). Seeing our day, Nephi addressed those who seek to close the heavens to revelation and silence God, saying: "Wo be unto him that shall say: We have received the word of God, and we need no more of the word of God, for we have enough! For behold, thus saith the Lord God: I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:29-30).

104:60-66 The Lord commanded that profits generated from the sale of the scriptures be placed into a special treasury, named by him "the sacred treasury of the Lord" (v. 66). The funds in this treasury were to remain separate from other contributions for the building up of the kingdom of God. This command preserves the sacred purpose of publishing books of scripture. No individual or people are to profit from publishing the word of God.

104:63 Funds to print the scriptures were to be generated by individual stewardships, which this revelation assigned to members of the United Firm. Earlier, funds were to be generated by the combined efforts of the United Firm. On 25 June 1833 the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to the Saints in Missouri, "The order of the Literary Firm is a matter of stewardship, which is of the greatest importance; and the mercantile establishment God commanded to be devoted to the support thereof" (History of the Church, 1:365-66). Although stewardships for Church properties were given into the hands of individuals at this time, the responsibility of the members of the United Firm remained the same: they were to generate profits that could be used to publish the word of the Lord.

The General Treasury of the United Order Is to Operate on the Basis of Common Consent

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:67-77

104:67-76 Members of the United Firm placed profits they earned from managing Church-owned properties into the second treasury mentioned in these verses. No individual had any claim to the profits generated from these stewardships. Members of the United Firm determined, as a council, the use of treasury funds. The funds were used to improve the Church's properties or for further purchases made in behalf of the Church.

Those in the United Order Are to Pay All Their Debts

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 104:78-86

104:78-81 See the introduction to this section concerning loans secured from creditors in New York City.

104:78 You shall pay all your debts. Latter-day Saints are to be honest in all their dealings. Those who contract financial obligations should make every effort to meet their obligations. The debts specifically referred to in this revelation were incurred by loans secured in behalf of the Church. The name of the Church must not be held in disrepute because those stewards responsible for Church finances secure loans that go unpaid. Regardless of who contracted debt as an agent of the Lord, all his agents are responsible to pay the debt incurred.

Those who were later called to positions of trust similar to that of members of the United Firm assumed the debts and obligations entered into by their predecessors. Brigham Young accepted responsibility for the Prophet Joseph Smith's debts. "Joseph was doing business in Kirtland," Brigham explained, "and it seemed as though all creation was upon him, to hamper him in every way, and they drove him from his business, and it left him so that some of his debts had to be settled afterwards; and I am thankful to say that they were settled up; still further, we have sent East to New York, to Ohio, and to every place where I had any idea that Joseph had ever done business, and inquired if there was a man left to whom Joseph Smith, Jun., the Prophet, owed a dollar, or a sixpence. If there was we would pay it. But I have not been able to find one. I have advertised this through every neighborhood and place where he formerly lived, consequently I have a right to conclude that all his debts were settled" (Journal of Discourses, 18:242).

104:83 Your bondage. Debt places an individual in bondage to the creditor every bit as much as the children of Israel were in bondage to Pharaoh in Egypt.

104:84 A chance to loan money. This phrase refers to securing a loan, not to loaning money to someone else. The United Firm was without money to loan. Here the Lord gave the United Firm permission to use Church-owned properties as collateral for needed funds.
