Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105

DATE: 22 JUNE 1834

PLACE: FISHING RIVER, MISSOURI

During the spring of 1834 Joseph Smith led an army of more than two hundred of his brethren, known as Zion's Camp, from Kirtland, Ohio, to Clay County, Missouri a distance of one thousand miles. Their objective was to help the Missouri Saints reclaim their homes and property in Jackson County, from which they had been driven by mobs (D&C 103). While the Prophet's party was encamped on Fishing River, he received this revelation.

Zion's Camp left Kirtland on 5 May 1834 with a pledge from Governor Dunklin of Missouri that the state would give those who had been driven from their homes and lands a military escort back to reclaim that which was rightfully theirs. The plan was published and sent to the eastern branches of the Church.

Zion's Camp crossed the Mississippi River in early June, arriving at the Salt River Branch of the Church in Monroe County, Missouri, on 7 June 1834. After a short rest there the camp resumed its march on 12 June. Three days later Orson Hyde and Parley P. Pratt brought the message to the camp that Governor Dunklin was refusing to fulfill his promise to help the Saints reclaim their homes, which he did to avert action he believed would escalate into civil war.

Because Zion's Camp was intended only to work in concert with the authority of the state, the governor's refusal frustrated the camp's designs. As a result, the camp moved to Clay County, where the refugees from Jackson County had gathered to consider what to do. The Prophet received this revelation after their arrival in that county.

Zion Shall Be Built Up by Conformity to Celestial Law

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:1-5

105:3 Do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints. One of the most fundamental of all virtues is to care for the needy. When asked by the people how they could "bring forth . . . fruits worthy of repentance," John the Baptist answered, "He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise" (Luke 3:8, 11). King Benjamin taught his people that to retain a remission of sins "ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need of your succor; ye will administer of your substance unto him that standeth in need; and ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish" (Mosiah 4:16).

In contrast to these teachings, some of the Saints in Missouri would not even care for the sick of Zion's Camp. An example of this disobedience occurred shortly before the camp disbanded. At the end of their thousand- mile journey, the men of Zion's Camp stayed temporarily on the land of a Brother Burgett. Heber C. Kimball said: "While we were here, the brethren being in want of some refreshment, Brother Luke Johnson went to Brother Burgett to get a fowl, asking him for one to make a broth for Elder Wilcox and others [who were stricken with cholera]; but Brother Burgett denied him it, saying, 'In a few days we expect to return back into Jackson County, and I shall want them when I get there.' When Brother Johnson returned he was so angry at Burgett for refusing him, he said, 'I have a great mind to take my rifle and go back and shoot his horse.' I told Luke to never mind; that such actions never fail to bring their reward.

"Judge how we felt, after having left the society of our beloved families, taking our lives in our hands and traveling about one thousand miles through scenes of suffering and sorrow, for the benefit of our brethren, and after all to be denied of a small fowl to make a little soup for brethren in the agonies of death. Such things never fail to bring their reward, and it would do well for the Saints never to turn away a brother who is penniless and in want, or a stranger, lest they may one day or other want a friend themselves" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 62).

105:4 Zion cannot be redeemed save it be by a "Zion" people. When Enoch took his city into heaven, he took a people worthy of a heavenly home. Avarice, greed, selfishness, and meanness of spirit in any of its forms can have no place among such a people. A perfect love, manifesting itself in concern for others, must prevail. The spirit and nature of such a community must be one and the same with what we would expect to find in celestial realms. Of such a spirit, Alma taught those gathered at the waters of Mormon "that there should be no contention one with another, but that they should look forward with one eye, having one faith and one baptism, having their hearts knit together in unity and in love one towards another" (Mosiah 18:21). To those of our day the Lord said, "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine" (D&C 38:27). Of those of Enoch's city the Lord said, "They were of one heart and one mind" (Moses 7:18).

Brigham Young explained: "The Savior sought continually to impress upon the minds of his disciples that a perfect oneness reigned among all celestial beings that the Father and the Son and their minister, the Holy Ghost, were one in their administration in heaven and among the people pertaining to this earth. Between them and all the heavenly hosts there can be no disunion, no discord, no wavering on a suggestion, on a thought or reflection, on a feeling or manifestation; for such a principle would differ widely from the character of Him who dictates them, who makes his throne the habitation of justice, mercy, equity, and truth. If the heavenly hosts were not one, they would be entirely unfit to dwell in the eternal burnings with the Father and Ruler of the universe" (Journal of Discourses, 7:276).

105:5 Zion is a celestial city; it is the earthly abode of the Lord. Zion can be built upon only one standard: those that inhabit her must be worthy to behold the face of the Lord. Before this earth can be "crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father" (D&C 88:19), cities of Zion must fill the breadth and width of her lands. Each time a stake of Zion was organized under the direction of Joseph Smith, a city of Zion was prepared to which the Saints were to gather. The next phase of establishing Zion is that of perfecting the Saints who live within the geographical boundaries of a stake. The earth cannot roll back into the presence of God until we have learned to build a celestial kingdom founded on the laws given by the Lord to sanctify and purify us. The labor is spiritual in nature and made possible through the atoning blood of Jesus Christ. Each individual citizen of Zion must be washed clean and be able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom (D&C 88:22).

Redemption of Zion Deferred for a Little Season

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:6-13

105:6-10 After citing these verses, President Lorenzo Snow said: "Hence we learn that the Saints in Jackson County and other localities, refused to comply with the order of consecration, consequently they were allowed to be driven from their inheritances; and should not return until they were better prepared to keep the law of God, by being more perfectly taught in reference to their duties, and learn through experience the necessity of obedience. And I think we are not justified in anticipating the privilege of returning to build up the center stake of Zion, until we shall have shown obedience to the law of consecration. One thing, however, is certain, we shall not be permitted to enter the land from whence we were expelled, till our hearts are prepared to honor this law, and we become sanctified through the practice of the truth.

"The Lord required that those lands in Missouri should be obtained, not by force, but by purchase, through the consecrations of the properties of the Saints; and the manner was pointed out how these consecrations should be made, but it was disregarded" (Journal of Discourses, 16:276).

105:7 First elders. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:2.

105:8 The phrase "churches abroad" refers to the various branches of the restored Church of Jesus Christ outside of Kirtland, Ohio. The Prophet Joseph Smith sent word to these branches that money was needed to help the afflicted Saints in Missouri. The Saints donated little in response to his plea. He wrote concerning the Saints' refusal to help pay the debts of the United Firm (see introduction to commentary on D&C 104) and aid those driven from their homes in Missouri:

"If this Church, which is essaying to be the Church of Christ will not help us, when they can do it without sacrifice, with those blessings which God has bestowed upon them, I prophesyI speak the truth, I lie not God shall take away their talent, and give it to those who have no talent, and shall prevent them from ever obtaining a place of refuge, or an inheritance upon the land of Zion; therefore they may tarry, for they might as well be overtaken where they are, as to incur the displeasure of God, and fall under His wrath by the way side, as to fall into the hands of a merciless mob, where there is no God to deliver, as salt that has lost its savor, and is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be trodden under foot of men" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:48).

105:9 Wait for a little season for the redemption of Zion. When this revelation was given, the "little season" was to end 11 September 1836 (see commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:23-26). Because the Saints did not obey the Lord's counsel by imparting to those in need, the little season has lengthened to however much time passes before the Saints learn to live according to the principles of the celestial kingdom.

105:11 Until mine elders are endowed with power from on high. The endowment referred to is administered in temples. The ordinances associated with the endowment were received in this dispensation in the Kirtland Temple. These included washings and anointings, as well as a pouring out of the Lord's Spirit as on the day of Pentecost in Acts 2. The fulness of the endowment as administered in temples today was not available until the Nauvoo Temple was built.

The Lord Will Fight the Battles of Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:14-19

105:14 I will fight your battles. The Saints were not required and will not be required to cleanse the area of Independence, Missouri, of wickedness. The Lord will secure the lands for the building of the temple and the inheritances of the righteous in his own way. To this end he instructed the Saints to purchase the lands of their inheritance (vv. 28-30). The Prophet clarified that the Lord never did intend that the Saints in Zion's Camp would battle the Missourians. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:19.

105:15 In the Comprehensive History of the Church, Elder B. H. Roberts documents the destruction that took place in Missouri during the Civil War. Many of the citizens of Jackson County and the surrounding regions were expelled from their homes as opposing Union and Confederate militias raided their lands. Citing a work by the Reverend W. M. Leftwich in Martyrdom in Missouri, Brother Roberts wrote, "The warfare at home [Missouri] presented scenes of outrage and horror unsurpassed by anything in the annals of civilized warfare, if, indeed, there can be such a thing as civilized warfare, for everything about it is intensely savage.

"Between the 'jayhawkers' of Kansas and the 'bushwackers' of Missouri some whole counties were plundered, some were desolated by fire and sword, and some were almost depopulated" (Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:547).

"Most Missourians were Southern in origin and culture," observed Albert Castel in his work on William Quantrill, one of the bloodiest of the Missouri bushwackers. "Although relatively few of them owned slaves, and most of these few did not own many, like the vast majority of Southerners they regarded the antislavery crusade in the North as a monstrous threat to their whole way of life. Negro slavery was to them much more than a mere economic matter. It was above all a system of race control and social order, the very basis of White Supremacy and of Southern Civilization. Consequently 'abolitionism' was a dread specter which aroused the deepest emotions of fear and wrath in their breasts. . . .

"Missourians joined the dark passions of the South to the rough turbulence of the West. Violent feelings, violent words, and violent deeds came naturally to them" (Castel, William Clark Quantrill, 2-3). He held this to be especially true of those counties that had so violently driven the Saints from their borders a few years earlier.

So it was that these western counties became a "seething hell" that produced the bloodiest men in our nation's history. Brawls, brutal whippings, shootings, and lynchings became daily occurrences. These men drove from the borders of their state those opposed to slavery, only to find the favor returned as they too were eventually driven from their homelands. "The outbreak of civil war in Missouri gave the Kansas jayhawkers the chance of their lifetime. Not only would the divided and strife- torn Missourians be unable to offer them any effective resistance, but they would now be able to steal horses, plunder farms, and liberate slaves in the name of the Union and under the guise of suppressing rebellion" (Castel, William Clarke Quantrill, 52).

This provided the Missourians with a greater reason to hate, to remember the wrongs committed against them, and to seek revenge. Their answer to their neighbors' depredations came in the form of bushwackers who more than returned the favor. Thus the state of Missouri became the devil's host as the bitter hostility between unionists and secessionists was overshadowed by guerilla warfare fought on the principle that one must kill or be killed. So dark did the scene become that "by the end of the war there was to be far more killing of Missourians by Missourians than by Kansans" (Castel, William Clarke Quantrill, 61-62).

On 21 August 1863 William Quantrill led his Missouri bushwackers on the "single most atrocious event of the entire Civil War." In an attack on Lawrence, Kansas, he left two hundred bodies littered in yards, doorways, and sidewalks and a hundred homes in flames. In response, Brigadier General Thomas Ewing Jr. of the Union Army issued his famous General Order No. 11, announcing that everyone living in Jackson, Cass, and Bates Counties was to leave their homes by 9 September. If they established their loyalty with the commanding officer nearest their residence, they would be permitted to remove to any military station in the district, or to any part of Kansas other than the eastern border counties. All others were to remove themselves from the areas involved. The order was enforced by military action (Castel, William Clarke Quantrill, 145).

The next two weeks witnessed a mass exodus from the border counties. Only a few families were permitted to stay. Thousands loaded their household goods onto wagons, gathered what stock they could take with them, and either crossed into northern Missouri or began trekking southward. A unionist living near Kansas City recorded that "poor people, widows and children, who, with little bundles of clothing, are crossing the river to be subsisted by the charities of the people amongst whom they might find shelter." Another reported that "women, barefooted and shiver ing in the cold, were driving oxen and riding upon miserable broken-down horses without saddles." And still another recorded, "A desolated country and men & women and children, some of them all most naked. Some on foot and some in old wagons. Oh God" (as quoted in Castel, William Clarke Quantrill, 145-46).

"Most of the soldiers enforcing the order were vengeance-minded Kansans who welcomed such a splendid opportunity to punish the Missourians. In addition, gangs of Red Legs swarmed into the depopulated area, looting, burning, and murdering indiscriminately" (Castel, William Clarke Quantrill, 146).

"If Missouri in the preceding generation had sown to the wind, when the Latter-day Saints were the victims of their cruel lawlessness, Missouri in the Civil War period reaped the whirlwind," noted B. H. Roberts. "The measure they had meted out to the saints was surely meted out to them again, pressed down and running over more than a hundred fold was the measure increased unto her. . . .

"The Missourians lived to see the outbreak of a 'civil war' in their state that was one of the most appalling men ever witnessed; and Missouri, when all things are considered, and especially western Missouri, suffered more than any other state of the Union. In other states the war lasted at most but four years; but counting her western border warfare in the struggle for Kansas, the war was waged in western Missouri from 1855 to 1865, ten years; and for many years after the close of the Civil War, a guerrilla warfare was intermittently carried on by bands of outlaws harbored in western Missouriespecially in Jackson, Ray, Caldwell and Clay counties that terrorized the community and shocked the world by the daring and atrocity of their crimesincluding bank robberies in open day, express train wrecking and robberies, and murders. . . .

"But what immeasurably added to her suffering, and especially to the suffering of western Missouri, was the spirit of lawlessness, rapine, murder and mobocracy engendered in the minds of the inhabitants of that section of the state, by their treatment of the Latter-day Saints, and the course the state pursued with reference to them.

"It is in no spirit of gloating exultation that the foregoing facts in Missouri's history are referred to here. It gives no gratification to the writer to recount the woes of Missouri, and his hope is that it will give none to the reader. These facts of history are set down only because they are valuable for the lesson they teach. It may be that visible retribution does not always follow in the wake of state or national wrong- doing; but it is well that it should sometimes do so, lest men should come to think that Eternal Justice sleeps, or that she may be thwarted, or, what would be worst of all, that she does not exist. I say it is well, therefore, that sometimes visible retribution should follow state and national as well as individual transgressions, that the truth of the great principle that 'as men sow, so shall they reap,' may be vindicated. Missouri in her treatment of the Latter-day Saints during the years 1833-9, sowed the wind; in the disastrous events which overtook her during the years 1855-1880, she reaped the whirlwind. Let us hope that in those events Justice was fully vindicated so far as the state of Missouri is concerned; and that the lessons of her sad experience may not be lost to the world" (Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:551-59).

105:17 The Lord called for five hundred brethren to march with Zion's Camp (D&C 103:30). Only 205 responded.

105:18 I have prepared a blessing and an endowment for them. Members of Zion's Camp were the first to receive the preparatory ordinances of the temple endowment in Kirtland, Ohio. See commentary on verses 33-36.

105:19 For a trial of their faith. The Lord knew before he called upon the Saints to raise an army of men to redeem Zion that they were not yet ready to live the laws necessary for her redemption. Yet the Lord had purpose in his command that they travel to Missouri as an army of Saints. Only 205 brethren volunteered to journey with Zion's Camp. Before leaving their homes in the eastern states, many feared that they might lose their lives in battle against the Missouri mobs. The journey to Missouri itself was a trial of faith that tested their mettle. Following the disbanding of Zion's Camp, a few of its numbers became critical of Joseph Smith and left the faith. The rest appear to have found great spiritual strength in the experience.

On 14 February 1835 the Prophet Joseph Smith called a meeting "of those who journeyed last season to Zion for the purpose of laying the foundation of its redemption, together with as many other of the brethren and sisters as were disposed to attend.

"President Joseph Smith, Jun., presiding, read the 15th chapter of John, and said: Let us endeavor to solemnize our minds that we may receive a blessing, by calling on the Lord. After an appropriate and affecting prayer, the brethren who went to Zion [in Zion's camp] were requested to take their seats together in a part of the house by themselves.

"President Smith then stated that the meeting had been called, because God had commanded it; and it was made known to him by vision and by the Holy Spirit. He then gave a relation of some of the circumstances attending us while journeying to Zionour trials, sufferings: and said God had not designed all this for nothing, but He had it in remembrance yet; and it was the will of God that those who went to Zion, with a determination to lay down their lives, if necessary, should be ordained to the ministry, and go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time" (History of the Church, 2:181-82).

On that day the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was organized with nine of its members coming from those who marched with Zion's Camp. Two weeks later the First Quorum of Seventy was organized. All seven presidents of the First Council of Seventy and sixty-three of the seventy members of the quorum were chosen from among those who had journeyed with Zion's Camp.

"Elder Joseph Young in his 'History of the Organization of the Seventies,' (page 14) says that the following sentiment was delivered by the Prophet Joseph Smith in an address to the Elders assembled in Kirtland soon after the Seventies were organized: 'Brethren, some of you are angry with me, because you did not fight in Missouri; but let me tell you, God did not want you to fight. He could not organize His kingdom with twelve men to open the Gospel door to the nations of the earth, and with seventy men under their direction to follow in their tracks, unless He took them from a body of men who had offered their lives, and who had made as great a sacrifice as did Abraham. Now the Lord has got His Twelve and His Seventy, and there will be other quorums of Seventies called, who will make the sacrifice, and those who have not made their sacrifices and their offerings now, will make them hereafter'" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:182).

Other Saints were similarly valiant. After cholera broke out among Zion's Camp, fourteen Saints died. They too passed the trial of their faith. On 8 February 1835 "the Prophet Joseph Smith called Elders Brigham and Joseph Young to the chamber of his residence, in Kirtland, Ohio, it being on the Sabbath day. After they were seated and he had made some preliminaries, he proceeded to relate a vision to these brethren, of the state and condition of those men who died in Zion's Camp, in Missouri. He said, 'Brethren, I have seen those men who died of the cholera in our camp; and the Lord knows, if I get a mansion as bright as theirs, I ask no more.' At this relation he wept, and for some time could not speak" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:181). Earlier, the Lord revealed, "I will try you and prove you herewith. And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal. Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy" (D&C 98:12-14).

The Saints Are to Be Wise and Not Boast of Mighty Works As They Gather

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:20-26

105:23-26 These instructions offered the Saints another opportunity to regain their lands in Zion after a little season. In addition to the personal purification required of the Saints, they were to make friends of the nonmembers in Clay County and surrounding regions. If they did so, the Lord promised them success in being reinstated to their inheritances in Zion. The endowment of power required before the Saints would be fully prepared to redeem Zion was administered in the Kirtland Temple in early 1836. The Prophet wrote to the Church leaders in Missouri that they should be ready to move into Jackson County on 11 September 1836, "which is the appointed time for the redemption of Zion. Ifverily I say unto you if the Church with one united effort perform their duties; if they do this, the work shall be complete if they do not this in all humility, making preparation from this time forth, like Joseph in Egypt, laying up store against the time of famine, every man having his tent, his horses, his chariots, his armory, his cattle, his family, and his whole substance in readiness against the time when it shall be said: To your tents, O Israel! Let not this be noised abroad; let every heart beat in silence, and every mouth be shut.

"Now, my beloved brethren, you will learn by this we have a great work to do, and but little time to do it in; and if we do not exert ourselves to the utmost in gathering up the strength of the Lord's house that this thing may be accomplished, behold there remaineth a scourge for the Church, even that they shall be driven from city to city, and but few shall remain to receive an inheritance; if those things are not kept, there remaineth a scourge also; therefore, be wise this once, O ye children of Zion! and give heed to my counsel, saith the Lord" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:145-46).

The Prophet Joseph Smith, writing from Kirtland, Ohio, continued to send instructions and counsel to the Saints in Missouri. Referring to these verses, he and other presiding high priests of the Church wrote to Hezekiah Peck: "It is wisdom that the church should make but little or no stir in that region, and cause as little excitement as possible and endure their afflictions patiently until the time appointedand the Governor of Mo. fulfills his promise in settling the church over upon their own lands. . . .

"Let them remember the commandment which says, 'talk not of Judgment,' we are commanded not to give the children's bread unto the dogs; neither cast our pearls before swine, least they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you. Therefore let us be wise in all things, and keep all the commandments of God, that our salvation may be sure; having our armour ready and prepared against the time appointed, and having on the whole armor of righteousness, we may be able to stand in that trying day. We say also that if there are any doors open for the Elders to preach the first principles of the gospel, let them not keep silence; rail not against the sects, neither talk against their tenets. But preach Christ and him crucified, love to God and love to man, observing always to make mention of our republican principles, thereby if possible, we may allay the prejudice of the people, be meek and lowly of heart, and the Lord God of our fathers shall be with you for evermore Amen" (Jessee, Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 347-48).

When the appointed time arrived, the Saints in Clay County, Missouri, had not heeded the commands of God. Without regard to the feelings of their neighbors, the Saints had gathered in great numbers to Clay County. "As the gathering heightened," explained Max Parkin, "some Saints did not follow counsel and were viewed as speaking with inordinate zeal for their home in exile. Friendly Joseph Thorpe lamented over what he saw as boasts of some of the Saints. '[The Latter- day Saints] with all their experience in Jackson, began to tell the citizens of Clay the same old tale; that this country was theirs by gift of the Lord, and it was folly for them to improve their lands, they would not enjoy the fruits of their labor; that it would finally fall into the hands of the saints.' After reviewing a conversation with a zealous Latter-day Saint, Thorpe unsympathetically reflected: 'This kind of talk, with their insolence and impudent behavior, so enraged the citizens that they began to consult about the best course to take to rid themselves of a set of religious fanatics.' Thus, lingering dissatisfaction by some old settlers of Clay County erupted into animosity against the Latter-day Saints.

"Adverse sentiment heightened by late spring 1836. On 29 June, friendly leading citizens at Liberty held a public meeting to help prevent violence by issuing suggestions and where they felt needful to file complaints against the Latter- day Saints. 'Their rapid emigration,' the committee report said of the Saints, 'their large land purchases,' and their claims that Clay County was 'destined by heaven to be theirs' were some of the objections they noted" ("Latter-day Saint Conflict," 254-55). The citizens of Clay County requested that the Saints move from the region and settle in Wisconsin. Instead, the Saints moved to relatively uninhabited lands north of Ray County, Missouri, at the advice of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who counseled them that "if [they] could stop short [of Wisconsin], in peace, [they] had better do so" (History of the Church, 2:455). The land they settled was later incorporated into Caldwell County, Missouri.

Lands in Jackson County and Adjoining Counties Should Be Purchased

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:27-30

105:28 Purchasing of all the lands in Jackson county that can be purchased. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:4, "The land should be purchased by the saints."

105:29 My saints should possess them according to the laws of consecration. To consecrate something is to dedicate it for sacred purposes. Lands that have been consecrated are lands dedicated to the Lord for building up his kingdom on earth. Those who possess such lands must in like manner be consecrated to the Lord if they are to bring forth the lands' riches.

105:30 This verse mentions things that were part of the provisional promise given to those who had been driven out of Jackson County. The Saints lost the opportunity to lay claim to their property because of their failure to live according to the standard required of a Zion people.

The Elders Are to Receive an Endowment in the House of the Lord in Kirtland and to Be Sanctified

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:31-37

105:31 Fair as the sun, and clear as the moon. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:14, "Clear as the moon, and fair as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners."

105:32 At a future daymost probably the Millenniumthe kingdoms of this world will come to acknowledge the greatness of Zion, its people, and her laws and will seek to unite with the Saints of God. "The worthiness of the Lord's people, their sanctified state, their purity and uprightness before him these are the things that will enable them to build the New Jerusalem, for Zion is the City of Holiness," said Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "When it is built, as it was in Enoch's day, its grandeur and glory and power must be such that those in all nations, from one end of the earth to the other, standing in awe, will feel inclined to be subject to such a mighty city, whence comes such a perfect law" (New Witness, 618-19). At that time Isaiah's words will find yet another fulfillment, for "many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths" (Isaiah 2:3).

105:33-36 The day after he received this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: "A council of High Priests assembled in fulfillment of the revelation given the day previous, and the following individuals were called and chosen, as they were made manifest unto me by the voice of the Spirit and revelation, to receive their endowments" (History of the Church, 2:112). He then recorded that the following brethren "were called and chosen, to go to Kirtland and receive their endowment with power from on high" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:113): Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Isaac Morley, John Corrill, John Whitmer, David Whitmer, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, Peter Whitmer Jr., Simeon Carter, Newel Knight, Parley P. Pratt, Christian Whitmer, Solomon Hancock, Thomas B. Marsh, and Lyman Wight.

105:36 They shall be sanctified. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:23.

105:37 Originally, the Saints were promised that they could reenter Jackson County 11 September 1836 (see commentary on D&C 57:4; 105:23-26). Failure to prepare themselves for this blessing resulted in its being taken from them.

Today the Saints await the Lord's instructions concerning the redemption of the City of Zion. Until that time, our responsibility is to establish and build up stakes of Zion among every nation, kindred, tongue, and people so that the whole earth can receive the blessings of the Holy City.

Saints Are to Lift an Ensign of Peace to the World

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 105:38-41

105:38-39 The mission of the Church is to teach the inhabitants of the earth how to live in peace and harmony. The ensign that is held up for the world to see is the fulness of the gospel of Christ. It teaches that every man is to esteem his brother as himself (D&C 38:24-25).
