Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 106

DATE: 25 NOVEMBER 1834

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Following the disbanding of Zion's Camp at Fishing River, Missouri (D&C 105), the Prophet Joseph Smith and many of those who had marched with him returned to Ohio. The Saints then renewed their labors in building the temple in Kirtland. As membership in the Church grew, the Prophet gave attention to branches outside the Kirtland area. On 16 November 1834, he and several others left Kirtland to visit the Saints in Michigan. He recorded: "After preaching, and teaching the Saints in Michigan as long as our time would allow, we returned to Kirtland, greatly refreshed from our journey, and much pleased with our friends in that section of the Lord's vineyard.

"It now being the last of the month, and the Elders beginning to come in, it was necessary to make preparations for the school for the Elders, wherein they might be more perfectly instructed in the great things of God, during the coming winter. A building for a printing office was nearly finished, and the lower story of this building was set apart for that purpose, (the school) when it was completed. So the Lord opened the way according to our faith and works, and blessed be His name.

"No month ever found me more busily engaged than November; but as my life consisted of activity and unyielding exertions, I made this my rule: When the Lord commands, do it. . . . I continued my labors daily, preparing for the school, and received the following" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:169-70).

Warren A. Cowdery Is Called As a Local Presiding Officer

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 106:1-3

106:1 Warren A. Cowdery. Warren Cowdery was an older brother to Oliver. He learned of the Book of Mormon and the Restoration from his younger brother and had been baptized in 1831.

A presiding high priest. This designation referred to an appointment to direct the labors of the Church within a particular geographical area. Today, bishops are set apart as the presiding high priests in their respective wards. Similarly, a stake president is set apart as the "presiding high priest" in his stake.

The land of Freedom. Warren Cowdery was called to preside over the Saints in branches of the Church in the area of Freedom, Cattaraugus County, New York. In early March 1834, about eight months before receiving this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith served a mission that took him to this area of New York, where he established the Freedom branch. The Prophet recorded that on "Sunday, March 9.We preached in a school house, and had great attention. We found a few disciples who were firm in the faith; and, after meeting found many believing and could hardly get away from them, and appointed a meeting in Freedom for Monday the 10th, and stayed at Mr. Warren A. Cowdery's, where we were blessed with a full enjoyment of temporal and spiritual blessings, even all we needed, or were worthy to receive" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:42).

The Prophet's companion on this journey was Parley P. Pratt, who described this experience: "President Joseph Smith and myself journeyed together. We had a pleasant and prosperous mission among the churches, and some very interesting times in preaching to the public. We visited Freedom, Catteraugus County, N.Y.; tarried over Sunday, and preached several discourses, to which the people listened with great interest; we were kindly and hospitably entertained among them. We baptized a young man named Heman Hyde; his parents were Presbyterians, and his mother, on account of the strength of her traditions, thought that we were wrong, and told me afterwards that she would much rather have followed him to an earthly grave than to have seen him baptized.

"Soon afterwards, however, herself, her husband, and the rest of the family, with some thirty or forty others, were all baptized and organized into a branch of the Churchcalled the Freedom branchfrom which nucleus the light spread and souls were gathered into the fold in all the regions round. Thus mightily grew the word of God, or the seed sown by that extraordinary personage, the Prophet and Seer of the nineteenth century" (Autobiography, 89).

106:2-3 Warren A. Cowdery's calling was to preside over the branch in Freedom and to declare the gospel full time there and in the adjoining counties. His calling was similar to that of a mission president today. Having no time to provide for his family, he was directed by the Lord to receive his support from the Church.

The Second Coming Shall Not Overtake the Children of Light As a Thief

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 106:4-5

106:4 Those who are of the world will no more know when Christ is to return than they know when the thief will strike. Spiritually, they have retired to their beds for the "slumber of death" (Jacob 3:11). It is as though they are asleep and unaware of the events taking place around them. While their sleeping eyes are closed to the signs of the times, they dream of iniquity, unaware of their danger. By contrast, the Lord told the "children of light" (v. 5) that they will "know the signs of the times, and the signs of the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 68:11).

106:5 The children of light. To accept the gospel and live by its standard is to come out of darkness into the light (1 Peter 2:9), thus becoming children of light (John 12:36; Colossians 1:12) and followers of light and truth. The commandment given to the Saints of all ages is to "walk as children of light" (Ephesians 5:8).

That day shall not overtake you as a thief. Paul warned the Thessalonian Saints, "For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief" (1 Thessalonians 5:2-4). Those who have treasured up the Lord's word shall not be deceived (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:37) but will know of the nearness of the Lord's coming. The prophesied signs will indicate the generation in which the Son of Man will appear in glory.

The Saints ought to look forward to the Savior's return and be anxiously engaged in preparing the world for that great event. If the Saints will prepare for the Lord's return, sleep will flee from their eyes as they wait in eager anticipation for the coming of the Bridegroom. While the wicked slumber, the children of light will be alert and aware that with each passing year the time of the Lord's promised return draws closer.

Commenting on Paul's warning to the Thessalonians, the Prophet Joseph Smith explained: "It is not the design of the Almighty to come upon the earth and crush it and grind it to powder, but he will reveal it to His servants the prophets. Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, &c. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286-87).

Great Blessings Follow Faithful Service in the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 106:6-8

106:6 There was joy in heaven. As the heavens wept when Satan and his legions were lost, so they rejoice when children of our Eternal Father choose the course that will enable them to return to his presence. The text suggests that angels are aware of what their earthly counterparts are doing (D&C 62:3).

106:8 If he continue to be a faithful witness. Warren A. Cowdery moved his family to Kirtland in February 1836. There he was active in Church affairs until he became disaffected with the leadership of the Church in 1838. This same year his brother Oliver was excommunicated. When the Lord commanded the Saints to move to Far West, Missouri, Warren remained behind (D&C 115:17). He died in Kirtland on 23 February 1851 while still disaffected (Cook, Revelations, 215).
