Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107

DATES: 28 MARCH 1835, NOVEMBER 1831, 18 DECEMBER 1833

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 107 weaves together revelations received at different times. The primary date is 28 March 1835, when the first fifty-two verses and verses 56-58 were given in response to the request of the newly ordained apostles for instruction relative to their office and calling. Verses 53-55 were extracted from the blessing given to Joseph Smith Sr. when he was ordained Church patriarch by the Prophet on 18 December 1833 (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 38-40). Verses 59 to 100 (with the exception of verses 61, 70, 73, 76-77, 88, 90, 93-98) were given in November 1831 (Kirtland Record Book). The verses in the latter part of the revelation not received in 1831 were added by the Prophet when he prepared this section for inclusion in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

On 14 February 1835 the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles was organized for the first time in this dispensation. The Twelve were chosen, according to revelation, by the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon (D&C 18). The Prophet met periodically with the Twelve after their organization to instruct them. On 12 March 1835 the Prophet called the Twelve on their first mission to the eastern states and the Atlantic Coast, instructing them to hold meetings with various branches of the Church along the way. In preparation for their departure, the Twelve met again on the afternoon of 28 March. Orson Hyde and William E. McLellin, who recorded the minutes of that meeting, observed that "on reviewing our past course we are satisfied, and feel to confess also, that we have not realized the importance of our calling to that degree that we ought; we have been light- minded and vain, and in many things have done wrong. For all these things we have asked the forgiveness of our heavenly Father; and wherein we have grieved or wounded the feelings of the Presidency, we ask their forgiveness. The time when we are about to separate is near; and when we shall meet again, God only knows; we therefore feel to ask of him whom we have acknowledged to be our Prophet and Seer, that he inquire of God for us, and obtain a revelation, (if consistent) that we may look upon it when we are separated, that our hearts may be comforted. Our worthiness has not inspired us to make this request, but our unworthiness. We have unitedly asked God our heavenly Father to grant unto us through His Seer, a revelation of His mind and will concerning our duty the coming season, even a great revelation, that will enlarge our hearts, comfort us in adversity, and brighten our hopes amidst the powers of darkness" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:209). In response to that request, Joseph Smith inquired of the Lord and received the first fifty-eight verses, excluding verses 53-55.

There Are Two Priesthoods: Melchizedek and Aaronic

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:1-6

107:1 Two priesthoods. Joseph Smith stated, "There are two Priesthoods spoken of in the Scriptures, viz., the Melchizedek and the Aaronic or Levitical. Although there are two Priesthoods, yet the Melchizedek Priesthood comprehends the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood, and is the grand head, and holds the highest authority which pertains to the priesthood, and the keys of the Kingdom of God in all ages of the world" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 166). On another occasion the Prophet said, "All Priesthood is Melchizedek" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180), meaning that the Melchizedek Priesthood embraces the Aaronic or lesser priesthood and that those who hold it can function in all the offices and duties of the Aaronic Priesthood (vv. 5, 14).

107:2 Melchizedek. See commentary on Joseph Smith Translation Genesis 14:26-40, page 331.

107:4 The church, in ancient days. This phrase affirms that a church organization existed in Old Testament times. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:17.

107:5 Appendages to this priesthood. "The priesthood is greater than any of its offices. No office adds any power, dignity, or authority to the priesthood. All offices derive their rights, prerogatives, graces, and powers from the priesthood. This principle may be diagramed by dividing a circle into segments. The priesthood is the circle; the segments of the circle are the callings or offices in the priesthood. Anyone who serves in a segment of the circle must possess the power of the whole circle. No one can hold an office in the priesthood without first holding the priesthood" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 595-96).

107:6 Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood. As the higher priesthood was named after Melchizedek, so the lesser priesthood was named after Aaron, the brother Moses. Aaron was the high priest, meaning presiding priest, over the Aaronic order, in which capacity he served for nearly forty years. This priesthood is also called the Levitical Priesthood because Aaron was a descendant of Levi, the third son of Jacob and Leah, whose descendants were given the birthright to this priesthood. They properly performed its functions from the time of Moses and Aaron to the coming of Christ.

Some argue that the Aaronic and Levitical Priesthoods are different priesthoods. This revelation, however, does not support such a distinction.

Those Holding the Melchizedek Priesthood Have Power to Officiate in all the Offices of the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:7-12

107:8 The right of presidency. The right of presidencycommonly referred to as holding keysis the right to preside, direct, or govern. When someone becomes a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, for instance, all the keys of the kingdom are conferred upon him. Wherever he goes in the Church, a member of the Twelve is the presiding officer, unless a more senior member of the Twelve is also present. In a sense, the Twelve hold every office in the Church, for they preside over all offices and auxiliaries. They do not preside because they hold priesthood but because they have been given the keys or "right of presidency."

107:9 Presidency of the High Priesthood. The "Presidency of the High Priesthood," meaning the First Presidency of the Church, presides over all other offices and officers in the Church. Joseph Smith taught that "revelations of the mind and will of God to the Church, are to come through the Presidency" (History of the Church, 2:477). Of necessity the First Presidency holds all the keys of the kingdom (D&C 90:2). Keys are the "right of presidency," and priesthood is used properly only when it is used under the direction of those who hold its keys. For instance, holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood can confer that priesthood upon others. They can do so, however, only under the direction of those holding the keys of the priesthood. To act independent of the direction of those holding the keys is to lose the priesthood. An ordinance not performed under their direction counts for nothing in the Church and kingdom of God.

107:10 Under the direction of the First Presidency high priests can be called to positions of presidency and to administer spiritual things. This revelation notes that their office encompasses that of an elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood and the offices of priest, teacher, and deacon in the Aaronic Priesthood. It does not include the office of seventy, which belongs to the Melchizedek Priesthood, or the office of bishop, which belongs to the Aaronic Priesthood. The suggestion here is that seventies were to hold general authority status rather than be a part of the local organization. It was not necessary to include the office of bishop in this verse because a bishop, which is an office in the Aaronic Priesthood, must also be a high priest (D&C 68:19).

107:11 In the absence of those called to preside, high priests can act in their stead. In the absence of high priests, the responsibility falls to the elders.

A Bishopric Is to Preside over the Aaronic Priesthood

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:13-17

107:13 The Priesthood of Aaron. From the days of Aaron to the time of Christ, the only priesthood known generally among the house of Israel in the Old World was the Aaronic, or Levitical, Priesthood. The right to hold this priesthood was limited to those who were of the tribe of Levi. With the coming of the gospel in the meridian day came the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood. The Aaronic Priesthood was retained, with the right to hold it again extended to all the tribes of Israel. Following the same pattern, both priesthoods have been restored in our day. Notwithstanding the fact that both priesthoods can be held by all worthy males, regardless of the tribe of Israel from which they descend, the promises given to those of the tribe of Levi "throughout all their generations" are still remembered and will be honored as a part of the restoration of all things. See Doctrine and Covenants 68:13-21; 84:31; 107:69-71.

107:14 An appendage to the greater. In all things the Aaronic Priesthood acts under the direction of the Melchizedek Priesthood. Those holding the higher priesthood can function in all the offices and capacities of the lesser priesthood; it is unnecessary to have received the Aaronic Priesthood before receiving the higher priesthood.

Outward ordinances. See Doctrine and Covenants 107:20.

107:15 The bishopric is the presidency of this priesthood. This refers to the presiding bishop of the Church and his counselors. Ward bishoprics did not function as we now know them until after the Saints had moved west. This is a specialized usage of the word bishopric peculiar to Latter- day Saints. More generally the word simply refers to an office or calling (see Acts 1:20; D&C 114:2). According to this revelation, the presiding bishop and his counselors hold the keys restored by John the Baptist to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and thus give direction and leadership to all who hold the Aaronic Priesthood.

107:16-17 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 68:15-18.

The Keys of All Spiritual Blessings

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:18-20

107:18 The keys of all the spiritual blessings. Earlier in this section (vv. 8-10; 15), "keys" are equated with the "right of presidency," meaning the authority to preside. In the present text the emphasis shifts to unlocking things that would otherwise remain hidden. As used here "keys" become an individual possession by which sacred truths are revealed and divine promises obtained. "Without this priesthood power, men are lost," President Spencer W. Kimball explained. "Only through this power does man 'hold the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church,' enabling him to receive 'the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to have the heavens opened' unto him (see D&C 107:18-19), enabling him to enter the new and everlasting covenant of marriage and to have his wife and children bound to him in an everlasting tie, enabling him to become a patriarch to his posterity forever, and enabling him to receive a fullness of the blessings of the Lord" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 494).

107:19 The promises enumerated in this verse are not the exclusive providence of prophets but are intended for all faithful Saints. All are to obtain the key of understanding. To receive it, men must first receive the higher priesthood, and both men and women must embrace the fulness of the new and everlasting covenant. See Doctrine and Covenants 132:19-24.

To enjoy the . . . presence of God the Father, and Jesus. The Melchizedek Priesthood was restored in order that the children of God might once again be brought into his presence. It is not future worlds to which this promise is directed but to the mortal and corruptible state in which we now reside. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:19-25.

107:20 Keys of the ministering of angels. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:69, page 118.

To administer in outward ordinances. Baptism of water is described here as an "outward ordinance," or "the letter of the gospel." By contrast, the baptism of fire, meaning the Spirit or Holy Ghost, could be referred to as an "inward" or spiritual ordinance. The first can be performed by those holding the Aaronic Priesthood, the second only by those holding the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. A primary charge given to the Aaronic Priesthood is to tend to temporal things, while the primary charge given the higher priesthood is to tend to spiritual things.

Agreeable to the covenants and commandments. The articles and covenants of the Church are set forth in Doctrine and Covenants 20 and 22.

The Presiding Quorums of the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:21-38

107:21 Presiding officers. Where there is priesthood there of necessity must be discipline and order. Indeed, such is implicit in the very name of the priesthood as restored to us in this revelation: "the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" (v. 3). It is not the divine plan that every man walk in his own way after the image of a god of his own making (see D&C 1:16). To reach its destination, every ship requires both a captain and crew that know their duty and stand in the office to which they have been appointed. Of necessity there must be presiding officers, and over these officers is one greater to whom they too must report.

107:22 Three Presiding High priests. This refers to the members of the First Presidency of the Church, who constitute its leading quorum.

Chosen by the body. Though somewhat ambiguous as used in this verse, "the body" is the newly formed Quorum of the Twelve to which this reve lation was given. Precedence accords that at the death of the president of the Church, his counselors are released and the quorum of the First Presidency is dissolved. "The body" responsible to form the new presi dency of the Church is the Quorum of the Twelve.

When the First Presidency is dissolved by the death of its president, the Quorum of the Twelve then becomes the leading quorum in the Church. Its president, the senior apostle of God on earth, presides over the Church by virtue of the fact that he presides over its leading quorum. No other man on earth has the right to lead. Indeed, the Quorum of the Twelve cannot even meet unless the senior apostle calls a meeting. When such a meeting is called, he presides over it. If revelation is to come, it must, according to the order of the Church, come through him. At the death of the President of the Church, the president of the Quorum of the Twelve automatically succeeds him. He is the mouthpiece of the Lord to the Church; no one else has a rightful claim to that privilege. From Brigham Young to the present day, this has always been the case.

Can the Lord change that order if he wants to? Of course; it's his Church and he runs it. But should he choose to change the order he has established, he must, according to his word, do it through the channels he has ordained. The only man on earth who can receive a revelation that the president of the quorum of the Twelve should not lead the Church is the president of that quorum. No other individual or quorum can receive that revelation until it has come through the channel the Lord has ordained. If a man is worthy and capable of presiding over the Quorum of the Twelve, he is certainly worthy and capable of presiding over the Church. What if the senior apostle is serving as a counselor in the First Presidency at the death of the president of the Church rather than as president of the Quorum of the Twelve? A senior apostle serving in the First Presidency is sustained as a member of the First Presidency and as president of the Quorum of the Twelve. The next senior apostle is sustained as "acting president" over that quorum. When the First Presidency is dissolved by the death of its president, the counselor who is the senior apostle assumes his rightful position as the president of the Twelve.

The system of succession in the presidency of the Church is but one of many illustrations of the Lord's genius. No room exits for contention, aspirations of the unworthy, or uncertainty. Nor is the Church left without inspired leadership for so much as a moment, for with his last breath one prophet bequeaths the office to another according to a system instituted by the God of heaven himself.

Upheld by the confidence, faith, and prayer of the church. No man can preside in the Church without the sustaining faith and goodwill of those over whom he presides. As the membership of the Church is edified and blessed by those who have been called as its leaders, so those in positions of leadership are edified and blessed by those who serve under their direction. As the husband is a strength to the wife and the wife to the husband, so both leader and follower strengthen each other through prayer and faithful service.

107:23 Witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world. While many have gone forth to testify of Christ, the charge given to the apostles is to testify of "the name of Christ." What, then, is the meaning of such a phrase and how does testifying of "the name of Christ" differ from the testimony of Christ? Much is embraced in the idea of the "name" of Christ. For instance, the Lord told Abraham, "I will lead thee by my hand, and I will take thee, to put upon thee my name, even the Priesthood of thy father, and my power shall be over thee" (Abraham 1:18). To testify of the name of Christ is to testify of his priesthood, his power, his holy order, and the system of government and laws and ordinances he has instituted. Little by way of obligation and commitment is associated with professing to believe in Christ and to testify that salvation is found in him. Testifying of his name embraces discipline, order, and the sacrifice of all things. The difference between the two testimonies is the difference between a pebble and a mountain. One suggests salvation on an individual basis, the other that salvation grows out of faithful participation in the covenant community. One represents a restoration of the principles and faith known to the Saints of ages past, the other a religion in which man dictates the terms of salvation. One calls upon us to consecrate all we have to the service of God, the other views such works as a denial of God's grace.

It becomes the role of the Twelve to travel throughout the world, placing in order the various branches of the Church, giving direction to the priesthood, teaching the principles of salvation, and showing how all that is associated with the same combines to testify of Christ (see verses 33, 35).

107:24 Elder Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl explained that "there can never be two or three quorums of equal authority at the same time; therefore in the revelation where it reads that the Twelve Apostles form a quorum equal in authority with the First Presidency, and that the Seventies form a quorum equal in authority with the Twelve, it should be understood that this condition of equality could prevail only when the ranking quorum is no longer in existence, through death or otherwise. When the First Presidency becomes disorganized on the death of the President, then the Apostles become the presiding quorum, or council, of the Church with all the power to organize again the First Presidency, when they fall back again as the second ranking quorum of the Church. So with the Seventies, they would become equal only on the condition that the first two quorums ceased to exist. In regard to the Seventies, this provision, of course, concerns the first quorum of the Seventies" (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 700). If through some catastrophe the two leading quorums of the Church were dissolved, the First Quorum of the Seventy would become the leading quorum in the Church. It would be that quorum's responsibility to reorganize the Quorum of the Twelve, which in turn would reorganize the First Presidency.

107:25 The office of a seventy is to teach the gospel in all the world. The Seventy are of necessity general officers of the Church. Though it took some time for the Church to grow up into the provisions of this revelation, it now follows this pattern.

On this matter John Taylor received a significant revelation while he presided over the Church. On Saturday, 14 April 1883, in answer to the question: "Show unto us Thy will, O Lord, concerning the organization of the Seventies," he received the following: "Thus saith the Lord unto the First Presidency, unto the Twelve, unto the Seventies and unto all my holy Priesthood, let not your hearts be troubled, neither be ye concerned about the management and organization of my Church and Priesthood and the accomplishment of my work. Fear me and observe my laws and I will reveal unto you, from time to time, through the channels that I have appointed, everything that shall be necessary for the future development and perfection of my Church, for the adjustment and rolling forth of my kingdom, and for the building up and the establishment of my Zion. For ye are my Priesthood and I am your God. Even so Amen" (Clark, Messages, 2:354).

107:26 Equal in authority. See commentary on verse 24.

107:27 The unanimous voice. The Church is not a democracy, nor is there any notion that the majority rules. Where scripture declares that there is but one God, the design is not to teach a mathematical principle but rather to emphasize the necessity of unity in the plan of salvation. We are saved to the extent that we have learned to think as God thinks, feel as he feels, and act as he would act. It is expected that this principle will find expression in the decisions of church councils. There is a spirit, power, and strength in unity that cannot otherwise be enjoyed. There is no place for politics where the souls of men and principles of salvation are concerned. Vigorous discussion will have its place in the councils of the Church, but contention and quarreling will not. A unity of purpose should bring with it decisions that are unanimous.

107:29 Three presidents . . . anciently. An identifying characteristic of the true Church is that no officer or leader presides alone. Such has been the order from ancient times. The concept of a presidency of three not only complies with the law of witnesses but also constitutes an earthly type and shadow of the heavenly presidency, which consists of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

107:30-31 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 4:6.

107:32 A decision by any of the three leading quorums of the Church made in unrighteousness may be reviewed before a general assembly of the several quorums, which constitute the spiritual authorities of the Church. Explaining such an action, President Joseph F. Smith said, "There can be no appeal from the decision of the First Presidency of the Church, except their decision be rendered in unrighteousness, and without love, and charity, etc., and in that case the appeal would have to be taken to the assembled bodies of the Priesthood. It means that when the Twelve Apostles are acting as Presidents of the Church, and they render a decision affecting the welfare of the Church, or on doctrine, there is absolutely no appeal from their decision, excepting it is rendered in unrighteousness. And the same would apply, of necessity, to a decision rendered by the Seventy in the absence of the First Presidency and Twelveif such a thing could be thought of at all" (Collected Discourses, 5:287).

107:33-35 Though the Twelve are commissioned to travel throughout the world to build up the Church and regulate its affairs, they do so only under the direction of the First Presidency. The Seventy, in like manner, act under the direction of the Twelve. In declaring the gospel to the world, the charge given to those of both quorums is that they go first to the Gentiles and then to the Jews. This is a reversal of the charge given by Christ to the Twelve and Seventy in the meridian of time. In that day the gospel was taken first to the Jews and then to the Gentiles (see Acts 13:46-48; Romans 11:7-26).

107:36 The instruction in this verse can only be understood in the context in which it was given. At that time only two high councils existed in the Church, one which had been organized in Kirtland, Ohio, on 17 February 1834, and the other in Missouri on 3 July of the same year. With the exception of a few scattered branches, these two stakes covered and governed the whole Church. The First Presidency of the Church also served as the presidency of the stake in Kirtland. If both councils came to the same determination on a matter, that decision would for all practical purposes govern the Church. This circumstance was, of course, temporary and could not be expected to apply in a Church destined to include thousands upon thousands of stakes. Describing this situation, John Taylor observed:

"In Kirtland, Ohio, a great many things were revealed through the Prophet. There was then a First Presidency that presided over the High Council, in Kirtland; and that High Council and another which was in Missouri, were the only High Councils in existence. As I have said, the High Council in Kirtland was presided over by Joseph Smith and his Counselors; and hence there were some things associated with this that were quite peculiar in themselves. It is stated that when they were at a loss to find out anything pertaining to any principles that might come before them in their councils, that the presidency were to inquire of the Lord and get revelation on those subjects that were difficult for them to comprehend. And I would make a remark here in relation to these things, that all High Councils, and all Presidents of Stakes and Bishops, and in fact all men holding the Priesthood, who are humble and faithful and diligent and honest and true to the principles of our religion, if they seek unto God with that faith that he requires of us, he will give them wisdom under all circumstances and on all occasions, and the Holy Spirit will never fail to indicate the path they should pursue" (Journal of Discourses, 19:241).

107:37 Today the same pattern of organization is used in every stake in the Church. The authority of one high council is equal to that of all other high councils. That authority enables each high council to make decisions suited to its differing circumstances.

107:38 The traveling high council. This passage refers to the Quorum of the Twelve, which is to call upon the Seventy to aid them as circumstances warrant (see v. 34).

Patriarchal Order Traced from Adam to Noah

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:39-52

107:39 All large branches of the church. The Church today uses many terms with a precision of meaning unknown in its early history. This is particularly true of terms used to describe the division of the Saints into various congregations or ecclesiastical units: wards, stakes, branches, and districts. As used at the time of this revelation the term branches would best equate with that of stakes today.

Evangelical ministers. "An Evangelist is a Patriarch," stated the Prophet, "even the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham. Wherever the Church of Christ is established in the earth, there should be a Patriarch for the benefit of the posterity of the Saints, as it was with Jacob in giving his patriarchal blessing unto his sons, etc. (June 27, 1839)" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151).

107:40 The order of this priesthood. This verse refers to the patriarchal order of the priesthood (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 322-23). The authority of the patriarchal order is found within the Melchizedek Priesthood. Were this not the case, the Twelve who have not received any priesthood but the Melchizedek Priesthood could not confer the office of patriarch upon others as they were directed to do in the previous verse. Because of the expanded duties of the Twelve in our day, the authority to ordain patriarchs has been given to stake presidents. The matter of approving or choosing patriarchs, however, remains with the Twelve.

Defining the nature of the office of patriarch, John Taylor asked, "Does not the patriarch stand in the same relationship to the church as Adam did to his family, and as Abraham and Jacob did to theirs?" His response was an emphatic No! "Adam," he explained, "was the natural father of his posterity, who were his family and over whom he presided as patriarch, prophet, priest, and king. Both Abraham and Jacob stood in the same relationship to their families." This, of course, was not the case with Joseph Smith Sr., the first church patriarch in this dispensation or any of his successors in that office. "They were not the natural fathers of the church, and could not stand in the same capacity as Adam, Abraham, or Jacob; but inasmuch as there had been none to bless for generations past, according to the ancient order, they were ordained and set apart for the purpose of conferring patriarchal blessings, to hold the keys of this priesthood, and unlock the door, that had long been closed upon the human family: that blessings might again be conferred according to the ancient order, and those who were orphans, or had no father to bless them, might receive it through a patriarch who should act as proxy for their father, and that fathers might again be enabled to act as patriarchs to their families, and bless their children. For like all other ordinances in the church, this had been neglected and must needs be restored" (Taylor, Gospel Kingdom, 148).

A year after this revelation was received, the keys held by Abraham and Elijah were restored (see commentary on D&C 110:12-16). With them came the right to perform eternal marriages and bind families together throughout the eternities. Thus the most important part of the patriarchal order, meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, was restored (see commentary on D&C 131:1-4). In and through this order, a man becomes a natural patriarch to his own family, thus imitating the ancient order of things. President John Taylor taught: "Every father, after he has received his patriarchal blessing, is a patriarch to his own family, and has the right to confer patriarchal blessings upon his family; which blessings will be just as legal as those conferred by any patriarch of the church: in fact it is his right; and a patriarch in blessing his children, can only bless as his mouthpiece" (Gospel Kingdom, 146). Elder Bruce R. McConkie added this insight: "He means every father who is married in the celestial order and has thereby received the blessings of Abraham so as to be a natural patriarch" ("Eternal Family Concept," 89).

Confirmed to be handed down from father to son. "From Adam to Noah the presiding representative of the Lord on earth held the joint office of patriarch and high priest a calling conferred successively from father to son. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other patriarchs held similar rights in their respective days. Abraham was promised that from his day on all who received the gospel would be accounted his seed and that his descendants after him would have right, by lineage, to the same priesthood he had gained (Abraham 2:6-11). Certain righteous persons were thus destined to receive the priesthood because they were 'lawful heirs according to the flesh' (D&C 86:8-10). It was their birthright.

"Special birthright blessings and priesthood pre-eminence have remained in the lineage of Jacob. Reuben, his firstborn, lost the birthright because of iniquity, and it passed to Joseph (1 Chron. 5:1-2) and through him to Ephraim. 'I am a father to Israel,' the Lord said, 'and Ephraim is my firstborn' (Jer. 31:9). This preferential status enjoyed by Ephraim among his fellow tribes in Israel has continued to our day. Predominantly Ephraim, among all the tribes of Israel, has so far been gathered into the fold of the true Shepherd. When the lost tribes return, they shall come to the children of Ephraim to receive their crowns of glory (D&C 133:26-34).

"From Aaron to the coming of John the Baptist, the high priests in Israel served in their presiding offices (of the Aaronic order) because they were descendants of Aaron. The office of Presiding Bishop in the Church today is of comparable hereditary nature, although the Lord has not so far designated the lineage in which the right to such office rests (D&C 68:14-24). The right to hold the Levitical Priesthood anciently was limited to the sons of Levi, who thus gained their priesthood prerogatives by birth. In the meridian of time our Lord altered this system and spread this Aaronic order of authority among worthy male members of the Church generally (1 Tim. 3:1-13)" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 87-88).

Rightly. The right referred to here is obtained by birth. It belongs to all who are born under the covenant.

Literal descendants of the chosen seed. See Abraham 2:9-11 and commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110:12-16.

The promises were made. The promise is that of the continuation of the family unit throughout time and eternity. In all gospel dispensations this promise stands at the heart of the plan of salvation.

The Ancient Saints Assembled at Adam-ondi- Ahman, Where the Lord Appeared to Them

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:53-57

107:53-55 These verses were taken from the blessing given by Joseph Smith to his father, Joseph Smith Sr., when he was ordained the first patriarch in this dispensation on 18 December 1833. The blessing is as follows: "Blessed of the Lord is my father, for he shall stand in the midst of his posterity and shall be comforted by their blessings when he is old and bowed down with years, and shall be called a prince over them, and shall be numbered among those who hold the right of Patriarchal Priesthood, even the keys of that ministry: for he shall assemble together his posterity like unto Adam; and the assembly which he called shall be an example for my father, for thus it is written of him: Three years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch and Methuselah, who were High Priests, with the residue of his posterity, who were righteous, into the valley of Adam-ondi- Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing. And the Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called him Michael, the Prince, the Archangel. And the Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him, I have set thee to be at the head: a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou art a Prince over them forever.

"So shall it be with my father: he shall be called a prince over his posterity, holding the keys of the patriarchal Priesthood over the kingdom of God on earth, even the Church of the Latter- day Saints, and he shall sit in the general assembly of Patriarchs, even in council with the Ancient of Days when he shall sit and all the Patriarchs with him and shall enjoy his right and authority under the direction of the Ancient of Days. . . .

"And again, blessed is my father, for the hand of the Lord shall be over him, and he shall be full of the Holy Ghost; for he shall predict whatsoever shall befall his posterity unto the latest generation, and shall see the affliction of his children pass away, and their enemies under their feet: and when his head is fully ripe he shall behold himself as an olive tree whose branches are bowed down with much fruit. Behold, the blessings of Joseph by the hand of his progenitor, shall come upon the head of my father and his seed after him, to the uttermost, even he shall be a fruitful bough; he shall be as a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well whose branches run over the wall, and his seed shall abide in strength, and the arms of their hands shall be made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, and the God of his fathers: even the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, shall help him and his seed after him: even the Almighty shall bless him with blessings of heaven above and his seed after him, and the blessings of the deep that lieth under: and his seed shall rise up and call him blessed. He shall be as the vine of the choice grape when her clusters are fully ripe: and he shall also possess a mansion on high, even in the Celestial Kingdom. His counsel shall be sought for by thousands, and he shall have place in the house of the Lord; for he shall be mighty in the council of the elders, and his days shall yet be lengthened out: and when he shall go hence he shall go in peace, and his rest shall be glorious; and his name shall be had in remembrance to the end. Amen" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 38-40).

107:53 Each of the seven patriarchs named in this verse received the priesthood at the hands of Adam. Of Mahalaleel, Jared, and Enoch we are told that Adam at a subsequent time also blessed them. Thereafter, we are told that Enoch "saw the Lord." In this verse we learn that they were all high priests. Joseph Smith told us that Adam blessed his posterity because "he wanted to bring them into the presence of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 159). Here we are told that Adam gave them and "the residue of his posterity who were righteous" his "last blessing." After he did so the Lord appeared to them (D&C 107:54). All that we are told here conforms to the pattern given earlier in this revelation (vv. 18-19) and in Doctrine and Covenants 84:19. Perhaps Adam-ondi- Ahman, like a general conference of the Church, consisted of different meetings; everyone may not have participated in all of them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:5-14.

Adam-ondi-Ahman. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 116.

107:54 Michael, the prince, the archangel. The great patriarch Adam was known to us in our premortal estate as Michael, who led the armies of the Lord against Lucifer when he and a third of the host of heaven rebelled against the Father and the Son. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:16.

107:57 The book of Enoch. We understand this text to be a promise that in a future day we will receive scriptural records written by Enoch. A number of ancient manuscripts attributed to Enoch are extant today. These manuscripts are generally classified as pseudepigraphic (meaning falsely named) at least in part because the scholarly world does not believe that a written language existed at the time of Enoch. Nonetheless, the Book of Moses assures us that Adam and his children had a "language that was pure and undefiled" and that this same language was known to Enoch (Moses 6:6, 46-47). Commenting on the extant Enoch manuscripts, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: "In the pseudepigraphic writings of Enoch we find visions, prophecies, exhortations, and doctrinal expositions relative to the Second Coming and the Millennium; the names and functions of the seven angels (including Raphael, Michael, and Gabriel); the separation of the spirits of righteous and wicked men as they await the day of judgment; the coming judgment of the wicked; the attainment of salvation by the righteous and elect; the bringing of the Son of Man before 'the head of days' (meaning, obviously, the Ancient of Days); the resurrection of the dead and the separation by the Judge of the righteous and the wicked; the translation of Enoch; preexistence and the creation of the souls of all men before the foundation of the world; the war in heaven and the casting out of Satan; the dividing of the eight-thousand- year history of the earth into the first six thousand years, to be followed by one thousand years of rest, after which would come another one thousand years, and then the end; a list of beatitudes, not far removed in wisdom from those of Jesus himself; personal responsibility for sin; the salvation of animals; the state of eternal life for those who keep the commandments; and much, much more.

"It will be observed that the matters here recited, though taught in part and by inference in the canonical scriptures of that and our day, are in fact known only in plainness and purity by latter- day revelation. It is far more than coincidence that doctrines attributed to Enoch in the pseudepigraphic writings are the very ones the Lord saw fit to restore in plainness in our dispensation. Unfortunately, the whole of these ancient writings cannot be accepted as the mind and will and voice of Him from whom revelation comes. As with the study of the apocryphal books, so it is with the study of the pseudepigraphic writings: the seeker after revealed wisdom must be guided by the power of the Holy Spirit" (Mortal Messiah, 1:274-75).

We fully expect all of Enoch's writings to be restored to us in the purity in which he originally recorded them.

The Twelve Are to Set the Officers of the Church in Order

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:58-67

107:58 At this point in this section a revelation given in November 1831 in Cuyahoga County, Ohio, on priesthood is added to that which had been received on 28 March 1835. Some additions to this revelation were made before it appeared in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. (Verses 61, 70, 73, 76-77, 88, 90, 93, 98 were added to the original revelation.)

107:61 Priests to preside over . . . priests. This verse was added to the 1831 revelation by the Prophet in 1835. As the Church is organized today, priests are presided over by their bishop, who holds the presidency of the Aaronic Priesthood in the ward. When these verses were recorded, wards did not yet exist and priests were men of full maturity.

107:63 According to the covenants and commandments of the church. In the 1831 revelation this read, "According to the Church Articles and Covenants," which referred to what is known today as Doctrine and Covenants 20.

107:64 Then comes the High Priesthood. The phrase "High Priesthood" as used here refers to the office of high priest. The previous verse speaks of an elder (an office in the higher priesthood); this verse follows, noting that after the elder comes "the High Priesthood." See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:29.

107:65-66 The president of the Church is the presiding high priest in the Church. He holds all the keys of the kingdom, and all priesthood quorums function under his direction.

The Office of Bishop Defined

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:68-76

107:68-76 From the time of Aaron to John the Baptist, the high priest in Israel (according to the Aaronic order) presided over the priesthood and the temple. It is not surprising, therefore, that with the restoration of that office in this dispensation there would be some confusion as to just what authority was appended to this position. We are told that this officeknown to us today as the presiding bishopis not equal to that of the president of the high priesthood but rather is to preside over temporal things. To hold the keys of this office one must be either a high priest or a literal descendant of Aaron. This office of bishop also carries with it the responsibility to be a judge in Israel. "Other bishops" are also spoken of who are to function in their designated area of authority after the pattern of the presiding bishop. Following the pattern announced in this revelation, a ward bishop functions as the president of the Aaronic Priesthood, as the presiding high priest in his ward, as a judge in Israel, and as having charge over temporal affairs. Further, we are told that the bishop is to be guided in his duties "by the Spirit of truth" (v. 71). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 68:15-16.

107:70 Literal descendant of Aaron. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 68:15-16.

The First Presidency Constitute the Highest Court in the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:77-84

107:77-84 As long as there is such a thing as right and wrong, as long as God continues to be a God of laws, and as long as the membership of the Church embraces mortal beings, there will be a necessity for church disciplinary councils. As every member of the Church is to work out his or her salvation with fear and trembling (Philippians 2:12), so all are subject to the order and discipline of the Church. No one is above the law. It is not to historical Christianity that one turns to find such prin ciples, for historical Christianity is seriously marred by supposed spiritual leaders who held themselves above the lawbe it man's or God's lawsand whose actions have been in many cases "enough to make hell itself shudder, and to stand aghast and pale, and the hands of the very devil to tremble and palsy" (D&C 123:10). It is but another evidence of the purity of purpose of the Prophet Joseph Smith that in establishing a system of government for the church of which he was the presiding officer that he would make himself subject to every law and ordinance of the gospel by which others were also to abide.

The supreme tribunal in the Church is here denominated as the Common Council of the Church. It consists of the First Presidency and twelve high priests chosen by them to assist as counselors. This council has the final word on all matters of controversy that involve the Church or a member's standing in it. As noted, no one stands above this council. Should the president of the Church transgress, his actions are to be judged by this body. This revelation specifies that in such an instance the council would be presided over by the presiding bishop and, we can only suppose, the Quorum of the Twelve. Their decision is the end of the controversy concerning him.

We note in passing that charges were preferred against Joseph Smith by Sylvester Smith, a member of the first high council in Kirtland. George A. Smith gave this recollection of what happened: "I remember well in Zion's Camp, Levi W. Hancock made a fife, from a joint of sweet elder, Sylvester Smith marched his company to the music of that fife. That fife may be considered almost the introduction of martial music among the 'Mormons.' A dog came out and barked, when Sylvester Smith was going to kill the dog. Joseph said he was a good watch dog, Sylvester became wrathy and threatened; finally Joseph reproved him sharply, showing him that such a spirit would not conquer or control the human family, that he must get rid of it, and predicted that if he did not get rid of it, the day would come when a dog would gnaw his flesh, and he not have the power to resist it. Some months after the return to Kirtland, Sylvester Smith preferred a charge against Joseph the Prophet, for having prophesied lies in the name of the Lord, and undertook to substantiate that charge on the ground that the Prophet had said a dog should bite him, if he did not get rid of that spirit, when he had not power to resist. They were three days and parts of nights, with the High Council in Kirtland, in investigating this charge; one person spoke three hours in behalf of the Prophet. Sylvester published a confession which can be seen in the Church History, acknowledging his fault" (Journal of Discourses, 11:7).

Presidents Govern Their Quorums

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 107:85-100

107:85-88 The four offices in the Aaronic Priesthood, as that priesthood is to function in this dispensation, are here specified as deacon, teacher, priest, and bishop. The number of priesthood holders in each quorum is also given: twelve deacons to a quorum; twenty-four teachers; and forty-eight priests, all of whom labor under the presidency of the bishopric with the bishop also presiding as the president of the priests quorum. Each quorum president is responsible for teaching quorum members their respective duties as "given according to the covenants," meaning Doctrine and Covenants 20. The only officers on the ward level who hold keys are the deacons quorum president, the teachers quorum president, the bishop and the elders quorum president.

107:91 Like unto Moses. Moses, who is a classic type for Christ, is here held up as the pattern to be followed by the man who stands at the head of the Church.

107:92 Having all the gifts. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 46:29.

107:93 According to the vision showing the order of the Seventy. "Now, if he [Joseph Smith] saw the Seventies in vision," reasoned Orson F. Whitney, "why not the Apostles? Why not the First Presidency? Why not the stakes and wards, with their presiding officers, and even the auxiliary organizations? Who can say that he did not see them? Who can say that these quorums of the Priesthood, these auxiliary societies and associations, the Church of God in its entirety as it exists upon the earth, is not a reflex of the Church of God in heaven, so far as it is adapted to our present conditions, so far as it has been found necessary to organize it here; the eventual outcome to be a perfect Church, corresponding in every particular to the Church of the First Born; and this that the will of God may be done upon earth even as it is done in heaven?" (Conference Report, April 1912, 51).

107:93-98 Some time and effort were necessary to allow the Church to grow up into the revelation as it describes the duties of a seventy. In accord with the direction of scripture, those who serve as seventies today are General Authorities who labor under the direction of the Twelve throughout the world (v. 38).

107:99-100 This great revelation on the priesthood concludes with a charge given to every priesthood holder to learn his duty and act with diligence in the office to which he has been called. The call is to magnify offices, not priesthood (Romans 11:13; Jacob 1:19, 2:2; D&C 24:3, 9; 66:11; 88:80). "We speak loosely of magnifying our priesthood," observed Joseph Fielding Smith, "but what the revelations speak of is magnifying our callings in the priesthood, as elders, seventies, high priests, patriarchs, and apostles"(Conference Report, October 1970, 91).

Every man must work out his salvation in the office to which he has been called. Elders must do the work of elders and high priests the work of high priests if they seek to be saved. To envy the office of another while neglecting the one to which we have been called is to sow the seeds of sorrow. John Taylor said it was a simple thing to respond to the question, "Who was the greater, the seventy or the high priest? It is the man who magnifies his office" (Gospel Kingdom, 152). As to the responsibility in the office and calling that is ours, President Joseph Fielding Smith gave this reminder: "The Council of the Twelve did not place them upon you; the Presidency of the Church did not place them upon you it is true that they, or their representatives, called you and ordained you to this ministrybut the responsibility to perform this labor came to you from the Son of God! You are his servants. You will be held accountable to him for your stewardship, and unless you magnify your callings and prove yourselves worthy and faithful in all things, you will not stand blameless before him at the last day" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:118).
