Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

LECTURES ON FAITH

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

DATE PUBLISHED: 17 AUGUST 1835

The preface to the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (1835) begins with this explanation: "The first part of the book will be found to contain a series of Lectures as delivered before a Theological class in this place [Kirtland, Ohio], and in consequence of their embracing the important doctrine of salvation, we have arranged them into the following work.

"The second part contains items or principles for the regulation of the church, as taken from the revelations which have been given since its organization, as well as from former ones" (iii).

The book entitled Doctrine and Covenants then consisted of two parts: the first dealing with its doctrines, which are set forth in a series of seven lectures known to us today as the Lectures on Faith; and second, the covenants, which are represented by a selection of revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. The name came from the idea that the doctrines of the Church were found in the Lectures on Faith and the covenants in the revelations given to the Prophet.

The preface to the book concluded by stating: "We do not present this little volume with any other expectation than that we are to be called to answer to every principle advanced, in that day when the secrets of all hearts will be revealed, and the reward of every man's labor be given him" (iv). It then bore the names of the First Presidency: Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and F. G. Williams.

By revelation the Lord directed that a "School of the Prophets" be established to prepare the elders of Israel to more fully magnify their callings in declaring the message of salvation among all the peoples of the earth (D&C 88:74-80, 127; 90:7). This school was organized in Kirtland, Ohio, in February 1833 and continued until April of that year. Of this period the Prophet said, "Great joy and satisfaction continually beamed in the countenances of the School of the Prophets, and the Saints, on account of the things revealed, and our progress in the knowledge of God" (History of the Church, 1:334).

The expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, Missouri, in the fall of 1833 appeared to prevent the continuation of the school in Kirtland during the winter of 1833 and 1834. In November 1834, however, preparations were made for the reopening of the school. The Prophet wrote: "It now being the last of the month, and the Elders beginning to come in, it was necessary to make preparations for the school for the Elders, wherein they might be more perfectly instructed in the great things of God, during the coming winter" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:169).

On 1 December 1834, the Prophet further said: "Our school for the Elders was now well attended, and with the lectures on theology, which were regularly delivered, absorbed for the time being everything else of a temporal nature. The classes, being mostly Elders gave the most studious attention to the all-important object of qualifying themselves as messengers of Jesus Christ, to be ready to do His will in carrying glad tidings to all that would open their eyes, ears and hearts" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:175-76).

It was during the winter of 1834 to 1835 that the Lectures on Faith were delivered. "During the month of January," the Prophet recorded, "I was engaged in the school of the Elders, and in preparing the lectures on theology for publication in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, which the committee appointed last September were now compiling" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:180).

The breadth of these lectures is as follows: lecture one explains what faith is; lecture two describes how mankind comes to know about God; lectures three and four identify the attributes of Deity and affirm that they are unchanging; lecture five deals with the nature of God the Father, his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost; lecture six proclaims that the willingness to sacrifice all things is necessary to gaining faith unto salvation; and lecture seven identifies both the fruits of faith that must always be present among the Lord's people and the path by which they obtain the fulness of the Father.

Various editions of the Doctrine and Covenants have appeared through the years with appropriate additions and deletions being made. For instance, in the 1876 edition twenty-six sections were added and Oliver Cowdery's article on marriage was dropped. The Lectures on Faith were not included in the 1921 edition and have not been included in the Doctrine and Covenants since that time. By way of explanation it was noted that the lectures, while profitable for doctrine, are not scripture. The introduction to that edition reads thus: "Certain lessons, entitled 'Lectures on Faith,' which were bound in with the Doctrine and Covenants in some of its former issues [all of them], are not included in this edition. Those lessons were prepared for use in the School of the Elders, conducted in Kirtland, Ohio, during the winter of 1834-1835; but they were never presented to nor accepted by the Church as being otherwise than theological lectures or lessons" (1921 edition, v).

Doctrinal works, like doctrinal teachers, never enjoy a shortage of critics. Certainly this has been the case with the Lectures on Faith over the years. Perhaps because the lectures did not enjoy the immunity accorded to scripture much of which is more difficult to understand or defend than anything in these seven lecturesit was felt best to drop them from inclusion in a book accepted as canon. Given, however, that the purpose of this work is to acquaint the reader with the natural development of Latter- day Saint theology, it would be a serious oversight not to include the lectures here. Indeed, they are a most instructive document, and, in the judgment of the writers, those few matters viewed by some as stumbling stones become, when polished by a thoughtful second or third look, rather bright and precious gems of truth.

A matter of some moment among particular critics of the lectures is that of authorship. Critics seem to feel that a word, a phrase, a thought, an idea that did not fall directly from the pen or lips of the Prophet cannot be approved by him, nor is it to be trusted by us. This idea is a little strained. It is similar to arguing that only the prophet should address the Saints at conference. From the beginning of the Restoration, Joseph Smith was quick to establish the idea that neither man nor woman was to serve without counselors and that the order of heaven was that the Church be governed by councils. That Joseph Smith was not the sole author of the Lectures on Faith but that they were written by a committee over which he presided seems quite compatible with that order. Let it suffice to say that the doctrinal ideas found in the lectures trace back to Joseph Smith; others helped in their expression; the final approval of all that was written rested with him.

It has also been argued that the ideas in these lectures are Protestant in tone and that, at least in some instances, they represent a concept of God which Joseph Smith would in the coming years throw off. In fact, each of the lectures centers on one or more basic ideas that are directly offensive to traditional or historical Christian theology. And one of the important roles played by the lectures in the early years of the Church's history was to distance Latter-day Saint theology from doctrines rooted in either Protestantism or Catholicism.

The first lecture concerns the nature of faith and the assurance we have of the reliability of what the Prophet called the "science of theology." The essence of the principle here involved is that faith and works are inseparably connected and that when we receive any blessing from heaven it is obtained by obedience to the law upon which it is predicated. Salvation cannot be obtained by grace alone any more that it can be obtained by compliance to any other gospel principle alone. No principle standing alone has any saving power in it.

The second lecture centers on the reality of a corporeal being who walked and talked with Adam and Eve in Eden and of whom they testified to their children and their children's children down through the generations. This is not the incorporeal essence of sectarian creeds. This lecture also taught that Adam had the gospel of Jesus Christ, which he received at the hands of angels, by revelation, and by the voice of the Father. Again, such doctrine hardly accords to traditional Christian beliefs.

The third lecture deals with the character of Deity. In sharp contrast with the idea espoused by historical Christianity that God is an incomprehensible mystery, this lecture declares that our faith in God cannot exceed our knowledge of him. To exercise faith in God we must first have "a correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes," the Prophet declared (Lecture 3:4). First, it is stated that man must know that God was God before the world was created and that he is the same God now. Second, it must be understood that he is merciful and gracious and that he has been from everlasting and will be to everlasting. Third, it must be understood that he does not change. All attributes and characteristics of God are absolute and eternal. Fourth, it must be known that he is a God of truth, that he cannot lie. Fifth, God is no respecter of persons, meaning that all his children in all ages will be taught the same gospel and granted the same privilege to enjoy its blessings. And sixth, God is love.

Similarly, the fourth lecture centers on the attributes of Deity, stating that without a knowledge of God's attributes we cannot exercise faith in him. Attributes to consider are his perfect knowledge of all things, his power, justice, judgment, mercy, and truth. The lecture again rejects the notion of God as an incomprehensible or transcendental being.

The fifth lecture centers faith in a Godhead consisting of three separate beings and the idea that we advance from grace to grace to become "heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ" (Lecture 5:2). Thus as the Son partakes of the fulness of the Father, so may we become partakersthrough righteousnessof that same fulness. As stated in a revelation that had already been given to the Prophet, the doctrine of heirship embraced the idea that we could become equal with God in power, in might, and in dominion, an idea far beyond the reach of sectarian theology (D&C 76:95).

The sixth lecture centers on the idea that an actual or personal knowledge that the course we are pursuing is approved of by God is necessary to exercise sufficient faith unto salvation. In so doing, this lecture rejects the sectarian notion that the heavens are sealed to immediate and personal revelation. This lecture also declares that as a covenant people we must posses a willingness to sacrifice all for the gospel cause. There is no cheap grace here; we must be willing to lay all that we have upon the altar.

The seventh lecture defines salvation as our being as Christ is. Further, it declares Christ to have been like his Father in all things. Thus salvation is defined as being assimilated into the likeness of God. This returns us to the central thought of the fifth lecture, that those of the house of faith are to be heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ (Romans 8:15-17). Though this doctrine did not find its full expression until the King Follett Discourse, it is certainly foundational for the understanding that we can become as God is, an idea most offensive to sectarian theology.

Following is presented the complete text of the Lectures on Faith, with each lecture followed by commentary.

Lecture One

3 First, faith itselfwhat it is.

Commentary

LF 1:1-24 The definition of faith given in this lecturewhich is the power of action by which God does all thingsappears to conflict with that of Alma wherein he suggests that when we exercise faith in a particu lar thing and thereby obtain the assurance that it is so, the knowledge that we have obtained supplants the faith with which we began and thus our faith is dormant on that matter. Alma's idea is that if we had a perfect knowledge of all things we would have no need for faith (Alma 32:33-34). Because it was through Joseph Smith that we obtained the writings of Alma, we can be quite confident that he was familiar with what Alma had said. The apparent difference between the two men centers in the spiritual maturity of those to whom they speak. Alma is instructing those of little understanding, Joseph Smith, on the other hand, is addressing the School of the Prophets. One defines from the perspective of the immediate moment, the other from that of the eternities. Both men define faith according to the level of understanding of those to whom they speak. To those who have relatively little experience in spiritual things, Alma says to exercise faith and you will obtain knowledge. (Such knowledge, however, cannot stand independent of the faith by which it was obtained, for if that faith is lost, the knowledge obtained by it will be lost also.) To those who are more mature and experienced, we say that it is the perfection of God's faith that enables him to do all that he does, and when we obtain the same faith we in like manner will be able to do all things.

In the questions and answers that followed this lecture, the Prophet defined theology as "revealed science." In the lecture it is reasoned that just as faith is the moving cause in all that we do in the temporal world, so is it the moving cause in the spiritual world also (vv. 11-12). In a future day, this principle would find expression in this language, "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21). It is this concept of the inseparable relationship between faith and works that is, the need for us to be obedient to the laws of heaven in order to obtain the blessings of heaventhat separates us from the Protestant concept of salvation by grace alone. Mormonism holds that grace cannot stand alone. No gospel principle stands alone! Just as the Lord declared that man was not to be without woman, so did he declare that faith was not to be without works, that baptism was not to be without repentance, that the Fall was not to be without the Atonement, that mercy was not to be without justice, that agency was not to be without accountability, and so on. Each principle of the gospel is an inseparable part of the whole, with none in and of itself constituting the gospel or the way to salvation.

Lecture Two

5 We shall now proceed to examine the situation of man at his first creation. Moses, the historian, has given us the following account of him in the first chapter of the book of Genesis, beginning with the 20th verse, and closing with the 30th. We copy from the new translation:

Commentary

LF 2:2 God is the only supreme governor and independent being in whom all fullness and perfection dwell. How, it is asked, can we say that "God is the only supreme governor . . . in whom all fullness and perfection dwell," on the one hand and claim that we can become as God is on the other? The answer rests in the patriarchal chain so essential to salvation. In yet another world it might be an individual's privilege to obtain all knowledge and all power, yet neither that knowledge nor that power will ever change the simple truth that his father is still his father and will "govern" his family as such. Throughout the endless eternities the members of that family will always love, honor, and respect him as such. Indeed, they would have no claim upon a place in the patriarchal chain were their feelings other than they are. If there are weak links in that family chain as it reaches back to Father Adam, they will be dropped and the joining links bound together. So it is that each of us as heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ will endlessly honor our Eternal Father, which we do by becoming equal with him in power, might, and dominion.

LF 2:5 At his first creation. Reference is to the first man created, Father Adam.

We copy from the new translation. Reference is to the Joseph Smith Translation. See Moses 2:26-29.

LF 2:12 Without a vail to separate between. The veil of separation between our Maker and us did not exist in Eden prior to the fall. There Adam and Eve freely walked and talked with their heavenly parents.

LF 2:15-18 In these verses we have as perfect an expression of the nature of Adam and his relationship with the Father as known to the pen of man. Of a certainty he is not the end product of evolution, nor is his father a spirit essence that fills the immensity of space. He is a son who walked and talked with his father even as we walked and talked with our own parents and as our children do with us.

LF 2:19-22 No prophet has ever walked the earth who knew God more perfectly than did Father Adam or enjoyed a more intimate association with him. That knowledge was not lost to him in the Fall nor did that association cease with the Fall.

It was not intended that man dwell in darkness. Long before the first of our race was placed upon the earth the Lord had given the command: "Let there be light" (Genesis 1:3). Nor was it intended that Adam wander in doubt or uncertainty relative to the nature and purpose of his creation or the being to whom he was answerable for his conduct. "God conversed with him face to face. In his presence he was permitted to stand, and from his own mouth he was permitted to receive instruction. He heard his voice, walked before him and gazed upon his glory, while intelligence burst upon his understanding, and enabled him to give names to the vast assemblage of his Maker's works" (Lecture 2:18).

Obviously Adam's transgression did not deprive him of the knowledge with which he had previously been endowed (Lecture 2:19). Upon hearing God's voice, Adam, knowing his shame, sought to hide himself. The expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of the Divine Presence did not bring an end to communion with their Father (Lecture 2:20). Their circumstance in the lone and dreary world immediately evoked the desire for divine assistance. Their prayers did not go unheeded, for we read, "And they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence. And he gave unto them commandments, that they should worship the Lord their God, and should offer the firstlings of their flocks, for an offering unto the Lord. And Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord. And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son" (Moses 5:4-9).

The quotation clearly establishes two points: first, the Fall did not cause Adam and Eve to lose their knowledge of God; and second, "no sooner was the plan of redemption revealed to man, and he began to call upon God, than the Holy Spirit was given, bearing record of the Father and Son" (Lecture 2:25). How then did the family of Adam obtain a knowledge of God? Adam and Eve communicated that knowledge to them (Lecture 2:31). How did Adam and Eve obtain that knowledge? God manifested himself to them in the Garden and he continued to speak to them after their transgression and expulsion from Eden (Lecture 2:30). Thus it was for Adam and Eve, as special witnesses, to plant the first seeds of testimony in the hearts of their children and their children's children for many generations. Thus man learned to have faith in God after the Fall.

Adam and Eve established the pattern to be followed in all subsequent dispensations and in all generations. This pattern is that the posterity of Adam in all ages first learns of God or has the seeds of faith planted in their hearts by special witnesses chosen of God for that purpose. It is for one man to plant the seed in the heart of another. Most properly, it is for parents to plant the seed in the hearts of their children, for previous to the time that any of "Adam's posterity had obtained a manifestation of God to themselves, Adam, their common father, had testified unto them of the existence of God, and of his eternal power and Godhead" (Lecture 2:35).

Thus the whole human family partakes of the fruit of the tree of faith because Father Adam planted the tree. Each dispensation in its turn has had its special witness or witnessesits "Adams"but in all cases it has been "human testimony, and human testimony only" that motivated man's initial investigation concerning God. It has been the belief exercised in "the testimony of their fathers" that has aroused their minds to "inquire after the knowledge of God; the inquiry frequently terminated, indeed always terminated when rightly pursued, in the most glorious discoveries and eternal certainty" (Lecture 2:56).

Though one may plant the seed in the heart of another, each must nourish the seed for himself. The Prophet said that after any members of the human family "are made acquainted with the important fact that there is a God, who has created and does uphold all things, the extent of their knowledge respecting his character and glory will depend upon their diligence and faithfulness in seeking after him, until, like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses, they shall obtain faith in God, and power with him to behold him face to face" (Lecture 2:55).

Lecture Three

Commentary

LF 3:4 A correct idea of his character, perfections, and attributes. The basic premise of this lecture is that we can exercise faith in God only to the extent that we know him. It stands in sharp contrast to the dogma of traditional Christianity that God is an incomprehensible mystery. To such, Joseph Smith would respond that to say that God is incomprehensible is at the same time to say that we cannot exercise faith in him.

LF 3:7 Without the revelations . . . no man by searching could find out God. God stands revealed or remains forever unknown. All the philosophical speculation in the world relative to the nature of God does not have the value of a feather carried away by the wind. Man himself is a marvelous revelation as to the nature of his Creator, but even this, the most obvious of truths, can be known only by revelation.

LF 3:13 He was God before the world was created, and the same God . . . after. The crowning revelation of the ministry of Christ is the fatherhood of God. Coupled with the understanding that he was the same God before the creation of the world as he was after, we can but conclude that he was our God and our Father in that first estate. Surely that is what he professes himself to be to men and women on the earth.

LF 3:14 He is merciful and gracious. Much has been said by those who do not have a proper understanding of the restored gospel about the angry and vengeful God of the Old Testament as contrasted with the God of love revealed to us in the New Testament. It is as if the ill-tempered old Man had retired, leaving the shop to his more mild- mannered and loving Son. The notion is ridiculous. By definition God must have all godly characteristics and attributes in their perfection, and his mercy and graciousness must be enjoyed in equal measure by the children of men irrespective of when they lived.

LF 3:15 He changes not. The testimony of the Book of Mormon prophets was that "God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing." For if he were to do so "he would cease to be God" (Mormon 9:9, 19).

LF 3:16 He is a God of truth. "The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth; And no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments. He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things" (D&C 93:26-28).

LF 3:17 He is no respecter of persons. God does not discriminate according to gender, age, nationality, or social standing; rather, he grants the blessings to all, on condition of their willingness to serve him (Lecture 7:17).

LF 3:18 He is love. Russell M. Nelson observed, "If I were to ask which characteristic of his life [Christ's] you would identify first, I think you might name his attribute of love. That would include his compassion, kindness, charity, devotion, forgiveness, mercy, justice, and more. Jesus loved his Father and loved his mother. He loved his family and the Saints. He loved the sinner, without excusing the sin. And he taught us how we can show our love for him. He said, 'If you love me, keep my commandments.' Then to underscore that his love was not unconditional, he added: 'If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love' [John 15:10]" ("Gratitude," 4; emphasis in original).

LF 3:26 The Saints of all ages have known the same God, shared the same truths, participated in the same ordinances, withstood the same temptations, suffered the same rejection of the world, and obtained the promise of the same rewards.

Lecture Four

Commentary

LF 4:1 Correct ideas of the character of God are necessary in order to the exercise of faith in Him. True faith cannot be exercised in principles that are false. If we plant wheat, we harvest wheat. If we plant corn, we harvest corn. But we cannot plant wheat and expect to harvest corn. If we could change the law of the harvest through the exercise of faiththat is, if we could call forth corn by the power of faith when we had planted wheatwe would rob the world of order. No longer could the divine law be trusted that all things were to bring forth after their own kind. If things no longer brought forth after their own kind we could not trust that righ teousness would bring forth the blessings of heaven or that wickedness would close the window of blessings to us. Faith exists because truth exists, and where there is no truth there can be no faith. One could worship as God a stone, a tree, or the clouds of heaven, expending all the energy of their souls in so doing, yet such efforts will call forth only those blessings that stones, trees, or clouds are capable of dispensing. It cannot be argued that God will reward the sincerity of our prayers, for then the sincere prayer that the planting of wheat might yield a harvest of corn must also be honored. And by so doing, God would, as we have seen, suspend the necessity of truth which in turn would destroy all possibility of exercising faith.

How then, the question is asked, does the God of heaven turn water to wine? Does that not alter a law of nature that is of his own making? We answer: all laws are ordained of him and function according to his command for his purpose. Can such laws be altered or suspended by a greater law? Certainly. Were this not the case, God would be the servant of law rather than its author. Thus all laws bear witness of him the law of nature in its place and the greater law that suspends nature in its place. Both the greater and the lesser law must testify of the same God. Both must respond to his command and both must respect the order of the kingdom of which they are a part. Both must be appended to truth, for the point cannot be surrendered that God is a God of truth. No prayer can be answered independent of truth, and no blessing can be granted that is in disharmony with the order of heaven. All miracles involve the suspension of certain laws and all miracles are in harmony with the greater purpose or law of heaven, none contradict truth and none sustain error or mistruth.

LF 4:2 Faith is born of righteousness and truth and cannot be exercised in a God who is not a god of righteousness and truth. Thus the exercise of faith requires the assurance that the focus of our worship is a Being possessed of all the attributes of godliness in their perfection. How could one be expected to exercise faith in a god who lacked virtue, was dishonest, or unjust, or who lacked wisdom? No honorable person would worship such a being, nor could they be expected to exercise faith in him (Lecture 4:11).

LF 4:11 Countless scriptural texts attest to the fact that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost know all things both in heaven and on earth. The plainness of these lectures, particularly in verses 11 and 17 of this lecture and again in verse 9 of the seventh lecture, is much easier to ignore than to uproot.

The whole system and plan of salvation as represented in these lectures appears to be an extension of the principles announced in Doctrine and Covenants 93, which assure that salvation consists in our receiving a "fulness of truth," which is one and the same with the "fulness of the Father" (D&C 93:19, 26-28).

LF 4:19 God never changes. If we begin with the idea that God by definition possess all the attributes of godliness in their perfection and that if he did not he could not be God, then to suggest that he is to change is to suggest that he will cease to be God. If God did lack knowledge, power, justice, judgment, mercy, or truth, to that same extent he would fall short of being God and thus of being worthy of our worship.

Lecture Five

Commentary

LF 5:2-3 The Father being a personage of spirit . . . the Son . . . a personage of tabernacle. Much of the criticism directed at the Lectures on Faith is pointed at this description of the Father as "a personage of spirit." The principle stated here is simply a restatement of the teachings of Abinadi as found in Mosiah 15:1-7. That text reads as follows:

"And now Abinadi said unto them: I would that ye should understand that God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people.

"And because he dwelleth in flesh he shall be called the Son of God, and having subjected the flesh to the will of the Father, being the Father and the Son

"The Father, because he was conceived by the power of God; and the Son, because of the flesh; thus becoming the Father and Son

"And they are one God, yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth.

"And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father, being one God, suffereth temptation, and yieldeth not to the temptation, but suffereth himself to be mocked, and scourged, and cast out, and disowned by his people.

"And after all this, after working many mighty miracles among the children of men, he shall be led, yea, even as Isaiah said, as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.

"Yea, even so he shall be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh becoming subject even unto death, the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father."

If we carefully follow Abinadi's teachings, the meaning of the Prophet's words in lecture five becomes clear. "God himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem his people," Abinadi declares. It is Christ of whom Abinadi is speaking. Thus we know that Abinadi understood Christ to be his God or, as we might say today, the God of the Old Testament. Abinadi explains that because Christ would dwell in the flesh, he would be called the Son of God. This, of course, is literally so; he is, indeed, the Son of the Eternal Father. Abinadi adds that the Son would subject "the flesh to the will of the Father." He would conquer the appetites of the flesh and do the will of the Father in all things. Thus, Abinadi says, Christ will be the Father and the Son.

Though Christ is the Son, he fully represents the Father by doing what the Father would do in all cases. There is nothing particularly confusing in saying that someone is both father and son; for all fathers are also sons, and most sons will someday become fathers. In this instance, however, Abinadi explains his meaning. He says Christ will be the Father "because he was conceived by the power of God." Because God is literally his father, Christ will inherit his nature and likeness. This is as it was with Adam and Seth: "He (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all things" (D&C 107:43).

Abinadi says that Christ will be the Son "because of the flesh," returning to the fact that he previously had not possessed a physical body, which is obviously one of the reasons he came to the earth. Thus, Abinadi explains, Christ is both Father and Son. "And they [Christ and the Father] are one God [they are perfectly united in all things], yea, the very Eternal Father of heaven and of earth" (Mosiah 15:4).

To assure that he has been understood, Abinadi then says, "Thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or [and now the explanation so you cannot miss his meaning] the Son [the flesh] to the Father [the Spirit]" (Mosiah 15:5). A description of Christ's mortal ministry follows, and Abinadi concludes by returning to the major theme of development, that being "the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father."

Abinadi makes two major points here: (1) the crowning revelation of the Father is spirit and (2) the crowning revelation of the Son is flesh. The great principle to be learned about the Father is that his power and influence, like the light and law that come from him, emanate everywhere. The great principle to be learned about the Son is that he became flesh he received a body so that he could work out his own salvation and so that he could offer his life as an atoning sacrifice for us all.

Abinadi's teachings echo those in Doctrine and Covenants 93:3-4, where Christ says he and the Father are one: "The Father [Christ is the Father here] because he [Christ's Father] gave me of his fulness, and the Son because I was in the world and made flesh my tabernacle [I came and clothed my spirit with a physical body], and dwelt among the sons of men."

At the conclusion of verse 3 in this fifth lecture, we are told that "the Son partakes of the fullness of the Father through the Spirit." This is the key to all that both Abinadi and the Prophet Joseph were teaching. The whole system and plan of salvation centers in this principle. Christ can be as his Father is through the light of the Spirit. Advancing far beyond the thinking of the historical Christian world, the Prophet Joseph Smith, in this lecture, said, "The saints are, by the same Spirit, to be partakers of the same fullness" and thus to enjoy "the same glory; for as the Father and the Son are one, so, in like manner, the saints are to be one in them."

Again, this follows the doctrine found in Doctrine and Covenants 93, where we are told that Christ did not receive the fulness of his Father's glory at first but that he advanced from one grace to a greater grace until he received "a fulness of the glory of the Father; and he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him" (vv. 16-17). The same doctrine is then extended to all who follow Christ in receiving grace for grace, for they have the promise that in due time they will also receive of his fulness. "The Spirit of truth is of God [it comes originally from the Father]. I [Christ is now speaking] am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth; and no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments. He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things" (D&C 93:16-17, 19, 26-28).

Both Doctrine and Covenants 93 and the fifth Lecture on Faith are clear to us; as members of the Church we read them through the lens Joseph Smith crafted for us in his King Follett Discourse in April 1844, when he told us that God was an exalted, glorified man. Without the aid of the King Follett Discourse, few would see the length and breadth of what is written in this lecture and in Doctrine and Covenants 93. All who were a part of the household of faith at the time this lecture was given would be challenged to grow up into the full implications of this doctrine. The extent of their understanding at the time this lecture was delivered may not be clear to us but it rather misses the point to confuse the God described here as a "personage of spirit" with the god of the creeds of Christendom.

Reference to the Father as spirit and the Son as flesh is simply an expansion of what had already been taught by Abinadi in Mosiah 15 and by the Lord in Doctrine and Covenants 93. If the latter two scriptural expressions constitute good doctrine, then the restatement of them in this lecture is also good doctrine.

Being begotten of him. Christ was the biological Son of God the Father. When this simple but sublime truth is lost, all other principles in the plan of salvation are lost with it.

He kept the law of God . . . showing thereby that it is in the power of man to keep the law and remain also without sin. In his birth into mortality, Christ, like all men, was subject to the carnal nature of the flesh. He too needed sleep and food, he too tired at the end of a long day, and he too knew the feel of aching muscles. Sickness and pain were not unknown to him, sorrow and heartache were his common lot (Isaiah 53:3-4). In a prophetic description of the Savior's ministry, Alma said, "He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind; and this that the word might be fulfilled which saith he will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people. And he will take upon him death, that he may loose the bands of death which bind his people; and he will take upon him their infirmities, that his bowels may be filled with mercy, according to the flesh, that he may know according to the flesh how to succor his people according to their infirmities" (Alma 7:11-12). Thus it was that Christ was spared no temptation and rightfully showed all men that they too could live beyond sin and rise above the fallen world into which they were born.

Which mind is the Holy Spirit. A better statement could have been made relative to the nature of the Holy Ghost, though this statement is certainly the equal of anything in the Bible on the nature of the third member of the Godhead. Eleven days before his death, the Prophet in a public discourse said, "I have always [taught] in all congregations when I have preached, it has been the plurality of Gods. It has been preached fifteen years. I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father. The Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and or spirit, and these three constitute three distinct personages, and three Gods" (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 378; syntax standardized). Verse two does identify the Holy Ghost as a member of the eternal presidency, stating that "these three constitute the great, matchless, governing and supreme, power over all things; by whom all things were created and made that were created and made, and these three constitute the Godhead." In January 1843, the Prophet said: "The Holy Ghost is a personage, and is in the form of a personage. It [He] does not confine itself to the form of the dove, but in sign of the dove. The Holy Ghost cannot be transformed into a dove; but the sign of a dove was given to John to signify the truth of the deed, as the dove is an emblem or token of truth and innocence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 276). Again in April of the same year, he said, "The Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage of Spirit" (D&C 130:22).

In the summary or review of the lecture, the question is asked, "How many personages are there in the Godhead?" To which the answer is, "Two: the Father and the Son." By this we would understand the text to be saying two tangible or corporeal personages, because the question is also asked, "Do the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit constitute the Godhead?" To which the answer is, "They do."

Lecture Six

Commentary

LF 6:1-3 To explain the doctrine of faith, the author of the epistle to the Hebrews wrote about those ancient prophets who had an actual knowledge that the course they were pursuing was according to the will of God. "By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that the was righteous" (Hebrews 11:4; emphasis added). And further: "by faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God" (Hebrews 11:5; emphasis added). These and others from Adam down to the Saints living on the earth today go forth in faith, or in the assurance that they are on the Lord's errand and are doing his will. Most importantly, the Savior Jesus Christ exercised such great faith because he knew that the words he spoke, the acts he performed, and the atoning sacrifice he suffered were all according to the will of God. He too received the witness: "This is my beloved Son, in whom Iam well pleased" (Matthew 3:17, emphasis added; 17:5; also 3 Nephi 11:7; Joseph Smith-History 1:17).

LF 6:4 The favorites of heaven. This lecture argues that an actual knowledge that the course one is pursuing is according to the will of God is necessary to endure faithfully to the end. Those who have obtained that knowledge are referred to here as "the favorites of heaven," which phrase is not suggesting that God is a respecter of personsfor heaven's favor is accessible to all on the same termsbut rather that "he that is righteous is favored of God" (1 Nephi 17:35).

LF 6:7 A religion that does not require the sacrifice of all things never has power sufficient to produce the faith necessary. Significantly, none have had greater faith than Abraham, of whom the greatest of sacrifices was asked. Faith is the fruit of sacrifice and cannot be born of easy labors nor found on the path not fraught with difficulties and seemingly insurmountable obstacles.

Seek his face. The idea of seeking the face of God or standing in his presence is quite literal. This idea had been repetitiously developed in the revelations of the Restoration. "Verily, thus saith the Lord: It shall come to pass that every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments, shall see my face and know that I am" (D&C 93:1; D&C 76:116-19; 84:19-24; 88:68; 107:18-19; 130:3; 132:19, 26).

Lecture Seven

Commentary

LF 7:2 Faith was the principle of action and of power in all intelligent beings, both in heaven and on earth. Faith is as essential to the gods as it is to mortals. It is, as here stated, the principle of action and power in all intelligent beings. As "no world has yet been framed that was not framed by faith," so no man has been resurrected save it were by faith, and no deed of God ever performed independent of this principle. Indeed, "all the blessings of eternity are the effects of faith" (Lectures 7:6).

LF 7:8 Salvation consists in our becoming like God. Thus we are saved to the extent that we are like him.

LF 7:9 The reasoning used in this verse is an important extension of the announcement in Lecture 4:11, which declares that God has all knowledge. Those arguing that God is eternally progressing in knowledge and understanding are not only arguing that he is infinitely ignorant but also that he is forever changing, which would, if it were possible, mean that the requirements of salvation would be in eternal flux, for salvation consists in becoming like him. One man would become as God is by complying with one set of principles; while another would be assimilated into his likeness by complying with still other principles, thus the order of heaven would change with the seasons.

Here the Prophet explains that were it possible for God to change even in the "least degree, so sure he would fail of salvation and lose all his dominion, power, authority and glory, which constitute salvation; for salvation consists in the glory, authority, majesty, power and dominion which Jehovah possesses and in nothing else; and no being can possess it but himself or one like him."

LF 7:16 On this hinge turns the door of salvation. Salvation is not as the world supposes they will not find themselves in a state of rapture in which they stand forever gazing in awe and wonderment on the grandeur, glory, and greatness of God. Such a notion leaves us to suppose that God finds pleasure in being worshiped by beings inferior to himself, beings that he created for that very purpose. Would it not do greater honor to God to suppose that he could not and would not create that which was less than godly? The work and glory of God is "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39), to exalt his family that they too might share in the glory, power, and dominion that is his.

LF 7:18 There is a great difference between believing in God and knowing him. The great thrust of thought in this lecture is that God can only be known to the extent that we are like him. To the extent that we are holy, we understand his holiness. To the extent that we are just or merciful, we understand his justice and mercy. To the extent that our natures are contrary to his, we are blind to his nature and his purposes.

LF 7:20 Train of attendants. If we plant the same seeds as did the ancients, we will harvest the same fruits. Thus the Lord says to those of all dispensations, "These signs follow them that believe," for the signs are everlastingly the same. That faith that opened the heavens to the ancients will open the heaven to those of our day and will bring the same dreams, the same visions, the same understanding, the same faith, and the same exaltation.
