Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 108

DATE: 26 DECEMBER 1835

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 108 records a personal revelation given to Lyman Royal Sherman, confidant and friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He, his wife, Delcena Johnson, and others of her family joined the Church in January 1832 in Vermont. Lyman and Delcena moved to Kirtland, Ohio, in 1833.

In 1834 Lyman Sherman marched with Zion's Camp and upon his return from Missouri was ordained one of the seven presidents of the original Quorum of Seventy, 28 February 1835. He was released from this position in April 1837 because he had previously been ordained a high priest.

The day after Christmas in 1835, while in conversation with the Prophet, Lyman said, "I have been wrought upon to make known to you my feelings and desires, and was promised that I should have a revelation which should make known my duty" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:345). The revelation recorded in section 108 was given in response to that request.

Shortly after receiving this revelation, Sherman participated with those of his quorum in several meetings in the Kirtland Temple in early 1836 wherein anointings and blessings were given.

After Joseph Smith's flight to Missouri in early 1838, dissenters in Kirtland sought to use the printing office and materials to foster opposition to the Prophet. To thwart their designs, Lyman secretly burned the press. He moved to Missouri sometime prior to October 1838 and was made a temporary member of the high council in Far West on 13 December 1838.

In a revelation given to Joseph Smith while the Prophet was incarcerated in the Liberty Jail, Lyman Sherman was called to fill a vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve. Unfortunately he died of illness at the age of thirty- five without learning that this sacred trust had been accorded him (Cook, "Lyman Sherman," 123-24).

Lyman Sherman Forgiven of His Sins

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 108:1-3

108:1 Lyman Sherman, a man of great spiritual integrity, was responding to the direction the Lord had given to him in coming to seek counsel from the Prophet (D&C 122:2). The Prophet knew nothing of the direction the Lord had given Lyman to seek counsel at his hand. It is a significant lesson for all that he received a remission of sins not in this instance for attending required meetings, but rather for being responsive to the personal directions of the Lord to him.

108:2 Let your soul be at rest concerning your spiritual standing. Forgiveness of sins brings "peace of conscience" (Mosiah 4:3), in which guilt is swept away (Enos 1:6). The soul is cleansed from the effects of wickedness and finds rest in the Lord without anguish for wrongs committed. Alma explained to his son Helaman that when forgiven, "I was harrowed up by the memory of my sins no more" (Alma 36:19).

Resist no more my voice. The voice of the Lord is heard in promptings of the Spirit. These proddings must be heeded if we are to receive the blessings the Lord has in store for us. Regarding such promptings, Amulek testified to the people of Ammonihah: "I did harden my heart, for I was called many times and I would not hear" (Alma 10:6). How long Lyman Sherman had been receiving promptings from the Lord to visit with the Prophet is not known. It is evident, however, that his anxiety over his spiritual standing could have been of a shorter length if he had not earlier resisted the Lord's voice to go to the Prophet. In like manner there are members today who resist visiting with their priesthood leaders concerning their spiritual standing, even though the Lord has prompted them to do so many times. How sweet is the comforting solace that comes from meeting with one's bishop and receiving the assurance that one can be at peace concerning his or her spiritual standing before the Lord.

He Is to Be Numbered with the Leading Elders of the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 108:4-5

108:4 The solemn assembly. The purpose of a solemn assembly of the Saints is for worship. Joel spoke of the nature of these assemblies: "Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and cry unto the Lord" (Joel 1:14).

This revelation informed Lyman Sherman that he was to be numbered among the first to receive the endowment. These were those who had proven themselves worthy of such an honor in Zion's Camp. Preparation for the endowment occupied much of the Church leaders' time during the early months of 1836. Those selected to participate in this sacred ritual met regularly in the Kirtland Temple during January and February of 1836.

Of these preparations Joseph Smith said: "We must have all things prepared, and call our solemn assembly as the Lord has commanded us, that we may be able to accomplish His great work, and it must be done in God's own way. The house of the Lord must be prepared, and the solemn assembly called and organized in it, according to the order of the house of God; and in it we must attend to the ordinance of washing of feet. It was never intended for any but official members. It is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us here" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 91).

On Monday, 5 October 1835, the Prophet recorded, "I returned home, being much fatigued from riding in the rain. Spent the remainder of the day in reading and meditation, and in the evening attended a Council of the Twelve Apostles; had a glorious time, and gave them much instruction concerning their duties for time to come; told them that it was the will of God they should take their families to Missouri next season; also this fall to attend the solemn assembly of the first Elders, for the organization of the School of the Prophets; and attend to the ordinance of the washing of feet; and to prepare their hearts in all humility for an endowment with power from on high; to which they all agreed with one accord, and seemed to be greatly rejoiced. May God spare the lives of the Twelve to a good old age, for Christ the Redeemer's sake. Amen" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:287; see also 308, 345).

You shall be remembered with the first of mine elders. At this time, Elder Sherman was one of the seven presidents of the Seventy. The reference to "the first of mine elders" does not refer to the office of an elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood but rather to the presiding quorums of the Church. The blessing promised to them was that they would be the first elders in this dispensation to be endowed with power in the Kirtland Temple (D&C 105:7, 33).

108:5 The Promise of the Father. See commentary on verse 6.

He Is Called to Preach the Gospel and Strengthen His Brethren

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 108:6-8

108:6 Right to preach my gospel wheresoever I shall send you. It was not until after the elders of the Church were endowed with power from on high that they were to go forth to preach the gospel to the nations of the world. The same was true of the Savior's disciples in Palestine. The risen Lord instructed them, "But tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high" (Luke 24:49). The Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "The endowment was to prepare the disciples for their missions unto the world" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 274). In like manner the Savior commanded the Saints to "build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; For this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem" (D&C 95:8-9). "And from thence," the Lord instructed, "whosoever I will shall go forth among all nations" (D&C 38:33). Following the endowment of power, Lyman Sherman, as well as other endowed brethren, had the right to take the gospel to the entire world. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 39:15, "And from thence men shall go forth into all nations."

108:7 Strengthen your brethren in all your conversation. Following the entry "conversation" in the dictionary of Joseph Smith's day we read: "General course of manners; behavior; deportment; especially as it respects morals" (Webster, Dictionary, 1828). This usage accords with that of the King James Translation of the New Testament. For instance, Paul says, "For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it" (Galatians 1:13). As noted in the footnote in the LDS edition of the Bible, Paul's reference is not to his speech but rather to his "conduct" (Ephesians 2:3; 1 Timothy 4:12; 1 Peter 1:15-16).
