Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109

DATE: 27 MARCH 1836

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

In preparation for the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Oliver Cowdery, as well as Warren A. Cowdery and Warren Parrish, who acted as scribes for the Prophet, met the day previous to the dedication "to make arrangements for the solemn assembly; this business occupied the remainder of the day" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:409). During this meeting the dedicatory prayer for the temple was written down. It is likely that Warren A. Cowdery and Warren Parris recorded the prayer because they served the Prophet as his scribes and personal secretaries. Oliver Cowdery recorded in his journal: "This day our school did not keep, We prepared for the dedication of the Lord's house. I met in the presidents room pres. J. Smith, jr. S Rigdon, my brother W. A. Cowdery & Elder W. Parrish, and assisted in writing a prayer for the dedication of the house" (cited in Cook, Revelations, 218; spelling and punctuation as in original).

On the day of the dedication, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: "The congregation began to assemble at the Temple, at about seven o'clock, an hour earlier than the doors were to be opened. Many brethren had come in from the regions round about, to witness the dedication of the Lord's House and share in His blessings; and such was the anxiety on this occasion that some hundreds (probably five or six) assembled before the doors were opened. The presidents entered with the doorkeepers, and stationed the latter at the inner and outer doors; also placed our stewards to receive donations from those who should feel disposed to contribute something to defray the expense of building the House of the Lord. We also dedicated the pulpits, and consecrated them to the Lord.

"The doors were then opened. Presidents Rigdon, Cowdery and myself seated the congregation as they came in, and, according to the best calculation we could make, we received between nine and ten hundred, which were as many as could be comfortably seated. We then informed the doorkeepers that we could receive no more, and a multitude were deprived of the benefits of the meeting on account of the house not being sufficiently capacious to receive them; and I felt to regret that any of my brethren and sisters should be deprived of the meeting, and I recommended them to repair to the schoolhouse and hold a meeting, which they did, and filled that house also, and yet many were left out. . . .

"At nine o'clock A.M. President Sidney Rigdon commenced the services of the day by reading the 96th and 24th Psalms" (History of the Church, 2:410-11). This was followed by hymns, an opening prayer, sermons, and sustaining of Church officers. In the afternoon the Prophet Joseph Smith read the dedicatory prayer given by revelation.

The Thursday after the dedication of the temple, the dedicatory services were repeated "for the benefit of those who could not get into the house on the preceding Sabbath. . . . The services of the day were commenced, prosecuted and terminated in the same manner as at the former dedication, and the Spirit of God rested upon the congregation, and great solemnity prevailed" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:433).

Kirtland Temple Built As a Place for the Son of Man to Visit

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:1-5

109:1 The only other dedicatory prayer for a temple found in holy writ is the one offered by Solomon at the dedication of his temple (1 Kings 8:23-61). The language of this verse comes from the first verse of that prayer. It reads, "Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart."

The language used in this prayer may cause concern as to who the Prophet Joseph Smith was addressing, God, the Father, or his Son, Jesus Christ (vv. 1, 4, 31, 34, 68, and 77). The Savior taught, "Ye must always pray unto the Father in my name" (3 Nephi 18:19). With regard to those verses that call upon Jehovah, it is part of the divine program to use the form and language of prayer in crying Hallelujah, which means praise Jehovah, or praise the Lord, or praise Christ who is Jehovah. These expressions of joy are uttered in the spirit of prayer and of thanksgiving. They arise from every believing heart because of all that Christ the Lord has done in bringing to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. Such cries or shouts or expressions of praise to Jehovah, and also a formal prayer to the Father, given in the true and proper sense of the word, are perfectly linked together in the revealed dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple. With joy and in the spirit of exultation, the revelation begins: "Thanks be to thy name, O Lord God of Israel, who keepest covenant and showest mercy unto thy servants who walk uprightly before thee, with all their hearts [that is, thanks be to Christ whose arm of mercy is over his saints]'Thou who hast commanded thy servants to build a house to thy name in this place [Kirtland]. And now thou beholdest, O Lord, that thy servants have done according to thy commandment" (vv. 1-3). The command to build the house came from the Lord Jesus. He conveyed the Father's will and gave the direction. It was his voice that spoke to Joseph Smith.

"The dedicatory prayer is addressed to the Father, as all prayers should be; it is addressed to the One whose original command it was that the house be built, which direction had been revealed to the builders by the Son through whom all revelation comes" (McConkie, Promised Messiah, 561-62).

Who keepest covenant. The Lord's people have always been a covenant people. Thus it naturally follows that they are temple building people because the temple is the place of the covenant. To have claim upon his blessings, they must abide with exactness the covenants they have made with him. Thus it is properly said that the God of Israel "keepest covenant" with those who "walk uprightly" before him.

Showest mercy unto thy servants who walk uprightly. Only those who choose to "walk uprightly" have rightful claim upon the mercies of heaven. It is an irrevocable principle that all the blessings of heaven are predicated on obedience and the keeping of covenants (D&C 130:20).

109:2 The commandment to build the temple in Kirtland, Ohio, was first given in Doctrine and Covenants 88:119.

109:4 In whose name alone salvation can be administered to the children of men. There are no alternative plans outside the gospel of Jesus Christ to enable us to enter into the presence of God. Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man comes unto the Father, but by him (John 14:6). No amount of misplaced faith in false religions can save a soul. Teachings which proclaim that prayers are to be offered to or through so-called saints of days' past are the doctrines of men but not the doctrines of heaven (D&C 46:7). An angel of God declared to King Benjamin, "There shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:17).

Accept of this house. One week later, Sunday, 3 April 1836, the Savior appeared in the Kirtland Temple, declaring, "Let the hearts of all my people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to my name. For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house" (D&C 110:6-7). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 109:26.

The workmanship of the hands of us. The Kirtland Temple was a unique building constructed according to the Lord's instructions. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 95:15-17.

109:4-5 Many of the Saints that gathered to Kirtland sacrificed their means to build the temple even before they paused to build homes for themselves. They sought to build a place worthy of the presence of God and angels. For three years the Saints sacrificed to build the temple in Kirtland, Ohio. Sister Eliza R. Snow, who was living in Kirtland at the time the temple was built, wrote: "At that time the Saints were few in number, and most of them very poor; and had it not been for the assurance that God had spoken, and had commanded that a house should be built to His name, of which He not only revealed the form, but also designated the dimensions, an attempt towards building that Temple, under the then existing circumstances, would have been, by all concerned, pronounced preposterous . . .

"From the day the ground was broken for laying the foundation of the Temple, until its dedication on the 27th of March, 1836, the work was vigorously prosecuted.

"With very little capital except brain, bone, and sinew, combined with unwavering trust in God, men, women, and even children worked with their might. While the brethren labored in their departments, the sisters were actively engaged in boarding and clothing workmen not otherwise provided for all living as abstemiously as possible, so that every cent might be appropriated to the grand object, while their energies were stimulated by the prospect of participating in the blessing of a house built by the direction of the Most High, and accepted by Him" (as cited in Talmage, House of the Lord, 96-97). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 97:16.

It Is to Be a House of Prayer, Fasting, Faith, Learning, Glory, and Order, and a House of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:6-21

109:6 Call your solemn assembly, as I have commanded you. The commandment referred to in this text was given to those the Lord called the "first laborers," or his "friends," whom he directed to hold a "solemn assembly" (D&C 88: 70, 117; 108:4). The solemn assembly to whom this reference was made was the School of the Prophets, where the elders would be instructed and endowed with power from on high. The dedication of a temple is also a solemn assembly as noted in Doctrine and Covenants 109:10.

The pattern of such assemblies would follow that of the Lord's people in ancient times. Solemn assemblies included the gathering of his servants in a state of ritual purity for sacred purposes and holy convocations such as the Festival of Unleavened Bread (Deuteronomy 16:8, 16) or the eighth day of the Festival of Booths (Leviticus 23:36; Numbers 29:35; 2 Chronicles 7:9; Nehemiah 8:18).

109:7-9 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:118-20.

109:11 To secure a fulfillment of the promises. With the command to move to Ohio, the Lord promised his Saints, "There you shall be endowed with power from on high" (D&C 38:32). The Savior revealed that this endowment of power was "the promise of the Father unto you [the Saints]" (D&C 95:9). It was with that hopeful expectation that the Saints had gathered to dedicate this temple.

109:12 That thy glory may rest down upon thy people. See commentary on verses 35-37.

That thy holy presence may be continually in this house. If no unclean thing defiles the temple, it will have the right to the constant presence of God or the Spirit of God within its walls.

109:13 Everything that the Lord does bears witnesses of him. No one who is susceptible to the Spirit of the Lord can go to the house of the Lord and not sense and know that his Spirit resides there.

109:14 The Kirtland Temple, unlike the temples we attend today, was also intended to serve as the meeting place for the School of the Prophets. Here the elders of Israel were to be instructed in virtually any subject that enhanced their ability to present the gospel message (D&C 88:78-80).

109:15 Receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost. As we grow up into an understanding of the scriptures and the gospel, so we grow up into an understanding of the spirit of revelation and of the companionship of the Holy Ghost. Spencer W. Kimball explained: "The Holy Ghost comes to you as you grow and learn and make yourselves worthy. It comes a little at a time as you merit it. And as your life is in harmony, you gradually receive the Holy Ghost in a great measure" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 114).

109:19 With holy hands, uplifted to the Most High. See Doctrine and Covenants 88:120.

109:20 Those who participated in the ordinances performed in the temple in Kirtland did so by invitation. These rites were performed on the third floor of the temple. It was not this area that was polluted by apostates who sought to depose the Prophet. Their activities took place in the assembly room on the main floor which was open to the public (D&C 95:16-17). Notwithstanding, their actions were sufficient to offend the Spirit of the Lord and pollute his house.

Similarly, the Nauvoo Temple was built with the idea that the lower floors of the temple would be available for public meetings and activities. Ordinances were performed in the upper rooms or attic where those who desired to participate in the temple ritual were required to first pass through an "examination area," or room, of which there were two presumably: one for men and the other for women (Brown, "Sacred Departments," 3:369). It was only after temples were built in the territory of Utah that recommends signed by priesthood leaders were required of those desiring to enter the temple.

May the Unrepentant Who Oppose the Lord's People Be Confounded

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:22-33

109:22-33 18 These verses are descriptive, in part, of the blessings that attend the endowment.

109:22 Armed with thy power. The missionary experiences of David Patten, one of the first apostles of this dispensation, are an illustration of the principle of being armed with the Spirit. Wilford Woodruff records the following experience had by Elder Patten when arrested for teaching the gospel in Tennessee in 1835.

"June 19th. About forty men armed with deadly weapons, led by Sheriff Robert C. Petty, and a Colonel and Major, with some other officers, and a Methodist priest with a gun on his shoulder; the Sheriff informed the brethren that he had a States' warrant for D. [David] W. [Warren] Patten, W. Parrish and W. Woodruff, issued on complaint of Mathew Williams the Methodist priest, who swore that those brethren had put forth the following false and pretended prophecy: 'That Christ would come the second time before this generation passed away,' and 'That four individuals should receive the Holy Ghost within twenty-four hours.' After examination brothers Patten and Parrish were bound over to appear on June 22nd under $2000 bonds.

"Early on the 22nd Elders [David] Patten and [Warren] Parrish had their trial. The mob gathered to the number of 100 all fully armed, they took from brother Patten his walking stick and a penknife; they went through with a mock trial, but would not let the defendants produce any witnesses, and without suffering them to say a word in defence, the Judge pronounced them guilty of the charges preferred.

"Brother [David] Patten being filled with the Holy Ghost rose to his feet and by the power of God bound them fast to their seats until he addressed them. He rebuked them sharply for their wicked and unjust proceedings. Brother Parrish afterwards said, 'my hair stood up strait on my head for I expected to be killed.' When Patten closed, the judge addressed him saying, 'you must be armed with concealed weapons, or you would not treat an armed court as you have this.' Patten replied, 'I am armed with weapons you know not of, and my weapons are the Holy Priesthood and the power of God. God is my friend, and he permits you to exercise all the power you have, and he bestows on me all the power I have.' The Court finally concluded to let the brethren go if they would pay the cost of court, and leave the country in ten days" (Millennial Star, 26:439).

That thy name may be upon them. In the waters of baptism we covenant to take upon ourselves the name of Christ (D&C 18:21-22). We renew that covenant when we partake of the sacrament (D&C 20:77). We take that name upon us in the anointing associated with the temple endowment. The Greek form of the word anointed is Christos (Christ). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:77.

For Christ to place his name upon someone is for him to identify them as his. Thus those bearing his name are rightfully endowed with his power and authority. "Their arm," the Lord said, "shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:14; see also v. 26).

Thine angels have charge over them. To those who have received the Melchizedek Priesthood, the Lord said, "I have given the heavenly hosts and mine angels charge concerning you" (D&C 84:42). And again he said, "And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88). "Angels are our associates," explained Heber C. Kimball, "they are with us and round about us, and watch over us, and take care of us, and lead us, and guide us, and administer to our wants in their ministry and in their holy calling unto which they are appointed" (Journal of Discourses, 2:222).

However, none of this should be construed to mean that individuals are assigned guardian angels with the sole responsibility of following us around "silent notes taking;" which is not good doctrine (Hymns, no. 237). Such a thought is demeaning to both the living and the dead. It demeans the living in the assumption that they need constant watching, a divine baby- sitter, as it were. It demeans the dead in the assumption that they have no greater work or labor to do. That simply is not the case. Were it so, we would be left to wonder why we had been given the companionship of the Holy Ghost and a blessing of protection as part of the endowment.

109:24 Those who are worthy to enter the temple of the Lord and participate in its sacred rituals will be blessed in and through their families throughout endless generations.

109:25 No weapon formed against them shall prosper. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 71:9.

He who diggeth a pit for them shall fall into the same himself. Nephi prophesied: "Every nation which shall war against thee, O house of Israel, shall be turned one against another, and they shall fall into the pit which they digged to ensnare the people of the Lord. And all that fight against Zion shall be destroyed, and that great whore, who hath perverted the right ways of the Lord, yea, that great and abominable church, shall tumble to the dust and great shall be the fall of it" (1 Nephi 22:14).

109:26 Upon whom thy name shall be put in this house. Similarly, King Solomon pled to the Lord in the dedicatory prayer of the temple at Jerusalem "that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place of which thou has said, My name shall be there" (1 Kings 8:29). Dallin H. Oaks explained: "All of these references to ancient and modern temples as houses for 'the name' of the Lord obviously involve something far more significant than a mere inscription of his sacred name on the structure. The scriptures speak of the Lord's putting his name in a temple because he gives authority for his name to be used in the sacred ordinances of that house. That is the meaning of the Prophet's reference to the Lord's putting his name upon his people in that holy house" (Conference Report, April 1985, 103).

Endowed servants of the Lord enjoy a special blessing of protection. Of their enemies the Lord has said, "Their bounds are set, they cannot pass" (D&C 122:9). The experience of tens of thousands of missionaries attests to the reality of this promise.

109:28 Thou wilt fight for thy people as thou didst in the day of battle. The world of the Old Testament was one of warfare. Much of the history recorded therein finds the Lord's people either locked in battle or preparing to go to battle. For the children of Israel, war was a sacred event. Nowhere is this more evident than in the holy war by which she obtained possession of her land of promise. This was warfare undertaken at God's command and in his presence. Going to battle was approached much like worship in the sanctuary. Sacrifices were made to God (1 Samuel 13), soldiers consecrated themselves to him (Joshua 3:5), while the war camp was maintained in a state of ritual purity (Deuteronomy 23:9-14).

The leader of the army of Israel, often the Lord's prophet, was expected to be instructed by God as to how to conduct the impending battle (Judges 20:28). When Israel marched against Jericho, a procession of priests and the ark of the covenant, symbolizing the presence of God, marched at the head of Israel's army (Joshua 6:4). "Fear not" was the watchword of the Lord's army, for they knew in whose name they marched and the source of the strength that was theirs (Exodus 14:13-14).

109:30-33 To have evil spoken of is the heritage of the Saints of God in all ages. Such will not end until that great day in which Satan is bound and his tongue silenced. Nevertheless, we have the assurance that truth will prevail and the promise of Moroni that the Church will increase the more it is opposed (Messenger and Advocate, 2:199).

109:30 Swept away by the hail. The hail appears to refer to the great hailstorm that the Lord revealed would destroy the crops of the earth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:16.

May the Saints Go Forth in Power to Gather the Righteous to Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:34-42

109:34 "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (Romans 3:23).

109:35 Let the anointing of thy ministers be sealed upon them. Preparatory to the anticipated outpouring of the Spirit at the dedication of the temple, the Prophet and the "first elders" were washed and anointed. Joseph Smith records as follows, on 21 January 1836: "About three o'clock, P.M., I dismissed the school, and the Presidency retired to the attic story of the printing office, where we attended the ordinance of washing our bodies in pure water. We also perfumed our bodies and our heads, in the name of the Lord.

"At early candle-light I met with the Presidency at the west school room, in the Temple, to attend to the ordinance of anointing our heads with holy oil; also the Councils of Kirtland and Zion met in the two adjoining rooms, and waited in prayer while we attended to the ordinance. I took the oil in my left hand, Father Smith being seated before me, and the remainder of the Presidency encircled him round about. We then stretched our right hands towards heaven, and blessed the oil, and consecrated it in the name of Jesus Christ.

"We then laid our hands upon our aged Father Smith, and invoked the blessings of heaven. I then anointed his head with the consecrated oil, and sealed many blessings upon him. The Presidency then in turn laid their hands upon his head, beginning at the oldest, until they had all laid their hands upon him, and pronounced such blessings upon his head, as the Lord put into their hearts, all blessing him to be our Patriarch, to anoint our heads, and attend to all duties that pertain to that office. The Presidency then took the seat in their turn, according to their age, beginning at the oldest, and received their anointing and blessing under the hands of Father Smith. And in my turn, my father anointed my head" (History of the Church, 2:379-80). During the weeks that preceded the dedication of the temple, others of the brethren participated in the biblical ritual of washing and anointing.

109:36-37 The day of Pentecost took place fifty days after Passover as mandated by the law of Moses (Exodus 23:15-16; 34:22; Leviticus 23:16). The first day of Pentecost following the resurrection of Christ was of particular importance. The Lord directed his disciples to "tarry . . . in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high" (Luke 24:49). "And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance" (Acts 2:1-4).

Writing of that occasion, President Joseph F. Smith and his counselors in the First Presidency stated: "We read that Jesus, after His resurrection, breathed upon His disciples and said, 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost.' But we also read that He said, 'Behold, I send the promise of my father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.' (John 20:22; Luke 24:49.) We read further, 'For the Holy Ghost was not yet given: because that Jesus was not yet glorified.' (John 7:39.) Thus the promise was made, but the fulfilment came after, so that the Holy Ghost sent by Jesus from the Father did not come in person until the day of Pentecost, and the cloven tongues of fire were the sign of His coming. This manifestation was repeated in this dispensation at the endowment in the Kirtland Temple, in the month of January, 1836" (Clark, Messages, 5:4).

The Prophet recorded that following the closing hymn and benediction at the dedicatory service: "President Brigham Young gave a short address in tongues, and David W. Patten interpreted, and gave a short exhortation in tongues himself, after which I blessed the congregation in the name of the Lord, and the assembly dispersed a little past four o'clock, having manifested the most quiet demeanor during the whole exercise.

"I met the quorums in the evening and instructed them respecting the ordinance of washing of feet, which they were to attend to on Wednesday following; and gave them instructions in relation to the spirit of prophecy, and called upon the congregation to speak, and not to fear to prophesy good concerning the Saints, for if you prophesy the falling of these hills and the rising of the valleys, the downfall of the enemies of Zion and the rising of the kingdom of God, it shall come to pass. Do not quench the Spirit, for the first one that opens his mouth shall receive the Spirit of prophecy.

"Brother George A. Smith arose and began to prophesy, when a noise was heard like the sound of a rushing mighty wind, which filled the Temple, and all the congregation simultaneously arose, being moved upon by an invisible power; many began to speak in tongues and prophesy; others saw glorious visions; and I beheld the Temple was filled with angels, which fact I declared to the congregation. The people of the neighborhood came running together (hearing an unusual sound within, and seeing a bright light like a pillar of fire resting upon the Temple), and were astonished at what was taking place. This continued until the meeting closed at eleven p. m." (Smith, History of the Church, 2:428).

The Pentecostal season continued for weeks after the dedication of the temple. The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded a week later: "I left the meeting in the charge of the Twelve, and retired about nine o'clock in the evening. The brethren continued exhorting, prophesying, and speaking in tongues until five o'clock in the morning. The Savior made His appearance to some, while angels ministered to others, and it was Pentecost and an endowment indeed, long to be remembered, for the sound shall go forth from this place into all the world, and the occurrences of this day shall be handed down upon the pages of sacred history, to all generations: as the day of Pentecost, so shall this day be numbered and celebrated as a year of jubilee, and time of rejoicing to the Saints of the Most High God" (History of the Church, 2:432-33).

109:38 Put upon thy servants the testimony of the covenant. Those upon whom a true testimony of the covenant rests will always be numbered among those who are faithful and valiant. Addressing this issue in general conference, Elder M. Russell Ballard said: "Somehow we need to instill in our hearts the powerful testimony of the gospel of Jesus Christ like unto that of our pioneer forefathers. Remember when Nauvoo fell in September of 1846 and the unbearable conditions of the Saints in the poor camps. When word reached Winter Quarters, Brigham Young immediately called the brethren together. After explaining the situation and reminding them of the covenant made in the Nauvoo Temple that no one who wanted to come, no matter how poor, would be left behind, he gave them this remarkable challenge:

"'Now is the time for labor,' he said. 'Let the fire of the covenant which you made in the House of the Lord, burn in your hearts, like flame unquenchable.' . . . Within a few days, in spite of near-destitute conditions at Winter Quarters, many wagons were rolling eastward to rescue the Saints in the poor camps along the Mississippi River" (Conference Report, April 1999, 112-13; emphasis added).

Seal up the law. See commentary on verse 46.

109:39 Come forth to Zion, or to her stakes. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "The law of gathering as given to us has varied to meet the needs of an ever-growing Church that one day will have dominion over all the earth. In 1830 the saints were commanded to assemble in 'one place.' (D&C 29:8). How could it have been otherwise? They were told to 'assemble together at the Ohio' (D&C 37:3) and to go forth to Zion in 'the western countries' (D&C 45:64). In 1833 they were told to gather in the Zion of Missouri, 'Until the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them,' saith the Lord, 'and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion.' They were to worship the Lord 'in holy places.' (D&C 101:21-22.) In the revealed prayer dedicating the Kirtland Temple (1836), the Prophet importuned for the righteous, 'that they may come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joy.' (D&C 109:39.) In 1838 the Lord spoke of 'the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes.' (D&C 115:6.) In 1844 the prophetic word acclaimed: 'The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land.' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 362.)

"We now have stakes of Zion in many nations, in Europe and Asia and South America and upon the islands of the sea. Before the Lord comes, there will be stakes in all lands and among all peoples. Any portion of the surface of the earth that is organized into a stake of Ziona City of Holiness, as it were becomes a part of Zion. A stake of Zion is a part of Zionit is just that simple. And every stake becomes the place of gathering for the saints who live in the area involved" (Millennial Messiah, 294-95).

109:42 Cleanse them from their blood. When servants of the Lord are commissioned to declare the message of salvation to a particular people, they cannot be held guiltless when they, through their own negligence, fail to do so. Only in raising the warning voice can they cleanse themselves from the blood and sins of those whom they have been given the responsibility to teach.

Teaching this principle, Jacob, brother of Nephi said, "We did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day" (Jacob 1:19).

May the Saints Be Delivered from the Terrible Things to Be Poured Out upon the Wicked in the Last Days

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:43-53

109:46 Seal up the law, and bind up the testimony. Isaiah 8:16 reads, "Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples." The imagery is idiomatic to the ancient day. After a parchment or papyrus scroll had been used, it was tied with a cord and sealed to preserve it until future use. Thus the thought expressed in this verse is "tie up the evidence," or "seal the admonition," it will be brought forth again in the day of judgment. In the context of this revelation, the servants of the Lord are to be endowed with power and sent to the nations of the earth, there they are to raise the warning voice, bind or seal up their testimonies, which will stand as evidence against those whom they have taught come the day of judgment (Interpreter's Bible, 12:227). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:84, "To bind up the law and seal up the testimony."

109:49 A display of thy testimony. In early records this is written as "a display of thy power" (Woodford, Historical Development, 1451).

109:50-53 Have mercy, O Lord, upon the wicked mob. The revealed utterance of the Holy Ghost in this prayer is in harmony with the Savior's instructions: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven" (Matthew 5:44-45). This righteous prayer also voiced the truth that mercy is available only upon conditions of repentance (v. 1). Divine justice cannot be denied for the wicked that drove the Saints from their homes in Jackson County, Missouri.

109:52 Wasted away, both root and branch. The words are similar to those revealed to Malachi concerning the destruction of the wicked at the Second Coming: "For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch" (Malachi 4:1). The root and branch refer to the familial associations of grandparents, parents, brothers, sisters, and children. The Saints prayed that the wicked mobs who had driven them from Zion might have the day of judgment moved forward, if they would not repent. In this way the redemption of Zion would not need to wait for the burning of the wicked; the wicked would waste away, without family, parents, or children to carry out their evil designs against the Saints. In the eternal sense, the wicked will be left without familial association in eternity. For more on the destruction in Missouri, see commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:15.

May Nations and Peoples and Churches Be Prepared for the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:54-58

109:54-58 Knowing that the adversary would seek to prevent the ambassadors of the Lord from entry into the various communities, cities, states, and nations to which the gospel must go, this inspired prayer called upon the Lord to open the way for the restored gospel to be taught to all peoples. The prayer recognizes that the leaders of nations are the gates through which missionaries must pass to enter their countries. The Prophet Joseph Smith pled with the Lord to soften their hearts so that the message might be taught.

109:56 That their prejudices may give way before the truth. Prejudice is a preconceived judgment that closes the hearts and minds of people to light and truth. Self- inflicted bondage robs hosts of people of associations and knowledge that would greatly edify and bless them. It finds perfect expression in those who reject the Book of Mormon without reading it, the story of the First Vision without praying about it, and the message of the Restoration out of fear of change or being thought different. It is a tool of the devil and is always associated with apostasy and spiritual darkness.

109:57 The test of true discipleship is found in the ability to accept and follow the living oracles of the Lord. The religious world has always been full of people who reject the living prophets in the name of loyalty to the prophets of earlier dispensations. Describing the same in his poem A Vision, the Prophet wrote:

These are they that came out for Apollos and Paul; For Cephas and Jesus, in all kinds of hope; For Enoch and Moses, and Peter and John; For Luther and Calvin, and even the Pope. For they never received the gospel of Christ, Nor the prophetic spirit that came from the Lord; Nor the covenant neither, which Jacob once had; They went their own way, and they have their reward. (Times and Seasons, 4:85) Compare Doctrine and Covenants 109:70-71. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:70-71.

109:58 The sons of Jacob. Refers to literal descendants of Jacob, whom the Lord named Israel.

May the Jews, the Lamanites, and All Israel Be Redeemed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:59-67

109:59 Appoint unto Zion other stakes besides this one. The Lord appoints by revelation through the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, under the direction of the First Presidency, the "building up [of] the church" (D&C 107:33), including the formation of stakes throughout the world. Today the Lord has appointed stakes unto Zion numbering in the thousands.

Thy work may be cut short in righteousness. The Saints of latter days are commanded to preach repentance to the world and to invite them to come unto Christ. Those who hearken to the message of the Restoration are commanded to gather to the stakes of Zion before the wicked are destroyed. "For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness. And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousnessUntil all shall know me, who remain" (D&C 84:96-98). As the prophesied destruction of the last days gets closer, the Lord will prosper the preaching of the gospel to all nations. Doors now locked to our missionaries will be opened. The Lord's work will be hastened by the blessings that he bestows upon the earth that all might know the truth. The Lord's work being cut short in righteousness will happen according to a divinely predetermined timetable.

109:60 Identified with the Gentiles. As used in the Bible, the word Gentile means nationa collective body. It is used in the same manner in the Book of Mormon. As a Jew is a Jewish national, so is a Gentile a citizen of a gentile nation. Thus, Joseph Smith, a pure-blooded Israelite, is referred to as a Gentile; and the gospel, it is prophesied, will be restored in a gentile nation. By this definition Latter- day Saints are Israelites by descent but Gentile by culture. Any nation that does not have prophets at its head, revelation as its constitution, and the Messiah as its king is a gentile nation.

109:61-64 As part of the promises of the Lord to be fulfilled before the coming of the Son of Man, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "the tribe of Judah will return to old Jerusalem" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 17). In this inspired prayer dedicating the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet was moved upon by the Holy Ghost to ask that the long- awaited day of Judah's return to Jerusalem be hastened. Jerusalem had not been under Jewish control since the Roman destruction of the holy city in 70 AD. The Lord covenanted with Abraham that the land of Palestine was to be given to him and his seed after him forever (Genesis 13:14-15). Preparations for that promise to be fulfilled were enacted with the gathering of the Jewish remnant to Palestine and the establishment of the nation of Israel following World War II.

The keys for gathering Judah to Jerusalem were restored by Moses to the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as part of the keys of the gathering of Israel (D&C 110:11). In 1841, under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Elder Orson Hyde traveled to Palestine and dedi cated the land of Israel for the gathering of the Jews. He knelt on the Mount of Olives to the east of the city and dedicated the land for that purpose. Concerning the return of the Jews to their ancient homeland, he prayed: "Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, and queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye.

"Thou, O Lord, did once move upon the heart of Cyrus to show favor unto Jerusalem and her children. Do Thou now also be pleased to inspire the hearts of kings and the powers of the earth to look with a friendly eye towards this place, and with a desire to see Thy righteous purposes executed in relation thereto. Let them know that it is Thy good pleasure to restore the kingdom unto Israel raise up Jerusalem as its capital, and constitute her people a distinct nation and government, with David Thy servant, even a descendant from the loins of ancient David to be their king" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:457). Christ, when he returns in glory as the promised David of the millennial kingdom, will claim his right to reign over the house of Israel, including Judah (D&C 45:43-53).

109:65 The remnants of Jacob, who have been cursed and smitten. This verse refers to the descendants of Lehi identified with the Indian nations of North America. They bore the curse of their ancestors who rejected the fulness of the gospel and had been smitten by the Gentiles that came to the Americas from across the Atlantic Ocean. Because of apostasy, they had no knowledge of the Holy One of Israel, even though they are descendants of the house of Israel. They have been promised that in the last days they will be restored to a knowledge of the true Messiah, believe in his gospel, and blossom as a rose (D&C 3:16-19; 49:24).

109:67 The Book of Mormon emphatically and repetitiously teaches that the gathering must in all instances be first to Christ and then, and only then, to lands of inheritance. No true prophecy is filled by someone claiming possession of a particular land with the idea in mind that salvation is a matter of homesteading the right piece of property. It is the truths of salvation, as noted in this text, to which the lost and fallen remnant of Israel must first return.

May the Saints Be Crowned with Glory and Honor and Gain Eternal Salvation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 109:68-80

109:71 Remember . . . all the presidents of thy church. This reference is not to those who have succeeded Joseph Smith in the office of president of the Church but rather to those who stood with him in the presidency of the Church at that time and those who presided in the presidency of the two stakes of Zion that had been organized by that point in time.

109:72 The kingdom, which thou hast set up without hands. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 65.

109:73 Fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:14, "Clear as the moon, and fair as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners."

109:74 Mountains to flow down at thy presence. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 133:22-24.

109:75 Shall be caught up. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:96; 101:31, "Shall be caught up."

109:76 This language in which clothing is used to represent the righteousness of the Saints is taken from Isaiah. "I will greatly rejoice in the Lord," he declared, "my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness" (Isaiah 61:10). Similarly, John the Revelator described those who would be exalted as "a great multitude, which no man could number, . . . clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands" (Revelation 7:9).

Garments may be pure. Symbolically, as the garment is clean, so is the soul. Alma taught, "There can no man be saved except his garments are washed white; yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain, through the blood of him of whom it has been spoken by our fathers, who should come to redeem his people from their sins" (Alma 5:21). Speaking of high priests, Alma taught: "Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb. Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 13:11-12).

With palms in our hands. The palm leaf is a symbol of victory and peace (John 12:13; Revelation 7:9).

Crowns of glory upon our heads. The crowns represent those that reign as kings and queens over their posterity in eternity. They have been married in "the new and everlasting covenant, and it is sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise. . . . [They] shall inherit thrones, kingdoms, principalities, and powers" (D&C 132:19).

109:79 That we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining seraphs . . . singing. "The veil is very thin in the temples," explained Dallin H. Oaks, "especially when we join in worshiping through music. At temple dedications I have seen more tears of joy elicited by music than by the spoken word. I have read accounts of angelic choirs joining in these hymns of praise, and I think I have experienced this on several occasions. In dedicatory sessions featuring beautiful and well- trained choirs of about thirty voices, there are times when I have heard what seemed to be ten times thirty voices praising God with a quality and intensity of feeling that can be experienced but not explained. Some who are listening today will know what I mean" (Conference Report, October 1994, 11).

Shining seraphs. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 38:1.

With acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna to God and the Lamb! William W. Phelps wrote a dedicatory hymn for this occasion, "The Spirit of God Like a Fire Is Burning," which has been sung at all latter-day temple dedications. The words of the first verse and chorus express the sentiments of the dedicatory prayer and are familiar to Latter-day Saints. The fifth verse, which is particularly fitting for a temple dedication, is no longer sung.

We'll wash and be washed, and with oil be anointed, Withal not omitting the washing of feet; For he that receiveth his penny appointed Must surely be clean at the harvest of wheat. (Smith, History of the Church, 2:426)

Hosanna. The word Hosanna is "of Hebrew origin, meaning literally, save now, or save we pray, or save we beseech thee[and] is both a chant of praise and glory to God and an entreaty for his blessings" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 368). At the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, a pattern for all subsequent temple dedications, the proceedings of the day were sealed "by shouting hosanna, hosanna, hosanna to God and the Lamb, three times, sealing it each time with amen, amen, and amen"(Smith, History of the Church, 2:427-28).
