Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 110

DATE: 3 APRIL 1836

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation, which records some of the most significant events of this dispensation, indeed, of the history of the earth, took place in the Kirtland Temple one week after its dedication. These events set the Kirtland Temple apart in the story of the Restoration and in the annals of temple building. Its purpose was not like that of other temples. It was built primarily as a place for prophets of past dispensations to restore the keys, powers, and authorities distinctive to their dispensations and ministries. The restoration of these keys brought about a "fulness of gospel ordinances" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:242).

Were it not for the authority restored in the Kirtland Temple, the entire purpose for which the earth was created would have come to naught (Malachi 4:5-6; D&C 2). Here the authority to gather Israel from her long dispersion and to lead "the ten tribes from the land of the north" was restored by Moses; here the authority to perform eternal marriages and bind families together for eternity was given anew by the Elias from Abraham's dispensation (see commentary on D&C 110:12); and the sealing power, by which all gospel ordinances are sealed for both the living and the dead, was restored by Elijah.

Introducing this revelation, Joseph Smith recorded the following:

"Sunday, 3.attended meeting in the Lord's House, and assisted the other Presidents of the Church [members of the first presidency] in seating the congregation, and then became an attentive listener to the preaching from the stand. Thomas B. Marsh and David W. Patten spoke in the forenoon to an attentive audience of about one thousand persons. In the afternoon, I assisted the other Presidents in distributing the Lord's Supper to the Church, receiving it from the Twelve, whose privilege it was to officiate at the sacred desk this day. After having performed this service to my brethren, I retired to the pulpit, the veils being dropped, and bowed myself, with Oliver Cowdery, in solemn and silent prayer. After rising from prayer, the following vision was opened to both of us" (History of the Church, 2:434-35).

The Lord Appears to Accept the Kirtland Temple As His House

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 110:1-10

110:1 The veil was taken from our minds. When the spirit children of God leave the realms of heaven and come to the earth to obtain a body, a veil is drawn across their minds, taking from them both the memory of their divine origin and the ability to see and comprehend the things of heaven. Elder James E. Talmage explained that "though the veil of mortality, with all its thick obscurity, may shut the light of the divine presence from the sinful heart, that separating curtain may be drawn aside and the heavenly light may shine into the righteous soul. By the listening ear, attuned to the celestial music, the voice of God has been heard declaring His personality and will; to the eye that is freed from the motes and beams of sin, single in its search after truth, the hand of God has been made visible; within the soul properly purified by devotion and humility the mind of God has been revealed" (Articles of Faith, 298). Such was the experience of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery on this occasion as the veil was lifted, allowing them to stand in the presence of the God of Israel and receive his instruction (Alma 19:6).

110:2 We saw the Lord. Like Joseph and Oliver, John Murdock also saw the Lord. He recorded: "The visions of my mind were opened, and the eyes of my understanding were enlightened, and I saw the form of a man, most lovely! The visage of his face was sound and fair as the sun. His hair, a bright silver gray, curled in most majestic form, His eyes, a keen penetrating blue, and the skin of his neck a most beautiful white, and He was covered from the neck to the feet with a loose garment, pure white, whiter than any garment I have ever before seen. His countenance was most penetrating, and yet most lovely! And while I was endeavoring to comprehend the whole personage, from head to feet, it slipped from me, and the Vision was closed up. But it left on my mind the impression of love, for months, that I never before felt, to that degree" (quoted in Anderson, Joseph Smith's Kirtland, 109-10).

110:3 The voice of Jehovah. Jesus of Nazareth identifies himself here as the great Jehovah of the Old Testament and as our advocate with the Father (v. 4).

110:5 Your sins are forgiven you. Had Joseph and Oliver not been clean and pure they could not have taken part in these visionary experiences.

You are clean before me. Anciently it was understood that one must be sanctified to stand in the presence of the Lord or perform any sacred function. Accordingly, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had prepared themselves for such an experience through the ordinances of washing and anointing in the Kirtland Temple (D&C 84:23; 88:37-41; 109:34-35). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 137.

110:7 My name shall be here. The "name" of the Lord signifies his priesthood and power (Abraham 1:18). To say that his name will be found in the temple is to say that his Spirit and power will manifest itself there.

I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house. This promise is twofold: to manifest himself is to reveal his mind and will to his people; it is also to reveal himself physically just as he is here doing with Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery (D&C 110:8).

In the dedicatory prayer for the Kirtland Temple, an appeal was made for three particular blessings namely, that the Lord would accept the Temple as his house; that his name would be there; and that he would manifest himself to his people in that place (D&C 109:4-5). In this verse the Lord affirms his willingness to do all three.

110:8 Do not pollute this holy house. "Like the Temple of Solomon and those which succeeded that grand structure in Jerusalem, the Kirtland temple was polluted and ceased to be a sanctuary to the name of the Lord. Even today, if it had remained undefiled it could hardly be used for the performance of the essential ordinances which are received in temples, for it was not built for them. . . .

"It is not a sacred temple todaynot by any means. It is no more a temple than an adobe building, and is not recognized by the Lord any more. It filled the measure of its creation, then fell into the hands of wicked men, and the Lord ceased to consider that building as a house built unto his name, and in the 124th section of the Doctrine and Covenants [v. 28] he says so" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:242-43).

Eliza R. Snow later described in part how the Kirtland Temple became polluted: "During the time my brother [Lorenzo Snow] was on this, his first mission, a great change had been going on in Kirtland, in the midst of the Saints. A spirit of speculation had crept into the hearts of some of the Twelve, and nearly, if not every quorum was more or less infected. Most of the Saints were poor, and now prosperity was dawning upon themthe Temple was completed, and in it they had been recipients of marvelous blessings, and many who had been humble and faithful to the performance of every duty ready to go and come at every call of the Priesthood, were getting haughty in their spirits, and lifted up in the pride of their hearts. As the Saints drank in the love and spirit of the world, the Spirit of the Lord withdrew from their hearts, and they were filled with pride and hatred toward those who maintained their integrity. They linked themselves together in an opposing partypretended that they constituted the Church, and claimed that the Temple belonged to them, and even attempted to hold it.

"Warren Parrish, who had been a humble, successful preacher of the Gospel, was the ringleader of this apostate party. One Sabbath morning, he, with several of his party, came into the Temple armed with pistols and bowie- knives, and seated themselves together in the Aaronic pulpits, on the east end of the Temple, while Father Smith and others, as usual, occupied those of the Melchisedec Priesthood on the west. Soon after the usual opening services, one of the brethren on the west stand arose, and just after he commenced to speak, one on the east interrupted him. Father Smith, presiding, called to orderhe told the apostate brother that he should have all the time he wanted, but he must wait his turn as the brother on the west took the floor and commenced first to speak, he must not be interrupted. A fearful scene ensued the apostate speaker becoming so clamorous, that Father Smith called for the police to take that man out of the house, when Parrish, John Boynton . . . saying he would blow out the brains of the first man who dared to lay hands on him. Many in the congregation, especially women and children, were terribly frightened some tried to escape from the confusion by jumping out of the windows. Amid screams and shrieks, the policemen, in ejecting the belligerents, knocked down a stovepipe, which fell helter-skelter among the people; but, although bowie- knives and pistols were wrestled from their owners, and thrown hither and thither to prevent disastrous results, no one was hurt, and after a short, but terrible scene to be enacted in a Temple of God, order was restored, and the services of the day proceeded as usual" (cited in Smith, Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, 20-21).

110:9 The endowment. The Lord directed his Saints to gather in the Ohio Valley to receive the endowment (D&C 38:15). "In January, 1836, over two months before the dedication, the first ceremonies of endowment were given in the temple," explained Joseph Fielding Smith. "They were not as complete as are the ceremonies today, but nevertheless, it was the beginning of the revealing and bestowing of the heavenly blessings in this dispensation. Washings and anointings were given, and the Prophet saw wonderful visions of the celestial kingdom. . . .

"The greater manifestations and endowment came, however, after the dedication of the temple. At that time all the elders who were out preaching the gospel were ordered to come to Kirtland to receive their endowment. The Lord said in June, 1834: 'Verily I say unto you, it is expedient in me that the first elders of my church should receive their endowment from on high in my house, which I have commanded to be built unto my name in the land of Kirtland' (see D&C 105:33). For this reason they were assembled at Kirtland at the dedication.

"This prophetic utterance about the elders obtaining an endowment in the temple at Kirtland is of double meaning. First, there were to come from on high essential blessings for the saints, which up to that time had not been revealed. Second, the elders were to receive greater powers that they might be better qualified to teach. It was made known by many manifestations of divine power at the dedication that the temple had been accepted as the house of the Lord" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:241-42).

In an address given at the laying of the cornerstone of the Salt Lake Temple, Brigham Young explained that Joseph Smith was given a commandment to build a temple in Kirtland, Ohio: "Joseph not only received revelation and commandment to build a temple, but he received a pattern also, as did Moses for the tabernacle, and Solomon for his temple; for without a pattern, he could not know what was wanted, having never seen one, and not having experienced its use.

"Without revelation, Joseph could not know what was wanted, any more than any other man, and, without commandment, the Church were too few in number, too weak in faith, and too poor in purse, to attempt such a mighty enterprise. But by means of all these stimulants, a mere handful of men, living on air, and a little hominy and milk, and often salt or no salt, when milk could not be had; the great Prophet Joseph, in the stone quarry, quarrying rock with his own hands; and the few then in the Church, following his example of obedience and diligence wherever most needed; with laborers on the walls, holding the sword in one hand to protect themselves from the mob, while they placed the stone and moved the trowel with the other, the Kirtland templethe second house of the Lord, that we have any published record of on the earth, was so far completed as to be dedicated. And those first Elders who helped to build it, received a portion of their first endowments, or we might say more clearly, some of the first, or introductory, or initiatory ordinances, preparatory to an endowment.

"The preparatory ordinances there administered, though accompanied by the ministrations of angels, and the presence of the Lord Jesus, were but a faint similitude of the ordinances of the house of the Lord in their fulness; yet many, through the instigation of the Devil, thought they had received all, and knew as much as God; they have apostatized, and gone to hell. But be assured, brethren, there are but few, very few of the Elders of Israel, now on earth, who know the meaning of the word endowment. To know, they must experience; and to experience, a temple must be built.

"Let me give you a definition in brief. Your endowment is, to receive all those ordinances in the house of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell" (Discourses of Brigham Young, 415-16).

Moses and Elias Appear and Commit Their Keys and Dispensations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 110:11-12

110:11 Keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth. Keys are the "right of presidency" (D&C 107:8), meaning the right to preside. When Moses gave the keys of the gathering of Israel to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, it meant that they alone held the presidency over this event. Thus everything that happens relative to the gathering of Israel that constitutes the fulfillment of prophecy must take place under their direction, or under that of their legal and lawful successors as possessors of those keys, or that presidency.

Their authority embraces the whole earth and is to be used to gather the twelve tribes of Israel, which have been scattered to the four winds, or the "four parts of the earth" (2 Nephi 10:8). They are gathered by missionaries sent forth for that purpose. To be gathered is to be baptized for the remission of sins (D&C 137:6; 3 Nephi 21:6). It is to embrace the testimony that Joseph Smith is a prophet, that the Father and the Son appeared to him in the Sacred Grove, and that the fulness of truth and eternal salvation are found only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints. Mormon prophesies of this gathering: "I am Mormon, and a pure descendant of Lehi. I have reason to bless my God and my Savior Jesus Christ, that he brought our fathers out of the land of Jerusalem, (and no one knew it save it were himself and those whom he brought out of that land) and that he hath given me and my people so much knowledge unto the salvation of our souls. Surely he hath blessed the house of Jacob, and hath been merciful unto the seed of Joseph. And insomuch as the children of Lehi have kept his commandments he hath blessed them and prospered them according to his word. Yea, and surely shall he again bring a remnant of the seed of Joseph to the knowledge of the Lord their God. And as surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth. And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them. And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen" (3 Nephi 5:20-26).

Leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "'We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes' (A of F 10). This inspired language leaves the clear impression that the gathering of Israel is one thing and the restoration of the Ten Tribes is another. Why this distinction? Are not the Ten Tribes a part of Israel? And if Israel is to be gathered, surely in the very nature of things this would include the gathering of the major portion of that ancient and favored people.

"An immortal Moses, appearing in resurrected glory on the 3rd day of April, 183[6], in the Kirtland Temple, committed unto his mortal fellowservants, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, 'the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north' (D&C 110:11). Again there is a distinction between Israel as a whole and the Ten Tribes who are the dominant portion of Jacob's seed. All scripture comes by the power of the Holy Ghost and is verily true. When special and unusual language is used, there is a reason. Holy writ is not idle chatter; it is the mind and will of the Lord; it says what he wants said. And so it now behooves us to learn why it is one thing to gather Israel from the four parts of the earth and yet another to lead the Ten Tribes from the land of the north.

"We have already seen that all Israel, including specifically and pointedly the Ten Tribes, is scattered in all the nations of the earth, upon all the islands of the sea, and among every people who dwell on this planet. . . .

"We are also aware that the Ten Tribes were first taken as a body into Assyria; that they went out from Assyria, northward, in a body, under prophetic guidance; and that they were then splintered and driven and scattered into all places and among all peoples. These Ten Tribes, no matter where they are located, are in nations and places known in the days of Isaiah and Jeremiah and the ancient prophets as the north countries. Hence, their return to Palestine at least will be from the land of the north.

"The tribe of Ephraim is one of the Ten Tribes; and her people became wanderers in the nations, where they now reside and where they are now being found and gathered, one of a city and two of a family, into the stakes of Zion in those nations. This gathering of Israel is not to an American Zion; it is not to Palestine and the ancient holy land; it is not to any central place or location. Rather, it is to the holy places of safety that are now being set up in all nations as rapidly as our strength and means permit. As we have seen, this gathering of Ephraim falls in the cate gory of the gathering of Israel and not of the leading of the Ten Tribes from the land of the north. This gathering of Ephraim is into the stakes of Zion in all the nations of the earth. There are, of course, isolated and unusual instances of people from the other lost tribes gathering with Ephraim, but these are few and far between. The gathering of these other tribes is not yet, but by and by. . . .

" . . . But with the Ten Tribes, in part at least, it will be another thing. They are destined to return (at least in large and representative numbers) to the same soil where the feet of their forebears walked during the days of their mortal pilgrimage. They are to return to Palestine. At least a constituent assembly will congregate there in the very land given of God to Abraham their father. Others will, of course, be in America and in all lands, but the formal return, the return from the north countries, will be to the land of their ancient inheritance" (Millennial Messiah, 319-21).

110:12 Elias. Discussions about the identity and mission of Elias demand attention and a careful reading of the texts involved. Two doctrines and a number of prophets are involved. First, Elias is a title properly given to a prophet whose office or calling is that of a forerunner, that is, one who prepares the way for something greater. The Aaronic Priesthood, for instance, could be called the Priesthood of Elias because it is a preparatory priesthood. It prepares the way for that which is greater (JST Matthew 17:11, 13). Second, there is a doctrine of Elias that pertains to restoration rather than preparation (JST Matthew 17:9-10). Scripture speaks of John the Baptist as an Elias of preparation (Luke 1:16-17; JST John 1:21-22) and Christ as an Elias of restoration (JST John 1:26-28). The name Elias can also be a title for those prophets who play a part in the restoration of all things. For instance, John the Revelator is referred to as Elias in section 77 (vv. 9 and 14); in the present text another prophet is identified as an Elias restoring keys from the dispensation of Abraham. In section 27 we are told that Gabriel (whom the Prophet Joseph Smith identified as Noah) holds the keys of the restoration of all things (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157; D&C 27:5-6).

The identity of the Elias in the present text is not entirely certain. It could have been Abraham himself or Melchizedek, either of whom could have restored keys from that dispensation. It is frequently said that it was Noah, because he is identified as an Elias in Doctrine and Covenants 27:5-6. This, however, seems unlikely, as Noah's life did not overlap that of Abraham (Bible Dictionary, 636). It is something of a strain on the order of heaven to suppose that Noah would restore the keys of a dispensation in which he did not live. Further, the text from which this conclusion is made identifies Noah as holding the keys of the restoration of all things. This seems to mean that all the Eliases who came to restore keys in this dispensation (or in the meridian of time) did so under Noah's direction, not that he restored all the keys (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 103-4, 115-21; McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 219-22).

The dispensation of the gospel of Abraham. The gospel of Abraham is that power and authority distinctive to Abraham and the covenant that God made with him. A "dispensation" of that gospel is the giving of it anew, or its restoration to those willing to enter into a like covenant. Thus all promises made to Abraham relative to his seed the endless continuation of his family and his eternal relationship with his wife Sarahare granted to all who receive that same gospel. The keys to perform the ordinances were restored by the Elias spoken of in this verse; the keys to seal this and all gospel ordinances were restored by Elijah.

In us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed. The promises given to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are here given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. Through these keys the priesthood can be extended to any who are married by this authority in the house of the Lord. Among the blessings of temple marriage are the promise of eternal increase and the promise that the seed of those so married will have right to the priesthood and will be called upon to take the blessings of salvation and eternal life to all nations (Abraham 2:9, 11).

Elijah Returns and Confers the Keys of His Dispensation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 110:13-16

110:13-14 Elijah the prophet . . . before the great and dreadful day. The Old Testament ends with the promise that Elijah the prophet would visit the earth prior to "the great and dreadful day" of the Lord's return (Malachi 4:5). Though there may be no plainer prophecy in all of holy writ, its meaning has been entirely lost to most Christians, who assume that this prophecy was fulfilled with Elijah's appearance on the Mount of Transfiguration (Matthew 17:1-13). This event, in which Peter, James, and John, who were with Christ on the Mount, were charged to keep secret (Matthew 17:9), hardly fits the description of a "great and dreadful day." Not even the faithful members of the Church in that day knew of it, nor would it generally be known for generations to come. Further, the context in which the prophecy is given is the destruction of the wicked by fire while the righteous inherit the millennial earth, which assuredly did not take place at that time (Malachi 4:1-3). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:37, page 23.

110:15 Hearts of the fathers. That separation known to us as death brings with it a heightened concern for our children and our children's children throughout their generations. Those in the spirit world have a great interest in and concern for their progeny yet in the flesh.

Children to the fathers. As the hearts of the fathers turn to their children, so will the hearts of the children turn to their fathers. This is evidenced by members of the Church going to the house of the Lord to perform vicarious ordinances in behalf of their kindred dead. As the dead accept those ordinances, they assure themselves of a place in an eternal family.

Smitten with a curse. Moroni rendered this "utterly wasted" when he appeared to Joseph in September 1823 (D&C 2:3). The world will be saved in family units. Since salvation centers in the Abrahamic covenant, to fail to enter into that covenant through marriage and the eternal sealing of family units is to squander the purpose of mortality. The earth was created to facilitate the natural and proper love between a man and a woman. In marriage they are to become "one flesh," the Lord said, "and all this that the earth might answer the end of its creation; And that it might be filled with the measure of man, according to his creation before the world was made" (D&C 49:16-17). Simply stated, salvation is a family affair. In subsequent years Joseph Smith learned how this authority restored by Elijah applied as well to our kindred dead. Moreover he learned that theyafter the gospel was preached to them in the world of spiritscould by proxy have all the ordinances of salvation performed for them in the house of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 127, 128, and 138.

110:16 The keys of this dispensation are committed into your hands. These are the keys of the sealing power by which gospel ordinances for both the living and the dead are sealed. This explains Moroni's statement that God would reveal the priesthood, meaning the purpose and function of the priesthood (see D&C 2:1), through Elijah. The authority restored by Elijah binds or seals every ordinance so that it is of "efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead" (D&C 132:7). Further, because of that authority restored by Elijah, ordinances can be performed for our kindred dead whereby the same blessings and promises can extend to those who died without the opportunity to receive them while in the flesh.
