Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 111

DATE: 6 AUGUST 1836

PLACE: SALEM, MASSACHUSETTS

Following the pentecostal season associated with the dedication of the Kirtland Temple, it was necessary that the Saints attend to the temporal needs of the Church. Heavy debt hung over the Church because of loans secured to procure land (see commentary on D&C 104) and to build the temple.

Ebenezer Robinson, an early member of the Church who served for a time as the Prophet's scribe, reported on a possible solution that had presented itself. "There came to Kirtland a brother by the name of Burgess who stated that he had knowledge of a large amount of money secreted in the cellar of a certain house in Salem, Massachusetts, which had belonged to a widow (then deceased), and thought he was the only person who had knowledge of it, or of the location of the house" (Roberts, Comprehensive History, 1:411).

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "On . . . July 25th, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Brother Hyrum Smith, and Oliver Cowdery, I left Kirtland" to travel to New York City. These brethren met with creditors in New York for four days. "From New York we continued our journey to Providence, on board a steamer," the Prophet further wrote, "from thence to Boston, by steam cars, and arrived in Salem, Massachusetts, early in August, where we hired a house, and occupied the same during the month, teaching the people from house to house, and preaching publicly, as opportunity presented; visiting occasionally, sections of the surrounding country, which are rich in the history of the Pilgrim Fathers of New England, in Indian warfare, religious superstition, bigotry, persecution, and learned ignorance" (History of the Church, 2:463-64). The day after arriving in Salem the Prophet received the revelation recorded as section 111.

The outcome of the journey is recorded in B. H. Roberts's Comprehensive History: "Burgess, according to [Ebenezer] Robinson, met the brethren in Salem, but claimed that time had wrought such changes in the town that he could not for a certainty point out the house 'and soon left'" (Comprehensive History, 1:411).

The Lord Had Treasure in Salem

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 111:1-11

111:1 Not displeased with your coming this journey. Lest discouragement overtake these brethren after the disappointing news that Brother Burgess could not tell them the location of the treasure, the Lord revealed that he was not angry with their efforts in seeking solutions to their debts.

Notwithstanding your follies. The Prophet's folly lay less in the fanciful hope of finding a treasure than it did in his failure to counsel with the Lord. A little over two years earlier he had received direction from the Lord about the Church's indebtedness. At that time the Saints were told that if they would humble themselves and be prayerful and diligent that he would send means for their deliverance (D&C 104:78-80). The trip to Salem was a venture of their own design, not one of divine direction.

111:2 I have much treasure in this city. The hidden treasure in Salem, that which is of greatest worth to God, was his children (v. 10). In the Old Testament the house of Israel was referred to as the Lord's "peculiar treasure" (Exodus 19:5; Psalm 135:4). The references here to his gathering them out for "the benefit of Zion" suggest that the city was rich in the blood of Israel.

Through your instrumentality. The Prophet Joseph Smith and his companions did not have success in preaching the gospel in Salem. However, five years later to the day, Elder Erastus Snow began his missionary labors there. The result of his efforts included the organization of a branch numbering about a hundred members, many of whom later joined the Saints in Nauvoo, Illinois.

111:4 I will give this city into your hands. In some future day, perhaps in the Millennium, the city of Salem (meaning the city of Peace) will be governed by righteous men holding the priesthood of God. These will have the necessary power and authority to draw upon its wealth to the blessing of all of its inhabitants.

They shall not discover your secret parts. This is a Hebrew idiom meaning embarrassment or shame (Isaiah 3:17). Their embarrassment centered in the financial plight that brought them to Salem in search of treasures.

111:5 Your debts. This refers to the debt incurred by the Prophet Joseph Smith and other Church leaders as agents for the Church in buying land, building the Kirtland Temple, and stocking Church-owned mercantile establishments. Most of the debt was in the form of contracts, which had been entered into for the purpose of purchasing property and goods received on credit from merchants. It is difficult from extant records to determine the exact amount of accumulative debt contracted at this time.

111:9 This place you may obtain by hire. The brethren rented a house in Salem for a month (Smith, History of the Church, 2:464).

Inquire diligently concerning the more ancient inhabitants and founders of this city. This revelation, which directs an interest in their kindred dead, comes some years before the principles associated with temple work had been revealed. It was given in Salem, the county seat of Essex County, Massachusetts. Robert Smith, the first of the Prophet Joseph Smith's family in America, had settled here. Similarly, record of many of the progenitors of the early families in the Church would later be found here.
