Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 112

DATE: 23 JULY 1837

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation was given during some of the darkest days in the history of the Church. As night follows the day, so the light and glory that surrounded the dedication of the Kirtland Temple was supplanted by darkness and evil. In the summer of 1837, members of the Quorum of the Twelve, witnesses to the Book of Mormon, and other key priesthood leaders met in the upper room of the temple to dispose of Joseph Smith as the prophet of the Lord. Their plan was to organize a new Church, with David Whitmer at its head. They had determined to reject the Prophet, the Book of Mormon, and the priesthood, while seeking to unite the Christian world around repentance, baptism, and the Bible (George A. Smith, Journal of Discourses, 11:11).

In the midst of this darkness, Joseph Smith said, "God revealed to me that something new must be done for the salvation of His Church" (History of the Church, 2:489). Heber C. Kimball reported that the Prophet Joseph Smith came to him while he was in the Kirtland Temple and said, "Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: 'Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation'" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 104).

Section 112 was given on the day the gospel was first preached in England. It was directed to Thomas B. Marsh, then the president of the Quorum of the Twelve and the man thus entitled to a revelation on the duties of that quorum. This revelation is of singular importance in identifying the rights and authority of the Twelve in declaring the gospel to the nations of the earth and in specifying their relationship to the First Presidency.

The Twelve Are to Take the Gospel to All Nations and People

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 112:1-10

112:1 Thine alms have come up as a memorial before me. These same words were spoken by the angel of the Lord who appeared to Cornelius, a Gentile, directing him to send for Peter, from whom he and his family received the gospel (Acts 10:1-4). It was, the angel said, Cornelius's alms, meaning good works, that opened the heavens and its blessings to him. In like manner the Lord spoke to Lehi in a dream, saying, "Blessed art thou Lehi, because of the things which thou hast done; and because thou hast been faithful and declared unto this people the things which I commanded thee" (1 Nephi 2:1). This principle, often repeated in scripture, is that the heavens are opened to those whose works are works of righteousness.

Were chosen to bear testimony of my name. In the revelation given to the Twelve at the time they were called, the Lord said, "The twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the worldthus differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling" (D&C 107:23).

112:4 Thou shalt bear record of my name. It is the office and calling of an apostle to testify of Christ and of all that properly bears his name, that is, all that is done under the direction of the priesthood. It is the duty of the Twelve to both teach the gospel among the nations of the earth and to see that the affairs of the Church are properly regulated wherever it had been organized.

112:5 Contend thou. In the early nineteenth century, this phrase meant to "use earnest efforts to obtain, or to defend and preserve" (Webster, Dictionary, 1828, s.v. "contend").

112:6 Publishing my name. The Twelve are to make the gospel known among all men.

112:7 Let thy feet be shod. To have one's feet shod meant to have one's shoes on and to be ready to travel. To show that they were ready for their journey, the Israelites were commanded to eat the Passover with their shoes on (Exodus 12:11). Similarly, Christ commanded his disciples to be "shod with sandals" (Mark 6:9) that they might be ready to go and publish the gospel. The Lord here directs Thomas B. Marsh to stand ready to travel in the duty of his office.

Thy path lieth among the mountains. Isaiah wrote, "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" (Isaiah 52:7). The revelations of the Restoration use the same imagery to announce glad tidings, particularly of the going forth of the Book of Mormon (D&C 128:19).

112:8 See Luke 1:52.

112:10 Thomas B. Marsh's failure to heed the counsel given him in this verse caused the Spirit of the Lord eventually to withdraw from him. George A. Smith, Heber C. Kimball, and Orson Hyde all relate interesting experiences regarding Elder Marsh's rejection of the Lord's admonitions and his apostasy from the Church. George A. Smith tells the story: "The wife of Thomas B. Marsh, who was then President of the Twelve Apostles, and sister Harris concluded they would exchange milk, in order to make a little larger cheese than they otherwise could. To be sure to have justice done, it was agreed that they should not save the strippings, but that the milk and strippings should all go together. Small matters to talk about here, to be sure, two women's exchanging milk to make cheese.

"Mrs. Harris, it appeared, was faithful to the agreement and carried to Mrs. Marsh the milk and strippings, but Mrs. Marsh, wishing to make some extra good cheese, saved a pint of strippings from each cow and sent Mrs. Harris the milk without the strippings.

"Finally it leaked out that Mrs. Marsh had saved strippings, and it became a matter to be settled by the Teachers. They began to examine the matter, and it was proved that Mrs. Marsh had saved the strippings, and consequently had wronged Mrs. Harris out of that amount. An appeal was taken from the Teacher to the Bishop, and a regular Church trial was had. President Marsh did not consider that the Bishop had done him and his lady justice, for they decided that the strippings were wrongfully saved, and that the woman had violated her covenant.

"Marsh immediately took an appeal to the High Council, who investigated the question with much patience, and I assure you they were a grave body. Marsh being extremely anxious to maintain the character of his wife, as he was the President of the Twelve Apostles, and a great man in Israel, made a desperate defence, but the High Council finally confirmed the Bishop's decision.

"Marsh, not being satisfied, took an appeal to the First Presidency of the Church, and Joseph and his Counsellors had to sit upon the case, and they approved the decision of the High Council.

"This little affair, you will observe, kicked up a considerable breeze, and Thomas B. Marsh then declared that he would sustain the character of his wife, even if he had to go to hell for it.

"The then President of the Twelve Apostles, the man who should have been the first to do justice and cause reparation to be made for wrong, committed by any member of his family, took that position, and what next? He went before a magistrate and swore that the 'Mormons' were hostile towards the State of Missouri.

"That affidavit brought from the government of Missouri an exterminating order, which drove some 15,000 Saints from their homes and habitations" (Journal of Discourses, 3:283-84).

Heber C. Kimball reported that "about the time he [Thomas B. Marsh] was preparing to leave this Church, he received a revelation in the Printing Office. He retired to himself, and prayed, and was humble, and God gave him a revelation, and he wrote it. There were from three to five pages of it; and when he came out, he read it to brother Brigham [Young] and me. In it God told him what to do, and that was to sustain brother Joseph and to believe that what brother Joseph had said was true. But no; he took a course to sustain his wife and oppose the Prophet of God, and she led him away" (Journal of Discourses, 5:28).

Last, we learn from Orson Hyde, who partook of the spirit of apostasy with Thomas B. Marsh, "During our temptation, David W. Patten was shot by the enemy, and several days afterward while Thos. B. and myself were sitting in a log cabin together in silent meditation, some being smote him on the shoulder, and said, with a countenance full of deepest anxiety and solicitude, 'Thomas! Thomas! why have you so soon forgotten?' Thomas told me it was David W. Patten, with whom, he not long before, had made a covenant to remain true and faithful until the end" (cited in Anderson, "Being Valiant," 42).

Revelation Given to Thomas B. Marsh on the Duties of the Twelve

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 112:11-15

112:12 Let them be admonished for all their sins. No good man has ever escaped the attention of the adversary. Satan, who confronted the Savior face to face, can be expected to show like attention to all who have been called to bear witness of his name. To the Nephite Twelve the Savior said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye must watch and pray always, lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away captive by him" (3 Nephi 18:15). Apostles labor with the same temptations and frailties as do all other men.

112:13 After their temptations, and much tribulation. Of these difficult times in Kirtland, John Taylor wrote, "There was a very bitter feeling gotten up by a number of men who had apostatized. Parley P. Pratt was one who was affected. He, however, did not go to the length that some did; and Orson Pratt had partaken more or less of that spirit" (Gospel Kingdom, 189). As a measure of his integrity, Elder Pratt recounted this experience in his autobiography, saying, "About this time, after I had returned from Canada, there were jarrings and discords in the Church at Kirtland, and many fell away and became enemies and apostates. There were also envyings, lyings, strifes, and divisions, which caused much trouble and sorrow. By such spirits I was also accused, misrepresented, and abused. And at one time, I also was overcome by the same spirit in a great measure, and it seemed as if the very powers of darkness which war against the Saints were let loose upon me. But the Lord knew my faith, my zeal, my integrity of purpose, and he gave me the victory.

"I went to Brother Joseph Smith in tears, and, with a broken heart and contrite spirit, confessed wherein I had erred in spirit, murmured, or done or said amiss. He frankly forgave me, prayed for me, and blessed me. Thus, by experience I learned more fully to discern and to contrast the two spirits, and to resist the one and cleave to the other. And, being tempted in all points, even as others, I learned how to bear with, and excuse, and succor those who are tempted" (Pratt, Autobiography, 144).

We are told that Orson Hyde had come close to defecting but perchance walked in on the meeting in which Heber C. Kimball was being set apart for his mission to England. Humbled by the spirit that he felt, he acknowledged his faults to the Prophet, sought forgiveness, and asked to accompany Elder Kimball on his mission. The Prophet set him apart to that calling, and he later played a significant role in that mission that proved to be the salvation of the Church (Talbot, Acts of the Modern Apostles, 37).

Many others did not repent. Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and John F. Boynton were dropped from the Quorum of the Twelve in the conference held on 3 September 1837, less than a month and a half after this revelation was given. See commentary on verse 15, "Rebel not against my servant Joseph."

They shall be converted. As this refers to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, it thus raises the question: How could men be called to the apostleship and at the same time not be converted? First, it should be noted that having a testimony and being converted are not necessarily the same thing. A testimony comes by the witness of the Spirit and leaves one with the knowledge that something is true. Conversion, on the other hand, is the fruit, or reward, of acting on the witness of the Spirit. Conversion comes only in discipleship, in living the gospel. To be converted is to be born again, to put off the world and walk with the Saints. It comes by putting off the natural man and putting on Christ. Thus true conversion is a process and comes only in the course of time.

The apostle Peter is the classical illustration of a convert. After he accepted Jesus as the Messiah, after he was baptized, after he spent three full years in almost constant companionship with the Son of God, after he was ordained an elder and an apostle, after he went forth on a mission healing the sick and performing other miracles, after he walked on the water amid the tempestuous waves of the Galilean sea, after he bore a fervent witness of the Savior's divinity, after all this and more, Jesus said to him: "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren" (Luke 22:32). It was only then that Peter was reconciled to God and became a new creature by the power of the Holy Ghost. Peter's conversion was manifest in his valiant actions from the time of the first Pentecost after the death of Christ until he, too, died upon a Roman cross (John 21:18).

112:14 Take up your cross. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 23:7.

Follow me. This divine injunction, repeatedly given to the Twelve in the meridian of time, marks the true path of salvation. Salvation is not merely found in professing Christ but rather in following, or emulating, him (v. 26).

112:15 Exalt not yourselves. The primary charge of apostleship is to teach the gospel of Jesus Christ. All their time, talents, and interests are to be centered in that ministry. All else is secondary. They are personal ambassadors of Christ. Thus it is not their purpose to promote themselves nor a personal point of view. The apostles are to know the gospel of him for whom they have been called to speak. To go beyond that gospel is a usurpation of stewardship.

Rebel not against my servant Joseph. The spirit of darkness in Kirtland in 1837 was so pervasive that no quorum of the priesthood could escape it. Nor was this mist of darkness quick to lift. "At the quarterly conference assembled at Far West, April 7, 1838, David W. Patten declared that, as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, he could confidently recommend Thomas B. Marsh, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, and Orson Pratt as being men of God. However, in a spirit of discernment rather than of disparagement, he stated that he somewhat doubted William Smith, and that he could not recommend William E. McLellin, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, or John F. Boynton. As time was to prove, Elder Patten's discernments were valid" (Talbot, Acts of the Modern Apostles, 40).

John Taylor, who would be called to fill the place of one of the fallen apostles in December the following year, had occasion to counsel Parley P. Pratt, also an apostle and the missionary who had converted him (see commentary on v. 13, "After their temptations, and much tribulation"). Elder Taylor recounted part of that dialogue thus: "I am surprised to hear you speak so, Brother Parley. Before you left Canada you bore a strong testimony to Joseph Smith being a Prophet of God, and to the truth of the work he has inaugurated; and you said you knew these things by revelation, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. You gave me a strict charge to the effect that though you or an angel from heaven was to declare anything else I was not to believe it. Now Brother Parley, it is not man that I am following but the Lord. The principles you taught me led me to Him, and I now have the same testimony that you then rejoiced in. If the work was true six months ago, it is true today: if Joseph was then a prophet, he is now a prophet" (Roberts, Life of John Taylor, 40).

The keys . . . shall not be taken from him. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 90:3.

Those Who Receive the First Presidency Receive the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 112:16-20

112:16-18 Each member of the Quorum of the Twelve holds all the keys of the kingdom, which they receive at the time of their ordination to that quorum. Nevertheless, they use those keyswhich constitute the right of presidency only under the direction of the First Presidency and their own quorum president. Such discipline is essential if the Lord's house is to remain a house of order.

112:17 In this verse the First Presidency is announced as consisting of Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Hyrum Smith. Perhaps the earliest manuscript of this revelation was recorded by Fredrick G. Williams (Woodford, Historical Development, 1479). What makes this of special interest is that Elder Williams was the second counselor in the presidency at the time. Various sources help us understand the context of the receiving of this revelation:

"'Well, break it is then,' said Williams, 'and we will strike hands upon it.'

"'Very well,' said Joseph, 'from henceforth I drop you from my quorum, in the name of the Lord,' and Williams in wrath replied, 'Amen.'

"Joseph entered a complaint against him, for neglect of duty as an officer of justice, on which account his ministry was taken from him, and given to Oliver Cowdery" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 335-36).

"President Smith then introduced Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith for assistant counselors. These last four, together with the first three, are to be considered the heads of the Church. Carried unanimously" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:509).

The revelation the Prophet received for the benefit of Frederick G. Willilams and Willliam W. Phelps reads as follows:

"Verily, thus saith the Lord, in consequence of their transgressions their former standing has been taken away from them, and now, if they will be saved, let them be ordained as Elders in my Church to preach my Gospel and travel abroad from land to land and from place to place, to gather mine elect unto me, saith the Lord, and let this be their labors from henceforth. Amen" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:46n).

112:20 To accept the Lord is to accept his word, it is to find his will and do it. Conversely, to reject his wordthe revelations he gives through his anointed servants is to reject him. Just as we cannot with consistency say we love the Father while rejecting the Son, neither can we profess to love the Son while rejecting those whom he has sent in his name to do his bidding. To accept his servants is to accept him, to reject them is to reject him.

Trials in Kirtland Separated the Wicked from the Righteous

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 112:21-29

112:21 Send them. See Doctrine and Covenants 84:107-8; 107:33-34.

112:23-26. In the imagery of a New Testament parable, the gospel net had been cast out and all kinds of fish had been gathered in (Matthew 13:47-50). The failure of the Kirtland Anti-Banking Society would result in a sorting of the good fish from the bad, as it were. This separation did much to cleanse the Church of those who would not have the faith to accept that which would be revealed in Nauvoo and to make the journey West. These verses also apply to a future day when the true Saints will be separated from those who only profess to be Saints.

112:23 A world blinded by sin is not able to see the light of the gospel. In the "Preface" to the Doctrine and Covenants (section 1), the Lord declared, "He that repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man" (v. 33). Later, he said, "That wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men (D&C 93:39).

112:26 Blasphemed agains me in the midst of my house. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110:8. "Do not pollute this holy house."

The Keys of the Kingdom are Held by the First Presidency and the Twelve

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 112:30-34

112:30-32 These verses teach that each member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles and the First Presidency holds all the keys of the kingdom. That is, each member of these two quorums would hold all the keys of the kingdom. For this reason we now sustain the members of these two quorums as prophets, seers, and revelators. This, however, was not the case when this revelation was given. It was not until the end of Joseph Smith's ministry in Nauvoo that all the keys had been restored in fulness to the Twelve.

Wilford Woodruff described the time bestowal of these keys: "In the winter of 1843-4, Joseph Smith, the Prophet of God, called the Twelve Apostles together in the City of Nauvoo, and spent many days with us in giving us our endowments, and teaching us those glorious principles which God had revealed to him. And upon one occasion he stood upon his feet in our midst for nearly three hours declaring unto us the great and last dispensation which God had set His hand to perform upon the earth in these last days. The room was filled as if with consuming fire; the Prophet was clothed upon with much of the power of God, and his face shone and was transparently clear, and he closed that speech, never-to-be- forgotten in time or in eternity, with the following language:

"'Brethren, I have had great sorrow of heart for fear that I might be taken from the earth with the keys of the Kingdom of God upon me, without sealing them upon the heads of other men. God has sealed upon my head all the keys of the Kingdom of God necessary for organizing and building up of the Church, Zion, and Kingdom of God upon the earth, and to prepare the Saints for the coming of the Son of Man. Now, brethren, I thank God I have lived to see the day that I have been enabled to give you your endowments, and I have now sealed upon your heads all the powers of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods and Apostleship, with all the keys and powers thereof, which God has sealed upon me; and I now roll off all the labor, burden and care of this Church and Kingdom of God upon your shoulders, and I now command you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to round up your shoulders, and bear off this Church and Kingdom of God before heaven and earth, and before God, angels and men; and if you don't do it you will be damned'" (Clark, Messages, 3:134).

112:30 Priesthood given, for . . . the last time. Various dispensations have required a restoration of the priesthood with all its keys, powers, and authority. Ours is the last such dispensation. As foreseen by the prophet Daniel, the restored gospel and the reestablished Church would never again be lost or left to "other people" (Daniel 2:44). These verses assured the Saints that those who sought to overthrow the Church in Kirtland would not be successful.

112:31 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:15, 18.

112:34 I come quickly. This description of the Lord's return tells how the Lord will come rather then when. Although no man knows the day or hour of his coming, this phrase teaches that when he appears it will be suddenly, catching the wicked unawares.
