Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 7

DATE: APRIL 1829 (ON OR AFTER 7 APRIL)

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

This revelation was received in April 1829. Of it, Joseph Smith said: "I continued to translate and he [Oliver] to write, with little cessation, during which time we received several revelations. A difference of opinion arising between us about the account of John the Apostle, mentioned in the New Testament, as to whether he died or continued to live, we mutually agreed to settle it by the Urim and Thummim and the following is the word which we received . . ." (History of the Church, 1:35-36).

The preface to this revelation, in both the Book of Commandments and the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, reads as follows: "A Revelation given to Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, in Harmony, Pennsylvania, April 1829, when they desired to know whether John, the beloved disciple, tarried on earth or died. Translated from parchment, written and hid up by himself."

In the previous revelation Oliver was promised the gift of translation (D&C 6:25). He was also promised that he would be involved as a translator in bringing forth revelations that had been hidden up because of the wickedness of men (D&C 6:27). This revelation appears to be at least a partial fulfillment of those promises. It would also appear that this experience was preparatory to fulfillment of the promise that had been made to Oliver that he would aid in the translation of the Book of Mormon.

John the Beloved and the Gathering of Israel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 7:1-3

7:1 You shall ask what you will. We read accounts of spiritually noble men who have received the Lord's promise that they may ask whatever they will of him and it will be given them. Nephi, son of Helaman, was such a man. Because of his tireless service in the cause of truth, the Lord said to him, "I will bless thee forever; and I will make thee mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will" (Helaman 10:5). In like manner the Lord told Enoch, "My Spirit is upon you, wherefore all thy words will I justify; and the mountains shall flee before you, and the rivers shall turn from their course; and thou shalt abide in me, and I in you; therefore walk with me" (Moses 6:34). Such was the promise here accorded by Christ to his beloved cousin John the Revelator.

7:2 Lord, give unto me power over death. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 49:8, "Holy men that ye know not of."

7:3 Shall prophesy before nations. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:9, "This is Elias"; 77:14, "It was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes."

Peter, James, and John Hold Gospel Keys

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 7:4-8

7:6 John was promised that he would not taste of death until the time of Christ's return. During the interim period he would be a translated being like unto Enoch and those of his city. "Many have supposed," Joseph Smith explained, "that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 170).

I will make him as flaming fire. This language, though used by Paul (Hebrews 1:7), traces to Psalm 104:4. It is part of the imagery used to describe the splendor and glory in which God clothes himself and his servants. Though John as a translated being could appear in glory, "as flaming fire," much of his labor could be accomplished while his glory was withheld.

A ministering angel. Paul taught that "angels are ministering spirits" (JST Hebrews 1:7). Speaking of angels, Mormon explained that "the office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him" (Moroni 7:31).

He shall minister for those who shall be heirs of salvation who dwell on the earth. Again, the language is that of the apostle Paul, who said that angels are "sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation" (Hebrews 1:14). A modern rendering of this text reads, "The angels are only spirit-messengers sent out to help and care for those who are to receive his salvation" (Living New Testament). The ministering of angels has been common to those of the household of faith in all ages. "Thus the Gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Moses 5:58). So it would be that John, who was himself ministered to by angels (Revelation 22:9), would now be called upon to administer in like fashion to others. At a conference of the Church, held June 1831, Joseph Smith said "John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion" (History of the Church, 1:176).

7:7 The text affirms that Peter, James, and John constituted "a quorum of three presidents" according to the ancient order (D&C 107:29), and as such they presided over the meridian- day Church. A little more than a month after this revelation was received, John the Baptist would explain to Joseph and Oliver that in restoring the Aaronic Priesthood he had acted under the direction of these three men who "held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek" (Joseph Smith-History 1:72), also known as "the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:2). We know their office today as that of the First Presidency (D&C 107:22).
