Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 113

DATE: MARCH 1838 (AFTER 14 MARCH)

PLACE: FAR WEST, MISSOURI

In the story of the Restoration, the most trying of circumstances consistently brought forth the richest treasures of heaven. As the spirit of apostasy continued to grow in Kirtland, it became necessary for the Prophet to flee for his own safety. Of January 1838 Joseph Smith recorded, "A new year dawned upon the Church in Kirtland in all the bitterness of the spirit of apostate mobocracy; which continued to rage and grow hotter and hotter, until Elder Rigdon and myself were obliged to flee from its deadly influence, as did the Apostles and Prophets of old, and as Jesus said, 'when they persecute you in one city, flee to another.' On the evening of the 12th of January, about ten o'clock, we left Kirtland, on horseback, to escape mob violence, which was about to burst upon us under the color of legal process to cover the hellish designs of our enemies, and to save themselves from the just judgment of the law. . . .

"The weather was extremely cold, we were obliged to secrete ourselves in our wagons, sometimes, to elude the grasp of our pursuers, who continued their pursuit of us more than two hundred miles from Kirtland, armed with pistols and guns, seeking our lives. They frequently crossed our track, twice they were in the houses where we stopped, once we tarried all night in the same house with them, with only a partition between us and them; and heard their oaths and imprecations, and threats concerning us, if they could catch us; and late in the evening they came in to our room and examined us, but decided we were not the men. At other times we passed them in the streets, and gazed upon them, and they on us, but they knew us not. One Lyons was one of our pursuers" (History of the Church, 3:1-3).

On 14 March the Prophet arrived at Far West, Missouri, where he was welcomed by the Saints. On that day or shortly thereafter, he received the following revelation. The particular circumstances that called it forth are not known. We do know, however, that Isaiah 11 was of particular interest to Joseph Smith because it was one of the chief passages quoted to him by Moroni when Moroni initially came to instruct him (Joseph Smith-History 1:40).

The Stem, Rod, and Root of Jesse Are Identified

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 113:1-6

113:1-4 The text referred to in Isaiah reads: "And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots: And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord; and shall make him of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears: but with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins" (Isaiah 11:1-5). The Prophet Joseph Smith indicated that on the night of 21 September 1823 Moroni "quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be fulfilled" (Joseph Smith-History 1:40).

113:1 The last two verses of Isaiah 10 speak of the Lord, or the forester, trimming and thinning the trees in the forest. These trees represent the power and glory of foreign rulers and, of course, their nations. Thus the dead wood and overgrowth is removed to prepare the way for a new shoot or "stem" to grow out of the stump of Jesse. Through this imagery we are invited to look at the stump of a once great tree to see a new branch spring forth. In other words, after the great dynasty or tree of David is cut down a new branch of the royal family will spring forth. The intent of this imagery is, in a veiled way, to say that Christ will be a descendant of Jesse, the father of David, and that from that "stem" will come a "rod" who will be the great prophet of the Restoration.

113:3 The rod . . . that should come of the Stem of Jesse. As indicated in the following verse, the rod represents a servant of Christ. The rod (Hebrew, choter) grows as an offshoot from the stem or trunk of the tree. It is allowed to grow into a sturdy branch that, when cut from the tree, is used as a shepherd's staff. The point of attachment to the tree is taken with the branch and worked into a thick knot on the head of the staff, which the shepherd uses both as a weapon against predators and to direct his flock. Isaiah's imagery is a perfect description of a rod that "is a servant in the hands of Christ" (v. 4), the Good Shepherd.

113:3-6 This revelation must have been a source of great consolation to Joseph Smith particularly in the time and circumstances that called it forth. Both the "rod" and the "root" in the Isaiah prophecy refer to the Prophet. We would assume both innate modesty and the sacred implications of this prophecy precluded any more direct expression from Joseph than that which the revelation contains.

By revelation the Saints had already been told that Joseph Smith had claim to the priesthood through the lineage of his fathers (D&C 86:8-10). That he held the keys of the kingdom was also known to them (D&C 27:13; 35:17-18; 65:2; 81:2; 90:3; 112:32). That he held these keys by right, meaning birthright, was affirmed in the patriarchal blessing given him by his father. That blessing reads as follows:

"'A marvelous work and a wonder' has the Lord wrought by thy hand, even that which shall prepare the way for the remnants of his people to come in among the Gentiles, with their fulness, as the tribes of Israel are restored. I bless thee with the blessings of thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and even the blessings of thy father Joseph, the son of Jacob. Behold, he looked after his posterity in the last days, when they should be scattered and driven by the Gentiles, and wept before the Lord; he sought diligently to know from whence the Son should come who should bring forth the word of the Lord, by which they might be enlightened, and brought back to the true fold, and his eyes beheld thee, my son; his heart rejoiced and his soul was satisfied and he said, As my blessings are to extend to the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills; as my father's blessing prevailed, over the blessings of his progenitors, and as my branches are to run over the wall, and my seed are to inherit the choice land whereon the Zion of God shall stand in the last days, from among my seed, scattered with the Gentiles, shall a choice Seer arise, whose bowels shall be a fountain of truth, whose loins shall be girded with the girdle of righteousness, whose hands shall be lifted with acceptance before the God of Jacob to turn away his anger from his anointed, whose heart shall mediate great wisdom, whose intelligence shall circumscribe and comprehend the deep things of God, and whose mouth shall utter the law of the just . . . and he shall feed upon the heritage of Jacob his father: Thou (Joseph Smith, Jr. ) shall hold the keys of this ministry, even the presidency of this Church, both in time and in eternity, and thou shalt stand on Mount Zion when the tribes of Jacob come shouting from the north, and with thy brethren, the Sons of Ephraim, crown them in the name of Jesus Christ" ("Seed of Joseph," 23:175).

That the labors of Joseph Smith stand as an "ensign" to which the nations of the earth gather is also a matter of scriptural promise known to the Saints. "Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the Lord shall be upon her; And she shall be an ensign unto the people, and there shall come unto her out of every nation under heaven. And the day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because of her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones" (D&C 64:41-43).

The Scattered Remnants of Zion Have a Right to the Priesthood and Are Called to Return to the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 113:7-10

113:7-10 This revealed commentary on Isaiah's prophecy about the redemption of Israel in the last days restores to the ancient text the understanding and perspective that is always lost in times of apostasy. First, we note that it is for God to call those who will labor in his behalf. There is no suspicion here that it is the prerogative of the worker to hire himself or herself. Second, we note the importance of priesthood in the whole story of the gathering. Israel is to be gathered under the direction of and by the power and authority of the priesthood. Without priesthood there can be no gathering. Third, we note that the gathering of Israel is always first a return to faith in Christ. There can be no true redemption of Israel without the true Redeemer. And finally, we are reminded of the importance of revelation. There never has been a people that the Lord acknowledged as his own to whom he would not speak. Revelation that is immediate and personal is always a part of true religion.

113:9 Isaiah's words were: "Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion" (Isaiah 52:2).

113:10 Return to the Lord. The scattering of ancient Israel was spiritual as well as temporal. Assyria was allowed to take Israel into captivity because they had forsaken the Lord, their God. As a result, over the centuries the children of Israel were literally "scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations" (1 Nephi 22:3). Because of wickedness and apostasy, they were as branches broken off from the trunk of an olive tree. They were driven out of the land of their inheritance in Palestine. In latter days Israel must first return to the Lord spiritually before they will be restored to the lands of their inheritance.

The bands of her neck are the curses of God upon her. When the inhabi tants of Israel were taken captive and led away into other lands, bands of enslavement were placed upon them. In addition to binding them physically, these bands also symbolized the spiritual bondage and captivity that lay ahead of them. The spiritual decline that began in Palestine with forsaking the Lord in worship of false gods continued to accelerate as the children of Israel lived among the Gentiles. There were no prophets among them to receive the word of the Lord. They lost their identity and royal heritage as the covenant people and became slaves to the false beliefs and precepts of men.

Nephi recorded that he was shown in vision "the nations and kingdoms of the Gentiles. And it came to pass that I saw among the nations of the Gentiles the formation of a great church. And the angel said unto me: Behold the formation of a church which is most abominable above all other churches, which slayeth the saints of God, yea, and tortureth them and bindeth them down, and yoketh them with a yoke of iron, and bringeth them down into captivity. And it came to pass that I beheld this great and abominable church; and I saw the devil that he was the founder of it" (1 Nephi 13:3-6). The doctrines of devils and men became the creeds of Israel. The chains of hell held them captive from knowledge of the true Messiah and the covenants that God made with their fathers.

Isaiah promised that the bands upon the neck of Zion would be loosed, or the curses of God removed, when the Lord spoke again from the heavens to descendants of ancient Israel in the last days. The restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith fulfills this promise. The word of the Lord through Isaiah, as referred to in this verse, was that when such took place: "My people shall know my name: therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth! Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the Lord shall bring again Zion" (Isaiah 52:6-8).
