Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 114

DATE: 17 APRIL 1838

PLACE: FAR WEST, MISSOURI

This revelation was given to David W. Patten, one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve. For some time prior to this he and Thomas B. Marsh were the steadying influence of the Church in Missouri, where the three men who had been called to preside thereDavid Whitmer, William W. Phelps, and John Whitmerhad become disaffected with the Church.

To these problems was added the persecution of the Saints by mobs. In October of 1838, a mob of some forty men took three of the brethren prisoner, threatening that they would kill them and return the next morning to burn the rest of the Saints out. Joseph Smith appointed David Patten to lead a group of volunteers against this mob, hoping to rout them without bloodshed and free the prisoners. The prisoners were freed but not without bloodshed. Among others, Elder Patten was shot in the stomach and died that night.

Of this fearless servant of the Lord, Joseph Smith said, "Brother David Patten was a very worthy man, beloved by all good men who knew him. He was one of the Twelve Apostles, and died as he had lived, a man of God, and strong in the faith of a glorious resurrection, in a world where mobs will have no power or place. One of his last expressions to his wife was'Whatever you do else, O! do not deny the faith'" (History of the Church, 3:171).

Church Positions Held by Those Who Are Not Faithful Shall Be Given to Others

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 114:1-2

114:1 Perform a mission unto me next spring, in company with others, even twelve. The Quorum of the Twelve were to take a mission to Great Britain in the spring of 1839. By that time David Patten had been killed and Thomas B. Marsh, William E. McLellin, Luke S. Johnson, John F. Boynton and Lyman E. Johnson had all apostatized and lost their member ship in the Quorum and in the Church. The newly called members of the Twelve were John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards (D&C 118:6). Orson Hyde was dropped from the Quorum in May of 1839 and restored June 27 of the same year. He and John E. Page were redirected to Jerusalem to dedicate the land of Palestine for the return of the Jews. William Smith, one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve, failed to keep his calling, leaving Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Willard Richards (who already was in England) to fill this commandment.

114:2 There are those among you who deny my name. To partake of the spirit of apostasy is to deny the name of Christ. Specific reference is made in this instance to those men who lost the spirit of their calling and thus their place as "Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ" (D&C 107:23).

Receive their bishopric. The Greek word for bishopric is episkope, meaning "overseership," or "office." It was not originally used in reference to religious callings and can properly be used to describe any of a variety of duties. Peter referred to the place of Judas among the Twelve Apostles as a "bishoprick" (Acts 1:20). Here it is used in reference to the office of an apostle.
