Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 115

DATE: 26 APRIL 1838

PLACE: FAR WEST, MISSOURI

The Prophet identified this as a "Revelation given at Far West making known the will of God concerning the building up of that place, and of the Lord's House" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:23). Far West, Missouri, had become the focal point of gathering in Missouri after the Saints were petitioned to depart from Clay County, which had served as a temporary refuge following mob action that had driven them from Jackson County.

This section is best known as the revelation that gives the official name of the Church: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In the early years of its existence the Church was called "The Church of Christ," "The Church of Jesus Christ," and "The Church of God." This caused some problems for missionaries because many congregations used these names. To distinguish themselves, members began to refer to the Church as "The Church of Latter- day Saints."

This section was first published in the Elders' Journal in August of 1838. It was included in the 1876 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Lord Names His Church The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 115:1-4

115:1 At this time Sidney Rigdon and Hyrum Smith were first and second counselors, respectively, to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the First Presidency of the Church. Hyrum was set apart as second counselor in the place of Frederick G. Williams, 7 November 1837. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 112:17.

And your counselors who are and shall be appointed hereafter. In addition to the three members of the First Presidency mentioned in this revelation, assistant counselors had previously been called in a conference in Kirtland, Ohio, on 3 September 1837. The minutes of that meeting read: "President Smith then introduced Oliver Cowdery, Joseph Smith, Sen., Hyrum Smith, and John Smith for assistant counselors. These last four, together with the first three, are to be considered the heads of the Church. Carried unanimously" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:509). By the time this revelation was received, neither Hyrum Smith nor Oliver Cowdery was still serving as assistant counselor in the First Presidency. Hyrum, as this revelation notes, was serving as second counselor in the First Presidency. Oliver Cowdery had lost his membership in the Church.

Doctrine and Covenants 107:22 established that the First Presidency was to consist of a quorum of three. Additional counselors became counselors to that quorum, not counselors in that quorum. Those who have served as counselors to that quorum include the following: John C. Bennett (1841-42), Amasa M. Lyman (1843-44), Joseph F. Smith (1866-77), Lorenzo Snow (1873-77), Brigham Young Jr. (1873-77), Albert Carrington (1873-77), John W. Young (1873-77), George Q. Cannon (1873-77), Hugh B. Brown (1961), Joseph Fielding Smith (1965-70), H. Thorpe B. Isaacson (1965-70), Alvin R. Dyer (1968-70), and Gordon B. Hinckley (1981-82) (1999-2000 Church Almanac, 16, 47-55).

115:2 Edward Partridge, and his counselors. Edward Partridge was the bishop in Zion; his counselors were Isaac Morley and Titus Billings. John Corrill, who had been his second counselor, was released the previous August to serve as a Church historian.

115:4 Elder B. H. Roberts explained the significance of the Lord naming his Church in this revelation: "Previous to this the Church had been called 'The Church of Christ,' 'The Church of Jesus Christ,' 'The Church of God,' and by a conference of Elders held at Kirtland in May, 1834 (see [Smith, History of the Church, 2:62-63]), it was given the name 'The Church of the Latter-day Saints.' All these names, however, were by this revelation brushed aside, and since then the official name given in this revelation has been recognized as the true title of the Church, though often spoken of as 'The Mormon Church,' the 'Church of Christ,' etc. The appropriateness of this title is self evident, and in it there is a beautiful recognition of the relationship both of the Lord Jesus Christ and of the Saints to the organization" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:23-24n). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:1, "The Church of Christ."

Zion and Her Stakes Are Places of Refuge for the Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 115:5-6

115:5 That thy light may be a standard for the nations. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:32.

115:6 This text affirms that in the last days the whole earth is to feel the chastening hand of the Almighty. When that day comes, two places of safety for the faithful Saints are identified: first, the "land of Zion," meaning Jackson County, Missouri; and second, the stakes of Zion, which will be scattered throughout the earth. Much must yet transpire before Zion is redeemed and becomes the administrative headquarters of the Church. In the meantime the safety known to the general body of the Church will center in its stakes. That these stakes will dot the whole earth suggests that the safety of the Saints will center not in a particular location but rather through the garment of protection that rests upon them in and through keeping their covenants with exactness and honor. The safety of the Saints will revolve around unity, love, concern, and support given to one another and upon their right to draw on the powers of heaven to protect their interests.

As the stakes of Zion spread across the face of the earth, we expect temples to follow. The hope is that in some not too far distant day every faithful Latter-day Saint will find themselves within some reasonable proximity of a temple. "Let us . . . recite the crowning reason for gathering to Zion or to her stakes," taught Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "It is to receive the blessings found in the temples of the Lord. There and there only are the saints endowed with power from on high after the ancient pattern. There and there only can they enter into the same eternal covenants that Jehovah made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that through celestial marriage they might have a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. There and there only can they perform the ordinances of salvation and exaltation for their ancestors who died without a knowledge of the gospel, but who would have received it with all their hearts had it come to them in their day . . .

"Indeed, all of the places appointed for the gathering of the saints are holy places, and the center and crown of each place is that sacred sanctuary, that holy temple, wherein the fulness of the blessings of heaven may be received" (New Witness, 574-75).

Wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture. The imagery of plagues being poured out upon the earth, like liquid from vials, comes from the book of Revelation (Revelation 16:1-21). To describe the wrath of God as liquid being "without mixture" is to say that the plagues will not be diluted or watered down. That is, the fulness of the wrath of God will be poured out upon the wicked of the earth.

The Saints Are Commanded to Build a House of the Lord in Far West

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 115:7-16

115:7 For the ground upon which thou standest is holy. It will be recalled that when Moses approached the burning bush on the side of Mount Sinai, he was commanded to take off his shoes for, he was told, "the place whereon thou standest is holy ground" (Exodus 3:5). In like manner, Jerusalem is referred to in holy writ as the "holy city" unto which in a future day the uncircumcised and the unclean will not come (Isaiah 52:1). Indeed, all places appointed for the gathering of the Saints are holy, "and the center and crown of each place is that sacred sanctuary, that holy temple, wherein the fulness of the blessings of heaven may be received" (McConkie, New Witness, 575).

That the spirit of revelation can flow with greater freedom in some places than others is evident from the Lord's instruction to Enoch, who, when he stood upon "the place Mahujah, and cried unto the Lord," heard "a voice out of heaven, saying Turn ye, and get ye upon the mount Simeon. And it came to pass that I turned and went up on the mount; and as I stood upon the mount, I beheld the heavens open, and I was clothed upon with glory; and I saw the Lord; and he stood before my face, and he talked with me, even as a man talketh one with another, face to face" (Moses 7:2-4). Why the Lord would appear to Enoch on Mount Simeon but not in the place Mahujah we are not told. It appears, however, that one place was holy, whereas the other was not.

All that was associated with the place known to us as Far West, Missouri, in ancient times is not known to us. It seems evident, however, that this was a place made holy by events that have transpired there.

Recounting one of the unusual and sacred experiences that Joseph Smith had at Far West, Joseph Fielding Smith recalled, "The Prophet Joseph Smith contended with the devil face to face for some time, upon the occasion of the power of evil menacing one of his children in the Prophet's home just west of the temple site. Lucifer declared that Joseph had no right to be there, that this was his place. Whereupon the Prophet rebuked Satan in the name of the Lord, and he departed and did not touch the child again" (Smith and Stewart, Life of Joseph Fielding Smith, 340).

115:10 Let the beginning be made on the fourth day of July next. Concerning the events of that day, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "The day was spent in celebrating the Declaration of Independence of the United States of America, and also by the Saints making a 'Declaration of Independence' from all mobs and persecutions which have been inflicted upon them, time after time, until they could bear it no longer; having been driven by ruthless mobs and enemies of truth from their homes, and having had their property confiscated, their lives exposed, and their all jeopardized by such barbarous conduct. The corner stones of the Houses of the Lord, agreeable to the commandments of the Lord unto us, given April 26, 1838, were laid.

"Joseph Smith, Jun., was president of the day; Hyrum Smith, vice-president; Sidney Rigdon, orator; Reynolds Cahoon, chief marshal; George M. Hinkle and J. Hunt, assistant marshals; and George W. Robinson, clerk.

"The order of the day was splendid. The procession commenced forming at 10 o'clock A.M., in the following order: First, the infantry (militia); second, the Patriarchs of the Church; the president, vice-president, and orator; the Twelve Apostles, presidents of the stakes, and High Council; Bishop and counselors; architects, ladies and gentlemen. The cavalry brought up the rear of the large procession, which marched to music, and formed a circle, with the ladies in front, round the excavation. The southeast corner stone of the Lord's House in Far West, Missouri, was then laid by the presidents of the stake, assisted by twelve men. The southwest corner, by the presidents of the Elders, assisted by twelve men. The northwest corner by the Bishop, assisted by twelve men. The northeast corner by the president of the Teachers, assisted by twelve men. This house is to be one hundred and ten feet long, and eighty feet broad" (History of the Church, 3:41-42).

115:11 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 118:4-5.

115:13 This command came on the heels of debt shackling the Church incurred from building the Kirtland Temple. Elder Heber C. Kimball explained, "This building [Kirtland Temple] the Saints commenced in 1833, in poverty, and without means to do it. In 1834 they completed the walls, and in 1835-6 they nearly finished it. The cost was between sixty and seventy thousand dollars. A committee was appointed to gather donations; they traveled among the churches and collected a considerable amount, but not sufficient, so that in the end they found themselves between thirteen and fourteen thousand dollars in debt" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 88). It has been the policy of the Church for many years that no church building is dedicated until it is paid for in full.

115:14-16 The plan or pattern for the temple in Far West, Missouri, was to be given by revelation. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "We have good reason to believe that his plan contemplated many changes not found in the house in Kirtland. The keys for the sealing of both the living and the dead had been revealed since the Kirtland Temple was built. The doctrine of salvation for the dead had been hinted at, but not yet clearly revealed. The Lord certainly intended to place in this new temple if it should be built according to his plan, the provisions which were found in the Nauvoo Temple and all the other temples erected since that day so that the ordinance of baptism for the dead, and all the ordinances of the gospel could be given to both the living and the dead, as outlined by the Lord to the Prophet, January 19, 1841" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:87).

Joseph Smith Holds the Keys of the Kingdom of God on Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 115:17-19

115:18-19 Stakes may be designated and established only under the direction of the President of the Church, he holding the keys of the kingdom. The Prophet Joseph Smith received revelation explaining the proper order for organizing a stake of Zion: "Revelation Given . . . January 12th 1838, upon an inquiry being made of the Lord, whether any branch of the Church of Christ of Latter Day Saints can be concidered a Stake of Zion, until they have acknowledged the authority of the first Presidency by a vote of Such Church

"Thus Saith the Lord, Verily I Say unto you Nay.

"No Stake Shall be appointed, Except by the first Presidency, and this Presidency be acknowledged, by the voice of the Same, otherwise it Shall not be Counted as a Stake of Zion and again except it be dedicated by this presidency it cannot be acknowledged as a Stake of Zion. For unto this End have I appointed them in Laying the foundation of and Establishing my Kingdom Even So Amen" ("Scriptory Book of Joseph Smith," 52-53, cited in Cook, Revelations, 333).
