Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 116

DATE: UNCERTAIN, EITHER 19 MAY OR 11 JUNE 1838

PLACE: SPRING HILL, MISSOURI

Doctrine and Covenants 116 is an extract from the journal of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was first included in the 1876 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. The Prophet, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Bishop Partridge, Elias Higbee, and a good number of others had left Far West and headed north in search of a place where they could lay out the beginnings of a city-stake of Zion similar to that at Far West (D&C 115). According to the divine pattern, at the center of a city- stake was to be a temple. The site where the Saints intended to build the temple at Adam-ondi-Ahman is not known.

Earlier, a few Saints had settled in Daviess County in 1837, and by 28 June 1838 a stake was organized, frequently referred to as the Diahman stake. John Smith was called as president, with Reynolds Cahoon and Lyman Wight as counselors. Vinson Knight was appointed as bishop, and in a subsequent revelation Newel K. Whitney was called to move from Kirtland, Ohio, to "come up to the land of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and be a bishop unto my people" (D&C 117:11). After the Saints were driven from the state of Missouri in early 1839, the area became known as Cravensville, named for John Cravens. The community ceased to exist by the early 1870s after most of the inhabitants had moved away.

During the second day that the Prophet Joseph Smith and his companions explored this area he noted the following: "Saturday, 19.This morning we struck our tents and formed a line of march, crossing Grand River at the mouth of Honey Creek and Nelson's Ferry. Grand River is a large, beautiful, deep and rapid stream, during the high waters of Spring, and will undoubtedly admit of navigation by steamboat and other water craft. At the mouth of Honey Creek is a good landing. We pursued our course up the river, mostly through timber, for about eighteen miles, when we arrived at Colonel Lyman Wight's home. He lives at the foot of Tower Hill (a name I gave the place in consequence of the remains of an old Nephite altar or tower that stood there), where we camped for the Sabbath.

"In the afternoon I went up the river about half a mile to Wight's Ferry, accompanied by President Rigdon, and my clerk, George W. Robinson, for the purpose of selecting and laying claim to a city plat near said ferry in Daviess County, township 60, ranges 27 and 28, and sections 25, 36, 31, and 30, which the brethren called 'Spring Hill,' but by the mouth of the Lord it was named Adam-ondi- Ahman, because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet" (History of the Church, 3:34-35).

Adam-ondi-Ahman and the Ancient of Days

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 116:1

116:1 Adam-ondi-Ahman. Elder Orson Pratt explained the meaning of this name: "We have then an understanding that [Adam-ondi- Ahman] was the place where Adam dwelt. Perhaps you may be anxious to know what 'Ondi-Ahman' means. It means the place where Adam dwelt. 'Ahman' signifies God. The whole term means Valley of God, where Adam dwelt. It is in the original language spoken by Adam, as revealed to the Prophet Joseph" (Journal of Discourses, 18:342-43). At the end of his life, Adam called all of his righteous posterity to gather to "the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman and there bestowed upon them his last blessing" (D&C 107:53). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 107:53-55.

The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as indicated in Doctrine and Covenants 116, that the clearer meaning of Adam-ondi-Ahman as applied to the area known in the 1830s as Spring Hill, Missouri, refers not to a place that Adam dwelt in past ages but to the area of a future visit that Adam will make to this region.

It is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people. Before Christ's appearance in glory to the world, Adamthe mighty Prince, the Archangel will hold a great conference at Adam-ondi-Ahman. Joseph Smith said that Adam "will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157).

The phrase "the Ancient of Days" in the sectarian world is thought to be Christ. This revelation makes it clear that Daniel used this term in reference to Adam. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that Daniel was referring to Father Adam as the oldest or the first man (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157).

As spoken of by Daniel the Prophet. Daniel recorded a vision wherein the degenerate kingdoms of the earth were represented by four beasts. Each had their season of dominion, which was taken away by the succeeding kingdom until the Lord God set up a kingdom never to be destroyed. Describing his vision of these events, Daniel said, "I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days [Adam] did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire" (Daniel 7:9-10). This description of Adam is similar to that given of the Savior during his appearance to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple (see D&C 110:1). It seems that Daniel saw Father Adam as a glorified resurrected being.

Daniel continued: "A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him [Adam]: the judgment was set, and the books were opened" (Daniel 7:10). By revelation we have been told that Adam holds "the keys of salvation under the direction of the Holy One" (D&C 78:16) and presides under Christ in directing the work of the priesthood of God, including judgment.

Daniel further wrote: "I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him [Adam] near before him [Christ]. And there was given him [Christ] dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed" (Daniel 7:13-14).

Daniel further wrote: "I beheld, and the same horn [the last kingdom to have dominion] made war with the saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom" (Daniel 7:21-22). It appears that the assembly to be held at Adam-ondi- Ahman may include several meetings or sessions and convene at various times. It may well include the promised sacrament meeting spoken of by the Savior to his disciples at the Last Supper: "And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. For this is in remembrance of my blood of the new testament, which is shed for as many as believe on my name, for the remission of their sins. . . . But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall come and drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom" (JST Matthew 26:23-26). The Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that during this sacrament meeting he would partake with Joseph and with Moroni, Elias, John the Baptist, Elijah, Joseph, Jacob, Isaac, Abraham, Adam, Peter, James, John, "and also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world" (D&C 27:5-14).

It is likely that the gatherings will be held during the great tribulations that will precede the Savior's appearance to the Jewish remnant on the Mount of Olives (see commentary on D&C 45:43-52) and his appearance in glory to the world. Daniel places the return of Adam before the desolation of abomination that will take place at Jerusalem (see Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:32). "And at that time shall Michael stand up," an angel revealed to Daniel, "the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book" (Daniel 12:1).
