Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 117

DATE: 8 JULY 1838

PLACE: FAR WEST, MISSOURI

When the Lord commanded that "the city of Far West should be built up speedily by the gathering of my saints" (D&C 115:17), the five years of retaining "a stronghold in the land of Kirtland" (D&C 64:21) came to an end. The Prophet Joseph Smith and others had fled Kirtland earlier in the year. On 6 July 1838, a group of 529 Saints, known as the Kirtland Camp, made their exodus from Kirtland, Ohio, to travel to Missouri. It appears that only 260 completed that journey, the others having been scattered 'to the four winds.' Conspicuously missing from this camp were Bishop Newel K. Whitney and William Marks. Both of these brethren chose to remain behind in Kirtland because they were concerned about securing their properties before leaving. President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "It is quite evident that these two brethren had fallen under the spell of speculation and temptation so rife in Kirtland in 1837, and which was the downfall of so many of the leading brethren of the Church" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:96).

Although the decision of these two leaders to remain in Kirtland would have been unknown to the Prophet Joseph Smith, who was a thousand miles away, yet the Lord was aware of their actions. Two days after the exodus of the Kirtland Camp, the Lord expressed his displeasure with these two men in this revelation and appointed Oliver Granger as an agent to transact business of Church-owned properties.

This revelation was one of four published in the Doctrine and Covenants that were received on the same day (D&C 118, 119, 120).

The Lord's Servants Should Not Covet Temporal Things, for "What Is Property unto the Lord?"

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 117:1-9

117:1-9 To the disciples of his day the Savior said, "Seek not the things of this world but seek ye first to build up the kingdom of God, and to establish his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you" (JST Matthew 6:38). A great deal of toil and energy were given to build up the stake in Kirtland. Now, however, it was time to let go of the property attained there and to build up the kingdom of God in Far West, Missouri. It must be remembered that the Church is not made of land and buildings. These are but means to meet the temporal needs of its members. Of the many buildings erected in dispensations past, not one has remained for use by the Saints of our day. Principles are eternal, not the wealth of men.

The command to abandon Kirtland was but one occasion on which our faithful forefathers were required to leave home and lands behind to follow their faith. As early as January 1831, the Lord had commanded the New York Saints to gather to Ohio (D&C 38:37). Now in moving to Far West the Kirtland Saints would be joining their Missouri counterparts who had been driven from Jackson County to Clay County and from Clay County to Caldwell County. Together these Saints would yet be driven from the state of Missouri to take up their abode in Illinois, where they would build Nauvoo, the "city beautiful," from whence they would be driven outside the boundaries of the United States to the Great Basin.

Surely the Lord was sifting his people that he might build his kingdom with the strongest of stock. Many of their number would yet be able to say, as did Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, that they had seen their houses burned to the ground five times and it was nothing to them as compared to the truths they obtained in Mormonism (Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, 10:316).

117:7 In each instance the Lord caused the unwanted, solitary places that were inhabited by the Saints, ranging from swamps to deserts, "to bud and . . . to bring forth in abundance."

117:8 The plains of Olaha Shinehah. Joseph Fielding Smith said, "The plains of Olaha Shinehah, or the place where Adam dwelt, must be a part of, or in the vicinity of Adam-ondi- Ahman. This name Olaha Shinehah, may be, and in all probability is, from the language of Adam. We may without great controversy believe that this is the name which Adam gave to this place, at least we may venture this as a probable guess. Shinehah, according to the Book of Abraham, is the name given to the sun. (Abraham 3:13.) . . . Elder Janne M. Sjodahl commenting on the name, Olaha Shinehah, has said: 'Shinehah means sun, and Olaha is possibly a variant of the word Olea, which is "the moon." (Abraham 3:13.) If so the plains of Olaha Shinehah would be the Plains of the Moon and the Sun, so called, perhaps because of astronomical observations there made.' We learn from the writings of Moses that the Lord revealed to the ancients great knowledge concerning the stars, and Abraham by revelations and through the Urim and Thummim received wonderful information concerning the heavens and the governing planets, or stars. It was also revealed by the Prophet Joseph Smith that Methuselah was acquainted with the stars as were others of the antediluvian prophets including Adam. So it may be reasonable that here in this valley important information was made known anciently in relation to the stars of our universe" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:97-98).

They Are to Forsake Littleness of Soul, and Their Sacrifices Shall Be Sacred unto the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 117:10-16

117:10 William Marks was called to serve as president of the Far West Missouri Stake. However, before he arrived in Missouri the Saints were being driven out by the state militia under Governor Lilburn W. Boggs's extermination order. Elder Marks was later called to serve as president of the stake in Nauvoo. Unfortunately, he allied himself with Sidney Rigdon in his false claims to guardianship of the Church after the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum. In his apostasy Elder Marks wandered among various groups that had broken away from the Church and was still outside the kingdom at the time of his death in 1872.

117:11 Littleness of soul. This expression was directed to the lack of faith and spiritual strength on the part of Bishop Whitney in remaining behind in Kirtland, Ohio, to regulate his business instead of heeding the Lord's call to come to Missouri. Joseph Smith wrote the following in his journal regarding Bishop Newel K. Whitney, giving insight into Brother Whitney's weaknesses and strengths: "Blessed of the Lord is Brother Whitney, even the Bishop of the Church of Latter-day Saints, for the Bishopric shall never be taken away from him while he liveth. And the time cometh that he shall overcome all the narrow- mindedness of his heart, and all his covetous desires that so easily beset him; and he shall deal with a liberal hand to the poor and the needy, the sick and afflicted, the widow and the fatherless. And marvelously and miraculously shall the Lord his God provide for him, even that he shall be blessed with a fullness of the good things of this earth, and his seed after him from generation to generation. And it shall come to pass, that according to the measure that he meteth out with a liberal hand to the poor, so shall it be measured to him again by the hand of his God, even an hundred fold" (History of the Church, 2:288).

Nicolaitane band. In the revelation of the apostle John, the Nicolaitans are identified as those that "cast a stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication" (Revelation 2:14). These abominations were in direct contradiction to the counsel issued to the new gentile converts by Peter and the apostles at the conference at Antioch (Acts 15:22-29). As stated earlier, the Saints in Kirtland had been counseled to remove to Missouri; Bishop Whitney remained behind to secure his property. Thus, he put his desires to retain his property above the Lord's command to gather speedily to Far West, Missouri (D&C 115:17). In so doing he took the same course of opposing the counsel of the presiding authority of the Church that the Nicolaitans had pursued in the first century after Christ.

Because of his tardiness in arriving in Missouri his calling as bishop at Adam-ondi-Ahman was never fulfilled. As with his equally tardy companion, William Marks, Brother Whitney arrived in Missouri only to find the Saints being driven from the state.

117:12-15 The Prophet Joseph Smith fled from Kirtland, Ohio, without being able to settle the debts he had incurred there. He wrote: "As I was driven away from Kirtland without the privilege of settling my business, I had, previous to this, employed Colonel Oliver Granger as my agent, to close all my affairs in the east; and as I have been accused of 'running away, cheating my creditors,' etc., I will insert one of the many cards and letters I have received from gentlemen who have had the best opportunity of knowing my business transactions, and whose testimony comes unsolicited: A Card.

"PAINSVILLE, October 19, 1838.

"We, the undersigned, being personal acquaintances of Oliver Granger, firmly believe that the course which he has pursued in settling the claims, accounts, etc., against the former citizens of Kirtland township, has done much credit to himself, and all others that committed to him the care of adjusting their business with this community, which also furnishes evidence that there was no intention on their part of defrauding their creditors. [Signed] THOMAS GRIFFITH, JOHN S. SEYMOUR" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:164-65).

The service that Oliver Granger rendered to put his business talents to work on behalf of the First Presidency later led to another blessing. At a conference held at Quincy, Illinois, 4-6 May 1839, he was "appointed to go to Kirtland and take the charge and oversight of the House of the Lord, and preside over the general affairs of the Church in that place" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:345).

In an expression of gratitude, the First Presidency wrote a letter of recommendation for Brother Granger: "We have always found President Oliver Granger to be a man of the most strict integrity and moral virtue; and in fine, to be a man of God.

"We have had long experience and acquaintance with Brother Granger. We have entrusted vast business concerns to him, which have been managed skilfully to the support of our characters and interest as well as that of the Church; and he is now authorized by a general conference to go forth and engage in vast and important concerns as an agent for the Church, that he may fill a station of usefulness in obedience to the commandment of God, which was given unto him July 8, 1838, which says, 'Let him (meaning Brother Granger) contend earnestly for the redemption of the First Presidency of my Church, saith the Lord'" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:350).

117:13 Let him contend earnestly for the redemption of the First Presidency. Oliver Granger performed a great service in settling the financial affairs of the First Presidency and thus restoring their good name.

His sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase. Being a man of sound business sense and reputation, Oliver Granger might have become a very wealthy man. The sacrifice of opportunity for wealth made by his servants is known to the Lord. As the Lord assured Oliver Granger, "his sacrifice shall be more sacred unto me than his increase," so is it true in the lives of countless others in the Church today. Their worth to the Lord is in that which they have given up, not that which they have accumulated.

117:16 Overthrow the moneychangers. Even before the Prophet Joseph Smith fled from Kirtland, apostates asserted that they should have control of the temple. The Lord likened them to the moneychangers that polluted the temple in Jerusalem. He declared at that time: "It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves" (Matthew 21:13).
