Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 118

DATE: 8 JULY 1838

PLACE: FAR WEST, MISSOURI

The revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 118 was received the same day as sections 117, 119, and 120. The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded that it was received "in answer to the question, Show us thy will O Lord concerning the Twelve" (History of the Church, 3:46).

The Lord Will Provide for the Families of the Twelve

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 118:1-3

118:1 Let a conference be held immediately. In obedience to this command, a conference was held the very next day. The following minutes of the conference pertain to business transacted according to the word of the Lord in this revelation: "July 9, 1838, a conference of the Twelve Apostles assembled at Far West, agreeable to the revelation, given July 8, 1838. Present, Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt and William Smith: T. B. Marsh, presiding.

"Resolved 1st. That the persons who are to fill the places of those who are fallen, be immediately notified to come to Far West; as also, those of the Twelve who are not present.

"Resolved 2nd. That Thomas B. Marsh notify Wilford Woodruff, that Parley P. Pratt notify Orson Pratt, and that President Rigdon notify Willard Richards, who is now in England.

"Voted that President Marsh publish the same in next number of The Elders' Journal.

"President Rigdon gave some counsel concerning the provisions necessary to be made for the families of the Twelve, while laboring in the cause of their Redeemer, advising them to instruct their converts to move without delay to the places of gathering, and there to strictly attend to the law of God" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:47).

118:2 To publish my word. President Marsh was appointed printer and publisher of the Elders' Journal in Zion, or Missouri. This was a continuation of the same responsibilities that he had in Kirtland, Ohio. The Prophet Joseph Smith was the editor of the journal, which served as the official voice of the Church.

The Apostles Depart on Their Mission

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 118:4-6

118:4-5 President Wilford Woodruff explained the conditions that prevailed at the time the Twelve were to leave Far West, Missouri, in accordance with this revelation: "The mission then mentioned was one of much interest to the Twelve, if not to the Church. The whole of that mission to England, from the beginning to the end, placed the apostles in such a position that they had to walk by faith from first to last. The Lord gave a revelation, with date, day, month and year, when they were to go up to lay the corner- stone in Caldwell county, Far West, Missouri. When that revelation was given all was peace and quietude, comparatively, in that land. But when the time came for the Twelve Apostles to fulfill that revelation, the Saints had all been driven out by the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, and it was as much as a man's life was worth, especially one of the Twelve, to be found in that State; and when the day came on which we were commanded by the Lord in that revelation to go up and lay the corner-stone of that Temple, and there take the parting hand with the Saints, to cross the waters to preach the gospel in England, the inhabitants of Missouri had sworn that if all the revelations of 'old Joe Smith' were fulfilled, that should not be, because it had a day and date to it.

"President Young asked the Twelve who were with him'What shall we do with regard to the fulfillment of this revelation?' He wanted to know their feelings. Father Smith, the Patriarch, said the Lord would take the will for the deed; others said the Lord could not expect the Twelve Apostles to go up and sacrifice their lives to fulfill that revelation; but the Spirit of the Lord rested upon the twelve, and they said'The Lord God has spoken, and we will fulfill that revelation and commandment;' and that was the feeling of President Young and of those who were with him. We went through that State, and we laid that cornerstone. George A. Smith and myself were ordained to the Apostleship on that corner-stone upon that day. We returned in safety, and not a dog to move his tongue, and no man shed our blood" (Journal of Discourses, 18:123).

On another occasion President Woodruff related events that transpired following the Twelve's departure from Far West: "The devil, however, tried to kill us, for before we started for England everyone of the Twelve was taken sick, and it was about as much as we could do to move or stir. I had travelled in Tennessee, Mississippi, Kentucky and Arkansas for two or three years, and that, too, during the sickly season, where they were not well enough to take care of the sick, and I had never had the ague. But upon this occasion I was taken with the ague, the first time in my life. All the Twelve had something the matter with them. But we had to travel sick; we had to travel by faith in order to fulfil the mission to which we had been called by revelation. But the Lord sustained us; He did not forsake us" (Journal of Discourses, 13:159-60).

118:5 On the building-spot of my house. In other words, from the lot dedicated for the building of the temple in Far West, Missouri.

118:6 To fill the places of those who have fallen. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 114:2, "There are those among you who deny my name."
