Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 119

DATE: 8 JULY 1838

PLACE: FAR WEST, MISSOURI

Attempts by the Saints to live the law of consecration had not provided for the expenses of building up the kingdom of God. The Lord forbade the First Presidency from building the temple in Far West with materials received on credit as had been done with the temple in Kirtland, Ohio (D&C 115:13). Thus, the Prophet Joseph Smith "inquired of the Lord, 'O Lord! Show unto thy servant how much thou requirest of the properties of thy people for a tithing,' and received the following answer, which was also read in public" (History of the Church, 3:44). This revelation was received the same day as sections 117, 118, and 120.

The Saints Are to Pay Their Surplus Property and Then Give, as Tithing, One-Tenth of Their Interest Annually

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 119:1-5

119:1-5 This revelation restored the ancient law of tithing to our dispensation as part of the restoration of all things. We know that this law was practiced during the dispensations of Abraham and Moses. We suppose, further, that it was revealed to Adam and was known and obeyed by those that lived during the dispensations of Enoch and Noah. The earliest mention of tithing in the Old Testament is the account of Abraham paying tithes to Melchizedek (Genesis 14:20). Later, Jacob renewed the covenant of tithing with the Lord at Beth-el (Genesis 28:20-22). The children of Israel were commanded that all of the tithes of the fruits of the land and of their flocks were the Lord's (Leviticus 27:30-34; Malachi 3:8-10).

Though it is little known, the command that the Saints pay one-tenth of their increase annually required a greater sacrifice of property than that required by the law of consecration and stewardship, as practiced in the early days of this dispensation. In the law of consecration, after the Saints put their substance and properties before the bishop, they received a stewardship to provide for their needs. Later, if from their steward ship they had more than was necessary for their support (D&C 42:33), or in other words, a residue or a surplus, then they would contribute surplus to the Church. The great difference in the law of tithing is that it requires the Saints to pay a tenth of their income before any expenses are met, not from their surplus after their needs have been satisfied.

Because the law of tithing requires an act of faith before the day of harvest, it provides a greater promise of blessing than that found in the law of consecration as it was applied to temporal stewardships in the early 1830s. President Joseph F. Smith taught: "The Bishop should encourage every man, woman and child, who earns and receives in return for labor, to honor the Lord and to prove obedient to the law of God by giving the one- tenth of that which he or she receives, as the Lord requires, so that they may have their names enrolled on the book of the law of the Lord, that their genealogies may be had in the archives of the Church, and that they may be entitled to the privileges and blessings of the house of God.

"I recollect most vividly a circumstance that occurred in the days of my childhood. My mother was a widow, with a large family to provide for. One spring when we opened our potato pits, she had her boys get a load of the best potatoes and she took them to the tithing office; potatoes were scarce that season. I was a little boy at the time, and drove the team. When we drove up to the steps of the tithing office, ready to unload the potatoes, one of the clerks came out and said to my mother, 'Widow Smith, ita shame that you should have to pay tithing,' . . . and he chided my mother for paying her tithing, called her anything but wise or prudent; and said there were others who were strong and able to work that were supported from the tithing office. My mother turned upon him and said: 'William, you ought to be ashamed of yourself. Would you deny me a blessing? If I did not pay my tithing, I should expect the Lord to withhold his blessings from me. I pay my tithing, not only because it is a law of God, but because I expect a blessing by doing it. By keeping this and other laws, I expect to prosper and to be able to provide for my family.' Though she was a widow, you may turn to the records of the Church from the beginning unto the day of her death, and you will find that she never received a farthing from the Church to help her support herself and her family; but she paid in thousands of dollars in wheat, potatoes, corn, vege tables, meat, etc. The tithes of her sheep and cattle, the tenth pound of her butter, her tenth chicken, the tenth of her eggs, the tenth pig, the tenth calf, the tenth colt a tenth of everything she raised was paid. Here sits my brother who can bear testimony to the truth of what I say, as can others who knew her. She prospered because she obeyed the laws of God. She had abundance to sustain her family" (Gospel Doctrine, 228-29).

Thus, the kingdom of God is built up by the faithful tithes and offerings of the poor, as well as by those who have been blessed beyond their needs with a surplus. The millions of poor in the Church who give their tithes to the Lord follow the path taken by the widow in Christ's day who gave two mites in her poverty, not out of her abundance but out of her faith (Mark 12:41-44).

Consecration is a higher law only when it extends beyond that which is temporal and involves dedicating all of one's time, talent, and energies that may be needed to building up the Lord's kingdom (D&C 105:3-5). The consecration of property was the Lord's means to teach the Saints that all things are his. In reality very little revenue was generated from the surplus that could be used for the building up of the kingdom of God.

The Lord's wisdom in giving the law of tithing at this time is evidenced by history. Very few of the Saints at the time of this revelation had much, if any, surplus goods, and of those that did, very few considered their property to be surplus. President Brigham Young described the response of the Saints to this revelation as follows: "The brethren wished me to go among the Churches, and find out what surplus property the people had, with which to forward the building of the Temple we were commencing at Far West. I accordingly went from place to place through the country. Before I started, I asked brother Joseph, 'Who shall be the judge of what is surplus property?' Said he, 'Let them be the judges themselves, for I care not if they do not give a single dime. So far as I am concerned, I do not want anything they have.'

"Then I replied, 'I will go and ask them for their surplus property;' and I did so; I found the people said they were willing to do about as they were counselled, but, upon asking them about their surplus property, most of the men who owned land and cattle would say, 'I have got so many hundred acres of land, and I have got so many boys, and I want each one of them to have eighty acres, therefore this is not surplus property.' Again, 'I have got so many girls, and I do not believe I shall be able to give them more than forty acres each.' 'Well, you have got two or three hundred acres left.' 'Yes, but I have a brother-in- law coming on, and he will depend on me for a living; my wife's nephew is also coming on, he is poor, and I shall have to furnish him a farm after he arrives here.' I would go on to the next one, and he would have more land and cattle than he could make use of to advantage. It is a laughable idea but is nevertheless true, men would tell me they were young and beginning the world, and would say, 'We have no children, but our prospects are good, and we think we shall have a family of children, and if we do, we want to give them eighty acres of land each; we have no surplus property.' 'How many cattle have you?' 'So many.' 'How many horses, &c?' 'So many, but I have made provisions for all these, and I have use for every thing I have got.'

"Some were disposed to do right with their surplus property, and once in a while you would find a man who had a cow which he considered surplus, but generally she was of the class that would kick a person's hat off, or eyes out, or the wolves had eaten off her teats. You would once in a while find a man who had a horse that he considered surplus, but at the same time he had the ringbone, was broken-winded, spavined in both legs, had the pole evil at one end of the neck and a fistula at the other, and both knees sprung" (Journal of Discourses, 2:306-7).

119:2 Debts of the Presidency of my Church. This has no reference to personal indebtedness, but, rather, those debts incurred for purchasing and managing Church-owned property. See introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 104.

119:4 Those who have thus been tithed. Reference to tithing as used in this revelation included all offerings given to the Church.

One-tenth of all their interest annually. The definition of the Hebrew word for tithe is "one-tenth." Some discussion is had among the Saints as to the use and meaning of the word interest in this revelation. Interest means incomethe profit that is gained on any investment of time or money. The term tithing did not carry the official definition of being one-tenth of an individual's increase until this revelation was received. In December 1837, at Far West, Missouri, Bishop Partridge met with John Corrill and Isaac Morley as a committee to determine how the expenses of the kingdom could be sustained. They proposed "a plan whereby the church of Latter Day Saints may voluntarily raise means by tithing themselves to be a fund ready at all times to assist the poor" and appointed that a tithe of "five mills could be raised upon the dollar which every man is worth" (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 129-30). This plan consisted of the Saints estimating their total assets in property and goods and paying two cents on the dollar. A further proposition was that widows and those "families not worth over seventy-five dollars, each should not be required to tithe themselves and yet retain an honorable standing in the church" (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 129).

The idea of a tithing consisting of ten percent of an individual's income was not an entirely new concept to the Saints in 1838. The Prophet recorded that "on the evening of the 29th of November [1834]; . . . after commencing and rejoicing before the Lord on this occasion, we agreed to enter into the following covenant with the Lord, viz.:

"That if the Lord will prosper us in our business and open the way before us that we may obtain means to pay our debts; that we be not troubled nor brought into disrepute before the world, nor His people; after that, of all that He shall give unto us, we will give a tenth to be bestowed upon the poor in His Church, or as He shall command; and that we will be faithful over that which he has entrusted to our care, that we may obtain much; and that our children after us shall remember to observe this sacred and holy covenant; and that our children, and our children's children, may know of the same, we have subscribed our names with our own hands (Signed) Joseph Smith, Jun. Oliver Cowdery" (History of the Church, 2:174-75).

119:4-5 The law of tithing separates those Saints who are committed to the kingdom of God and those who are not. Today it serves as one of the determining factors of worthiness to enter the temples of God and receive the holy ordinances administered therein. President Joseph F. Smith taught, "By this principle the loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on doing the will of God and keeping His commandments, thereby sanctifying the land of Zion unto God, and who are opposed to this principle and have cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion. There is a great deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it it shall be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is as essential as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost" (Conference Report, April 1900, 47).

Such a Course Will Sanctify the Land of Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 119:6-7

119:6 By this law sanctify the land of Zion. President Joseph F. Smith explained to those of latter-day Israel: "If you will sanctify the land of Zion unto the Lord through the observance of this law, it shall be a land of Zion unto you. The Lord will bless the land and make it fruitful unto you, as He did the land of the children of Israel. In ancient times the Lord blessed the earth for those who observed the law of tithing (2 Chronicles 31:5). This law was given to the children of Israel, and when they obeyed it they were prospered and had abundance; when they disobeyed it, they were afflicted with drought, with mildew, with rust, with the devouring insect, and they were impoverished and destroyed because they did not observe the law" (Conference Report, April 1900, 49).

Through the prophet Malachi, the Lord commanded ancient Israel: "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of hosts. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the Lord of hosts" (Malachi 3:10-12). The renewing and sanctifying of the land is symbolic of the spiritual renewal of the Lord's people.
