Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121

DATE: 20 MARCH 1839

PLACE: JAIL AT LIBERTY, MISSOURI

On 27 October 1838, Governor Lilburn W. Boggs issued his infamous extermination order. Writing to General John B. Clark, commander of the state militia, he said, "The Mormons must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good. Their outrages are beyond all description" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:175). Three days later a mob under the leadership of Colonel William O. Jennings, who had not yet received the governor's order, attacked a little settlement of Saints at Haun's Mill, killing seventeen and severely wounding others. At the same time, the mob-militia, about two thousand strong, under the command of Samuel D. Lucas, arrived near Far West as its citizens made preparations for its defense.

On Wednesday, 31 October, the Prophet was informed by Colonel Hinkle, a fellow Saint, that the officers of the militia wished to have a conference with him and several of the leaders of the Church. "I immediately complied with the request," wrote the Prophet, "and in company with Elders Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt, Colonel Wight and George W. Robinson, went into the camp of the militia. But judge of my surprise, when, instead of being treated with that respect which is due from one citizen to another, we were taken as prisoners of war, and treated with the utmost contempt. The officers would not converse with us, and the soldiers, almost to a man, insulted us as much as they felt disposed, breathing out threats against me and my companions. I cannot begin to tell the scene which I there witnessed. The loud cries and yells of more than one thousand voices, which rent the air and could be heard for miles, and the horrid and blasphemous threats and curses which were poured upon us in torrents, were enough to appall the stoutest heart. In the evening we had to lie down on the cold ground, surrounded by a strong guard, who were only kept back by the power of God from depriving us of life. We petitioned the officers to know why we were thus treated, but they utterly refused to give us any answer, or to converse with us. . . .

"[The next day] Brothers Hyrum Smith and Amasa Lyman were brought prisoners into camp. The officers of the militia held a court martial, and sentenced us to be shot, on Friday morning, on the public square of Far West as a warning to the 'Mormons'" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:188-90).

The lives of the Prophet and his companions were spared when General Alexander Doniphan courageously refused to carry out the illegal and immoral order. The prisoners were taken to Independence and then to Richmond, Missouri, for trial. The judge ordered that they be bound over for further trial and placed in the jail at Liberty, Missouri. Here it was that they were incarcerated in the dungeon on the bottom floor in miserable circumstances for the next four months. During this time word reached the prisoners of the atrocities committed against the Saints in Far West and other places.

During this period the Prophet communicated with the Saints by letter. Excerpts from one of those letters, dated 25 March 1839, constitute what we know today as sections 121, 122, and 123, and were first included in the Doctrine and Covenants in the 1876 edition.

"To the Church of Latter-day Saints at Quincy, Illinois, and Scattered Abroad, and to Bishop Partridge in Particular.

"Your humble servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., prisoner for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the Saints, taken and held by the power of mobocracy, under the exterminating reign of his excellency, the governor, Lilburn W. Boggs, in company with his fellow prisoners and beloved brethren, Caleb Baldwin, Lyman Wight, Hyrum Smith, and Alexander McRae, send unto you all greeting. . . .

" . . . Inasmuch as we know that the most of you are well acquainted with the wrongs and the high- handed injustice and cruelty that are practiced upon us; whereas we have been taken prisoners charged falsely with every kind of evil, and . . . a strong guard, who continually watch day and night as indefatigable as the devil does in tempting and laying snares for the people of God.

"Therefore, dearly beloved brethren, we are the more ready and willing to lay claim to your fellowship and love. For our circumstances are calculated to awaken our spirits to a sacred remembrance of everything, and we think that yours are also, and that nothing therefore can separate us from the love of God and fellowship one with another; and that every species of wickedness and cruelty practiced upon us will only tend to bind our hearts together and seal them together in love. We have no need to say to you that we are held in bonds without cause, neither is it needful that you say unto us, We are driven from our homes and smitten without cause. We mutually understand that if the inhabitants of the state of Missouri had let the Saints alone, and had been as desirable of peace as they were, there would have been nothing but peace and quietude in the state unto this day; we should not have been in this hell, surrounded with demons (if not those who are damned, they are those who shall be damned) and where we are compelled to hear nothing but blasphemous oaths, and witness a scene of blasphemy, and drunkenness and hypocrisy, and debaucheries of every description.

"And again the cries of orphans and widows would not have ascended up to God against them. Nor would innocent blood have stained the soil of Missouri. But oh! the unrelenting hand! The inhumanity and murderous disposition of this people! It shocks all nature; it beggars and defies all description; it is a tale of woe; a lamentable tale; yea a sorrowful tale; too much to tell; too much for contemplation; too much for human beings; it cannot be found among the heathens; it cannot be found among the nations where kings and tyrants are enthroned; it cannot be found among the savages of the wilderness; yea, and I think it cannot be found among the wild and ferocious beasts of the forestthat a man should be mangled for sport! women be robbed of all that they have their last morsel for subsistence, and then be violated to gratify the hellish desires of the mob, and finally left to perish with their helpless offspring clinging around their necks. . . .

"They practice these things upon the Saints, who have done them no wrong, who are innocent and virtuous; who loved the Lord their God, and were willing to forsake all things for Christ's sake. These things are awful to relate, but they are verily true. It must needs be that offenses come, but woe unto them by whom they come" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:289-91).

The Prophet Pleads with the Lord for the Suffering Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:1-6

121:1-6 These verses, which constitute a prayer, do not reflect a faith that is wavering, but rather a soul wearied with concern for the suffering of the innocent. The Prophet wrote with a heart sickened "with grief, because of the sufferings of the poor and much injured Saints. And we need not say to you that the floodgates of our hearts were lifted and our eyes were a fountain of tears" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:293).

121:1 The pavilion that covereth thy hiding place. A pavilion symbolizes the heavenly tabernacle or temple where the Most High dwells. The "thick clouds" which surround this holy residence signify the glory of God. God's pavilion is hidden from the eyes of mortal man (Psalm 18:11; 27:5; D&C 121:1, 4). Reference to the Lord's "hiding place" is not intended to suggest that God is an absentee landlord but rather that his presence is hidden from the wicked (D&C 101:89).

121:4 The dark and benighted dominion of Sheol. Sheol is a Hebrew rendering of the English word hell. It represents the kingdom of the devil and those who follow him.

The Lord Speaks Peace to Joseph Smith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:7-10

121:7-10 At a particularly dreary time, letters from Emma and others at home encouraged the Prophet and prompted these verses. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote that one token of friendship can work so that "all enmity, malice, and hatred, and past differences, misunderstandings and mismanagements are slain victorious at the feet of hope; and when the heart is sufficiently contrite, then the voice of inspiration steals along and whispers, My son, peace be to thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment . . . " (History of the Church, 3:293).

121:8 If thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high. To the Saints of his day, Peter said, "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you; But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy" (1 Peter 4:12-13).

This period of confinement for the Prophet proved to be a school in which his soul was sanctified. Mercy and compassion, which often are best learned by personal suffering, are characteristics that all exalted beings must possess. Three months after recording these words, the Prophet wrote: "After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost, (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and his election made sure" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150; D&C 132:49). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 131:5, "More sure word of prophecy."

121:9 Thy friends do stand by thee. Those that were incarcerated in Liberty Jail received with the utmost appreciation the words of friends in letters. Joseph and his companions wrote, "Those who have not been enclosed in the walls of prison without cause or provocation, can have little idea how sweet the voice of a friend is; one token of friendship from any source whatever awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:293).

121:10 Thou art not yet as Job. Among other things, this text affirms that the scriptural story of Job is not fictional, as many have supposed. He was not a mythical character but rather a real man of exemplary faith. Unlike Job, whose wife and friends became his accusers, the Prophet Joseph Smith was loved and supported by his wife, family, and friends.

Cursed Are All Those Who Raise False Cries of Transgression against the Lord's Anointed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:11-17

121:11-12 "From apostates the faithful have received the severest persecutions," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith. "Judas was rebuked and immediately betrayed his Lord into the hands of his enemies because Satan entered into him. There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God, and he is, in truth, nigh unto cursing, and his end is to be burned. When once that light which was in them is taken from them, they become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened, and then, no marvel, if all their powers should be enlisted against the truth and they, Judas like, seek the destruction of those who were their greatest benefactors" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 67).

Like Cain, the wicked are deceived into believing that they are so intelligent and crafty that they can hide their abominations and outwit the laws of justice (Moses 5:31-33). Secret combinations of wickedness breed pride and cause the wicked to become blind to threats of their own destruction. The proud and the wicked will be cut down like mighty trees of a forest that boast of themselves before the small, seemingly powerless axe in the hands of the Lord's servants.

121:11 As the hoar frost. The moisture that gathers on the ground during the cool of the evening to form a thin white covering is referred to as hoar frost, due to its white color.

121:15 Their posterity shall be swept from under heaven. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:15.

Not one of them is left to stand by the wall. This is a modern rendition of an idiom from Old Testament times that refers to the destruction of the entire male population among a family or people (1 Kings 16:11).

121:16 Those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed. This phrase refers to those that fight against Jesus Christ, the Anointed One. The psalmist foretold the treachery of Judas, "Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me" (Psalm 41:9). To fight against those who come in the name of the Lord is to fight against the Lord's anointed. Traitors from among the Saints had betrayed those held captive in Liberty Jail and had given testimony against them, as they had spoken similar words against the Church.

121:16-17 Those who speak out against leaders of the Church do so in an attempt to hide their own sins. They become like their father Lucifer, who was and is "the accuser of our brethren" (Revelation 12:10). They project their own desires into the actions of others and show the darkness of their souls in the manner in which they speak evil against the Lord's anointed. Harold B. Lee observed: "There are some who look upon the leaders of this Church and God's anointed as men who are possessed of selfish motives. By them the words of our leaders are always twisted to try to bring a snare to the work of the Lord. Mark well those who speak evil of the Lord's anointed for they speak from impure hearts. . . .

" . . . I want to bear you my testimony that the experience I have had has taught me that those who criticize the leaders of this Church are showing signs of a spiritual sickness which, unless curbed, will bring about eventually spiritual death. I want to bear my testimony as well that those who in public seek by their criticism, to belittle our leaders or bring them into disrepute, will bring upon themselves more hurt than upon those whom they seek thus to malign. I have watched over the years, and I have read of the history of many of those who fell away from this Church, and I want to bear testimony that no apostate who ever left this Church ever prospered as an influence in his community thereafter" (Conference Report, October 1947, 67).

They Shall Not Have Right to the Priesthood and Shall Be Damned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:18-25

121:18 Those who swear falsely against my servants. Though the principle here stated is an eternal one, it had a very specific application at the time of this writing (see commentary on v. 22). "While all of these troubles with mobs were going on," commented President Joseph Fielding Smith, "and the members of the Church living in DeWitt and other settlements were being robbed and driven from their homes, other evils developed that tried the Prophet's soul. Thomas B. Marsh, who had been honored by being called to the apostleship and as the oldest member in that council was chosen as the president of the twelve, suddenly left Far West and went to Richmond in a fit of anger in October 1838. It was only a trivial matter that had caused him to be offended but he permitted it to interfere with his faith and standing in the Church. Arriving in Richmond he went before Henry Jacobs, justice of the peace, and made an affidavit consisting of the vilest slanders against the Prophet and the Church. A few days earlier, Orson Hyde had also gone to Richmond, leaving a letter with one of the brethren stating that it would reveal the secret of his leaving" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 2:120-21). Commenting on Thomas B. Marsh, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "He had been lifted up in pride by his exaltation to office and the revelations of heaven concerning him, until he was ready to be overthrown by the first adverse wind that should cross his track, and now he has fallen, lied and sworn falsely, and is ready to take the lives of his best friends. Let all men take warning by him, and learn that he who exalteth himself, God will abase. Orson Hyde was also at Richmond and testified to most of Marsh's statements" (History of the Church, 3:167).

121:20 They themselves shall be despised by those that flatter them. In a previous letter written from Liberty Jail, the Prophet Joseph Smith had written concerning those who bore false testimony against the Saints: "Renegade 'Mormon' dissenters are running through the world and spreading various foul and libelous reports against us, thinking thereby to gain the friendship of the world, because they know that we are not of the world, and that the world hates us; therefore they [the world] make a tool of these fellows [the dissenters]; and by them try to do all the injury they can, and after that they hate them worse than they do us, because they find them to be base traitors and sycophants" (History of the Church, 3:230).

121:21 Righteous male descendants of Abraham have a right by birth to hold the priesthood (Abraham 2:11; D&C 132:30-31; see commentary on D&C 86:8-11). This right passes naturally to their male descendants from generation to generation. This promise, which is fundamental to the Abrahamic covenant, is renewed with every couple that enters into the new and everlasting order of marriage. When someone so blessed pursues a course to dishonor the priesthoodfor instance, those priesthood holders who lift up the heel against the Lord's anointed he will have that priesthood taken from him and will forfeit in the process his place in the family of Abraham or the family of the faithful. No longer a part of that family, he cannot bequeath to his posterity the promises reserved for the seed of Abraham, including the right to the priesthood or any of its blessings.

121:22 From the Liberty Jail, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote concerning those that apostatized from the Church and bore false witness against the Saints: "We have waded through an ocean of tribulation and mean abuse, practiced upon us by the ill bred and the ignorant, such as Hinkle, Corrill, Phelps, Avard, Reed Peck, Cleminson, and various others, who are so very ignorant that they cannot appear respectable in any decent and civilized society, and whose eyes are full of adultery, and cannot cease from sin. Such characters as McLellin, John Whitmer, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris, are too mean to mention; and we had liked to have forgotten them. Marsh and 'another,' whose hearts are full of corruption, whose cloak of hypocrisy was not sufficient to shield them or to hold them up in the hour of trouble, who after having escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, became again entangled and overcome their latter end is worse than the first. But it has happened unto them according to the word of the Scripture: 'The dog has returned to his vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.'

"Again, if men sin wilfully after they have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation to come, which shall devour these adversaries. For he who despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much more severe punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath sold his brother, and denied the new and everlasting covenant by which he was sanctified, calling it an unholy thing, and doing despite to the Spirit of grace.

"And again we say unto you, that inasmuch as there is virtue in us, and the Holy Priesthood has been conferred upon usand the keys of the kingdom have not been taken from us, for verily thus saith the Lord, 'Be of good cheer, for the keys that I gave unto you are yet with you'therefore we say unto you, dear brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, we deliver these characters unto the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption, that they may be dealt with according to their works; and from henceforth their works shall be made manifest" (History of the Church, 3:232).

After being released from Liberty Jail and again enjoying the company of his family and the Saints, the Prophet Joseph Smith further instructed: "O ye Twelve! and all Saints! profit by this important Key that in all your trials, troubles, temptations, afflictions, bonds, imprisonments and death, see to it, that you do not betray heaven; that you do not betray Jesus Christ; that you do not betray the brethren; that you do not betray the revelations of God, whether in Bible, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants, or any other that ever was or ever will be given and revealed unto man in this world or that which is to come. Yea, in all your kicking and flounderings, see to it that you do not this thing, lest innocent blood be found upon your skirts, and you go down to hell. All other sins are not to be compared to sinning against the Holy Ghost, and proving a traitor to the brethren" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 156).

121:24-25 Additional information is given here concerning the appointed time for death. In the wisdom of God, an individual's life may be lengthened because of righteousness (2 Kings 20:1-11) or cut short because of wickedness (Jacob 7:1-20). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 122:9, "Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less."

Glorious Revelations Promised Those Who Endure Valiantly

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:26-32

121:26-32 These verses and those that follow are excerpted from the letter containing this section of the Doctrine and Covenants and follow the preceding verses by several paragraphs. They are written as inspired instruction and counsel. The Prophet Joseph Smith promised to instruct the Saints regarding "whether there be one God or many gods" (v. 28); the laws and times of the sun, moon, and stars; and "the Council of the Eternal God of all other gods" (v. 32). The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote from Liberty Jail: "It has been the plan of the devil to hamper me and distress me from the beginning, to keep me from explaining myself to them [the Saints]; and I never have had opportunity to give them the plan that God has revealed to me" (History of the Church, 3:286). These doctrines were clarified for the Saints in some degree through the translation of the book of Abraham. Although the Saints had purchased the papyri containing writings of Abraham in 1835, it was not until 1842 that the Prophet's translation was published in the Times and Seasons. It was not until the latter months of his life that the Prophet Joseph Smith revealed the endowment administered in holy temples and unfolded the doctrine of the plurality of gods by preaching in plainness to the Saints in Nauvoo. See commentary on the King Follett Discourse, page 1078.

121:26 God shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit. "No man can receive the holy ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator," the Prophet said (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328).

121:28 Whether there be one God or many gods. The crowning truths of the Restoration are those truths that deal with the nature of God. From the First Vision in the spring of 1820 to his last public discourse on 18 June 1844, Joseph Smith enhanced the Saints understanding of the God of heaven. That there are more Gods than one we learned in the First Vision, where the Father and the Son stood separate and distinct as exalted men. That we can become as God was affirmed in Joseph's final public remarks as he challenged the Saints to "hold out to the end, and we shall be resurrected and become like Gods, and reign in celestial kingdoms, principalities, and eternal dominions" (Smith, History of the Church, 6:500).

"I will preach on the plurality of Gods," he said on 16 June 1844. "I have selected this text for that express purpose. I wish to declare I have always and in all congregations when I have preached on the subject of the Deity, it has been the plurality of Gods. It has been preached by the Elders for fifteen years.

"I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods. If this is in accordance with the New Testament, lo and behold! we have three Gods anyhow, and they are plural; and who can contradict it?

"Our text says, 'And hath made us kings and priests unto God and His Father.' The Apostles have discovered that there were Gods above, for Paul says God was the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. My object was to preach the scriptures, and preach the doctrine they contain, there being a God above, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. I am bold to declare I have taught all the strong doctrines publicly, and always teach stronger doctrines in public than in private.

"John was one of the men, and apostles declare they were made kings and priests unto God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. It reads just so in the Revelation. Hence, the doctrine of a plurality of Gods is as prominent in the Bible as any other doctrine. It is all over the face of the Bible. It stands beyond the power of controversy. A wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein.

"Paul says there are Gods many and Lords many. I want to set it forth in a plain and simple manner; but to us there is but one God that is pertaining to us; and he is in all and through all. But if Joseph Smith says there are Gods many and Lords many, they cry, 'Away with him! Crucify him! crucify him!'

"Mankind verily say that the scriptures are with them. Search the scriptures, for they testify of things that these apostates would gravely pronounce blasphemy. Paul, if Joseph Smith is a blasphemer, you are. I say there are Gods many and Lords many, but to us only one, and we are to be in subjection to that one, and no man can limit the bounds or the eternal existence of eternal time. Hath he beheld the eternal world, and is he authorized to say that there is only one God? He makes himself a fool if he thinks or says so, and there is an end of his career or progress in knowledge. He cannot obtain all knowledge, for he has sealed up the gate to it" (Smith, History of the Church, 6:474-75).

121:29 Those that will receive thrones and principalities have entered into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage and it has been sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise. See Doctrine and Covenants 132:19.

121:30-31 By means of the Urim and Thummim, Abraham was shown the manner of the creation, times, revolutions, and reckoning of the sun, moon, and stars (Abraham 3:1-13).

121:32 The Council of the Eternal God of all other gods. "The Eternal God of all other gods" is our Eternal Father, meaning the father of our spirits. The psalmist declared, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High" (Psalm 82:6). When we assembled in council with our Eternal Father, we sat in the council of the Gods; all who assembled there were of the family of the gods. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "In the beginning the head of the Gods called a council of the Gods; and they came together and concocted a plan to create the world and people it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 349).

Why Many Are Called and Few Are Chosen

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:33-40

121:34 Many called, but few are chosen. If we live beneath our privileges, blessings go unclaimed, calls go unmagnified, and opportunities are lost. To be chosen is to have chosen to honor every opportunity to serve the Lord and to stand in defense of the gospel cause.

121:34-40 The Prophet Joseph Smith drew upon the experiences of the previous months to pen these inspired words. These thoughts reflect the sorrow of seeing friends become traitors and then war against the Saints. They were given by way of explanation as to how those who had been sustained as presiding authorities of the Church could apostatize and become enemies of the kingdom of God. It was a difficult lesson for the Saints to endure that wickedness may be found even among those of high and holy station. The Three Witnesses to the Book of Mormon, the presidency of the Church in Missouri, and six members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles had lost their rights to and the authority of the priesthood. Foremost among those who betrayed the Saints was Thomas B. Marsh, former president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. After the Saints had been driven from Nauvoo, Illinois, and settled in the Rocky Mountains, he went to Salt Lake City, where he confessed to the wrongs he had committed and pleaded for forgiveness. He was called on to speak to the Saints at the Tabernacle. Marsh stated: "Many have said to me, 'How is it that a man like you, who understood so much of the revelations of God as recorded in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, should fall away?' . . .

"I have sought diligently to know the Spirit of Christ since I turned my face Zionward, and I believe I have obtained it. I have frequently wanted to know how my apostacy began, and I have come to the conclusion that I must have lost the Spirit of the Lord out of my heart.

"The next question is, 'How and when did you lose the Spirit?' I became jealous of the Prophet, and then I saw double, and overlooked everything that was right, and spent all my time in looking for the evil; and then, when the Devil began to lead me, it was easy for the carnal mind to rise up, which is anger, jealousy, and wrath. I could feel it within me; I felt angry and wrathful; and the Spirit of the Lord being gone, as the Scriptures say, I was blinded, and I thought I saw a beam in brother Joseph's eye, but it was nothing but a mote, and my own eye was filled with the beam; but I thought I saw a beam in his, and I wanted to get it out; and, as brother Heber says, I got mad, and I wanted everybody else to be mad. I talked with Brother Brigham and Brother Heber, and I wanted them to be mad like myself; and I saw they were not mad, and I got madder still because they were not. Brother Brigham, with a cautious look, said, 'Are you the leader of the Church, brother Thomas?' I answered, 'No.' 'Well then,' said he, 'Why do you not let that alone?'

"Well, this is about the amount of my hypocrisyI meddled with that which was not my business" (Journal of Discourses, 5:206-7).

For details concerning the events that led to the apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh, see commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 112:10.

121:36 The rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven. Authority in the priesthood is obtained by the laying on of hands and must always be traceable to one who had it and was properly authorized to confer it upon the one laying claim to it. Authority functions in such a manner that every priest in the Church has the same authority as every other priest in the Church. One priest cannot perform a baptism that has greater effect than any other priest, nor can anyone holding any other priesthood office perform a baptism that is more efficacious or binding than a baptism performed by a priest. In like manner every elder in the Church has the same authority as every other elder in the Church. Thus there would be no difference found in any ordinances performed that required the office of an elder or one holding any office in the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Power in the priesthood differs from authority in the priesthood in that it does not come by the laying on of hands but rather through righ teousness, faith, and knowledge. Thus, no two priesthood holders have the same power in their priesthood. To give, for instance, a patriarchal blessing, one must both hold the office of a patriarch and be so living as to enjoy a rich outpouring of the spirit of revelation. The office comes by ordination; the inspiration or ability to receive revelation comes through the companionship of the Holy Ghost, having a clear understanding of the principles of the gospel, and experience in responding to the direction of the Spirit.

121:38 Kick against the pricks. This imagery comes from the direction of the Lord to Saul on the road to Damascus (Acts 9:1-5). The image elicited is of an ox resisting its owner's sharp goading stick by kicking back against it, only to drive the sharp point into its hoof. The message is that those who fight against the Lord or his people destroy themselves with self-inflicted wounds.

121:39 The priesthood bears the name Melchizedek, which means "king of righteousness." The priesthood holder is expected to be a king, one who rules and reigns in righteousness. Anything that is unrighteous stands outside the bounds, or dominion, of his kingdom.

The Priesthood Should Be Used Only in Righteousness

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 121:41-46

121:41-46 These verses are the foundation of power to preside in the priesthood in time and in eternity, and reveal how God the Father exercises power and authority. Each of the approaches and characteristics mentioned reveal his nature. The doctrine of the priesthood contained herein includes truths by which we may become like him. He is a "Man of Holiness" (Moses 6:57). Through the spirit of truth, he invites his children to do good without force or compulsion (Moroni 7:16). He is long- suffering as he waits for them to discover and learn the exactness and veracity of his doctrines. He is gentle and meek in teaching them truth and allowing them to make it part of their lives. He does not seek his own good but does all things out of pure love for his children. He does not feign love as a disguise for manipulating and controlling them. Even in his chastisement, his motive is pure love (D&C 95:1). He does not seek to dominate by virtue of his fatherhood. In the words of Alma, he asks his children to "give place" in their hearts for the truths he teaches them (Alma 32:27). He is virtuous in thought and deed, possessing perfect purity. We know that we may put our everlasting trust and faith in him. All who give him dominion over them do so with the utmost confidence in his sincere and fatherly intent to bring to pass their immortality and eternal life. The grand secret of presiding in the priesthood is that there is power in righteousness. Virtuous beings will freely give honor and glory to their Father, who is in every respect a "Man of Holiness."

The guidelines in these verses are given as truths that cannot be trampled upon. Each priesthood bearer must learn them and make them part of his character if he is to ever preside over a family in righteousness. Likewise, those who are called to presiding offices in the Church should govern upon these principles of righteousness. By doing so they will also receive power in the priesthood within their sphere of teaching and presiding over the Saints.

121:43 Those who cherish truth know that chastening may be a manifestation of love (D&C 95:1). "A frank and open rebuke provoketh a good man to emulation," the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote from Liberty Jail; "and in the hour of trouble he will be your best friend"(History of the Church, 3:295). "If you are ever called upon to chasten a person," President Brigham Young counseled, "never chasten beyond the balm you have within you to bind up" (Journal of Discourses, 9:124-25).

121:45 The doctrine of the priesthood. "What then is the doctrine of the priesthood? And how shall we live as the servants of the Lord?" asked Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "This doctrine is that God our Father is a glorified, a perfected, and an exalted being who has all might, all power, and all dominion, who knows all things and is infinite in all his attributes, and who lives in the family unit.

"It is that our Eternal Father enjoys this high status of glory and perfection and power because his faith is perfect and his priesthood is unlimited.

"It is that priesthood is the very name of the power of God, and that if we are to become like him, we must receive and exercise his priesthood or power as he exercises it.

"It is that he has given us an endowment of heavenly power here on earth, which is after the order of his Son and which, because it is the power of God, is of necessity without beginning of days or end of years.

"It is that we can enter an order of the priesthood named the new and everlasting covenant of marriage (see D&C 131:2), named also the patriarchal order, because of which order we can create for ourselves eternal family units of our own, patterned after the family of God our Heavenly Father.

"It is that we have power, by faith, to govern and control all things, both temporally and spiritual; to work miracles and perfect lives; to stand in the presence of God and be like him because we have gained his faith, his perfections and his power, or in other words the fulness of his priesthood.

"This, then, is the doctrine of the priesthood, than which there neither is nor can be anything greater. This is the power we can gain through faith and righteousness.

"Truly, there is power in the priesthoodpower to do all things!

"If the world itself was created by the power of the priesthood, surely that same power can move mountains and control the elements.

"If one-third of the hosts of heaven were cast down to earth by the power of the priesthood, surely that same power can put at defiance the armies of nations or stay the fall of atomic bombs.

"If all men shall be raised from mortality to immortality by the power of the priesthood, surely that same power can cure the diseased and the dying and raise the dead.

"Truly there is power in the priesthooda power which we seek to acquire to us, a power which we devoutly pray may rest upon us and upon our posterity forever" (Conference Report, April 1982, 50).

121:46 All eternal relationships are based on free choice. Our Father in Heaven will not force any of his sons or daughters to embrace any covenant or any truth contrary to their will. God derives his power from the allegiance given him because his children love and honor him. His unfailing love and unselfish efforts to bless his children are his only means of drawing them to him. There is no compulsion in the kingdom of heaven.

Thy scepter an unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth. A scepter is a staff or rod, which, like a throne or a crown, is a symbol of kingship and its accompanying authority and power. In this text we are told that the authority and power of the Melchizedek Priesthood centers in the principles of "righteousness and truth." The word righteousness literally means "to move in a straight line," it is to be "up right," and "virtuous." Truth, as used here, carries the idea of conformity to correct principles or doctrines. Thus, the authority and power of the priesthood centers in the "up right" or "virtuous" application of eternal principles or the light of heaven. This meaning is captured in the name Melchizedek, by which the priesthood is known. It naturally follows that the priesthood of God will never be found conscribing agency. All that is done in the Church and kingdom of God must represent free will and be accomplished by "persuasion, by long- suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned" (v. 41).
