Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 122

DATE: BETWEEN 20 AND 25 MARCH 1839

PLACE: JAIL AT LIBERTY, MISSOURI

This revelation contains the word of the Lord to Joseph Smith the Prophet while he, his brother Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin, and Alexander McRae were held prisoners in the jail at Liberty, Missouri. See introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 121.

The Ends of the Earth Shall Inquire after the Name of Joseph Smith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 122:1-4

122:1-2 As Latter- day Saints, our commission is to bear witness of the restored gospel to all the peoples of the earth. Central to that testimony is the announcement that Joseph Smith was the man chosen by God to stand at the head of this dispensation. We cannot be true to that commission independent of the testimony that Joseph Smith is the great prophet of the Restoration. If the adversary can get us to substitute something for that message, the victory is his. It is not our purpose to convert people to programs, to activities, or to a Latter- day Saint culture. Nor can we modify the message the Lord gave us in an attempt to be more acceptable. To make such things the focus of our efforts is to lose sight of our destiny and purpose and will eventually cause us to lose our own way. There is power in such a testimony, and every effort is made by the adversary to keep us from bearing it. Perhaps his most effective ploy is the notion that we should not testify about Joseph Smith for fear that people will think we worship him instead of Christ. The hope here is to gain respectability in the eyes of professing Christians by emphasizing our faith in Christ while avoiding reference to Joseph Smith. We cannot follow such a course without offending the Spirit. Joseph Smith is the great revelator of Christ for this dispensation. It is through himthat is, the revelations given him that we have learned every truth about Christ we have been commissioned to teach the nations of the earth.

We can no more disassociate our message from Joseph Smith than we can disassociate Moses from the law that bears his name, John from the baptism he performed, or the Revelator from the book he wrote. We cannot accept Christ without accepting those he has sent in his name. We cannot declare the message of the Restoration without telling the story of the First Vision. If God did not speak to Joseph Smith and if he did not send the ancient prophets to him to give him the keys, powers, and authorities that were theirs, we have no message to bear. Our testimony is like that of Brigham Young, who said, "There is not a man or woman that loves the truth, who has heard the report of the Book of Mormon, but the Spirit of the Almighty has testified to him, or her of its truth; neither has any man heard the name of Joseph Smith, but the Spirit has whispered to him'He is a true Prophet'" (Journal of Discourses, 1:93).

122:1 Thy name. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:33, page 19.

Hell shall rage against thee. Every truth of salvation is attested to by two witnesses: (1) the sweet, quiet whisperings of the Spirit and (2) the loud, ugly, and rancorous hollering of the adversary. If the prince of darkness and his legions do not oppose a doctrine, fighting and warring against it, we can have every assurance it is not a principle of salvation. The importance of a doctrine can always be measured in Satan's opposition to it. Standing opposite the greatest doctrines may always be found the greatest heresies. Further, it is the practice among people of evil disposition that when they cannot refute a person's doctrine they attack their character.

Had Satan chosen to leave Joseph Smith and the Latter-day Saint people alone, we would have every reason to hold them suspect as far as their claim to possessing the truths of salvation is concerned. Such was never their lot, for as the Prophet observed, "As for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all the days of my life; and for what cause it seems mysterious, unless I was ordained from before the foundation of the world for some good end, or bad, as you may choose to call it" (D&C 127:2).

122:4 Though the influence of traitors caused Joseph Smith much difficulty and resulted in considerable suffering, their names today are virtually unknown and then only for their pitiful wickedness. But the name Joseph Smith is had in great honor by millions upon millions of faithful Latter- day Saints. To him was given the promise that his voice would be more terrible in the midst of his enemies than the fierce lion. The expression is reminiscent of the prophesy of Micah, which was quoted three times by the Savior to the nation of the Nephites as he described the events of the last days. "And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver" (Micah 5:8; 3 Nephi 16:15; 20:16; 21:12). With graphic imagery, the text assures that truth will prevail and that the gospel restored by Joseph Smith and carried with power by missionaries who testify that he was a prophet will lay waste to all that opposes it. All who opposed the Prophet will be confounded, and victory will be the Lord's.

All His Perils and Travails Shall Give Joseph Smith Experience and Be for His Good

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 122:5-9

122:7 All these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. Difficulty faced well rewards its subjects with greater strength. Greatness of character can come only from the rigors of experience in which it is forged. There is a purifying and sanctifying power that grows out of suffering that cannot, perhaps, be gained in any other way.

122:9 Their bounds are set, they cannot pass. The reference is to those who held Joseph Smith and his companions captive in the dungeon of Liberty Jail. Angels stood as companions to their captive brethren. They would assure that the bounds the Lord had set for the fiends that held his servants captive would not be traduced.

Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less. "For there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (D&C 121:25). As to those of the Saints who suffer with sickness or affliction, the Lord said, "It shall come to pass that he that hath faith in me to be healed, and is not appointed unto death, shall be healed" (D&C 42:48). At the funeral of Richard L. Evans, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, Joseph Fielding Smith, then president of the Church, said, "No righteous man is taken before his time" (unpublished funeral address, text in possession of authors). Joseph Smith had the sure promise that he would not be taken until his work had been completed.
