Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 8

DATE: APRIL 1829 (ON OR AFTER 7 APRIL)

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

Oliver Cowdery is here given permission to use the gift of translation that he had been promised and told that he may aid in the labor of translating the Book of Mormon. Preparatory to that, the Lord teaches Oliver two principles: the spirit of revelation is essential to the translation process, and faith is also a part of that process, for should he give way to doubt, he will lose the power of God and be unable to proceed.

Revelation Comes by the Holy Ghost

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 8:1-5

8:1-5 In these verses Oliver Cowdery is told that he has been given the gift of revelation. If he asks in faith, doing so with an honest heart, he is promised that he will be able to translate ancient records. From the Book of Mormon we learn that there are many records which are yet to come forth. These records will also contain a witness of Christ and the assurance of the promises made to the posterity of Abraham. And like the Book of Mormon, these sacred records can be translated only by the gift and power of God (2 Nephi 29:10-14; 3 Nephi 26:6-11; Ether 3:22-28; 4:5-7).

8:2 Though we would not seek to limit the ways in which the Lord can communicate his mind and will to his children, we would be well within the mark to say that most revelation comes in the form of thoughts and feelings that the Lord places in the hearts and minds of those he chooses to instruct. They in turn are left to clothe those thoughts with words that might be shared with others. This stands in sharp contrast with the sectarian world, where the prevailing doctrineknown as divine dictation maintains that when the Lord chooses to speak through someone, all his or her bodily functions are suspended. The recipient of the revelation becomes as a dummy in the lap of the divine ventriloquist, voicing only those words that are given it. This, it is reasoned, must be the case so that the culture, understanding, and temperament of the revelation's recipient do not influence its expression. Thus, it is argued that revelation is both inerrant and infallible. Here we learn that the Lord gave us as his children both minds and hearts, with the intent that they be used to converse with him. As we grow in spiritual understanding, our capacity to receive and understand revelation increases accordingly, just as a child's ability to converse with others increases as that child grows in understanding.

There are no mindless revelations, nor are there any heartless ones. Indeed, we would say that the more disciplined and informed the mind and the more refined and purified the heart, the greater the portion of heavenly light forthcoming. As parents speak to their children according to the level of their understanding, so does our Heavenly Father speak to his children. For this reason, the Lord reminds Oliver (v. 5) to keep his commandments. One cannot do those things that alienate the Spirit of the Lord and at the same time draw upon the light and strength that it brings.

Mysteries of God and the Power to Translate

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 8:6-11

8:6 The gift of Aaron. In the Book of Commandments this was called the "rod of nature," which has caused considerable speculation that Oliver Cowdery had some kind of a divining rod by which he could receive reve lation. Then comes the supposition that in changing this text to read "the gift of Aaron," Joseph Smith decided he was telling more than he intended. Such conclusions do not seem to represent good doctrine, good history, or a correct appraisal of the Prophet's purpose in making this change. Consider the following:

First, there is no record or statement tracing to either Joseph Smith or Oliver Cowdery that so much as hints that Oliver had or used any sort of a rod to receive revelation.

Second, the divinely ordained system by which the Book of Mormon was to be translated was the Urim and Thummim. There is no justification for the supposition that Oliver, when granted the privilege of translating, would do so by some other means. Here the Lord said he had been given the "gift of Aaron." True it is that Aaron had a rod which became a serpent when he cast it down before Pharaoh (Exodus 7:10), but he did not use it to receive revelation. Aaron had another gift, the Urim and Thummim, for that purpose (Exodus 28:30; Leviticus 8:6-9).

Third, in Doctrine and Covenants 6, Oliver was told that he had a gift by which he could ask and receive and even obtain a knowledge of the mysteries of heaven (D&C 6:3-12). He was also told that he would be given the gift by which he could translate "even as my servant Joseph" (D&C 6:25). If he was to translate even as Joseph, he would have to translate by the same means used by the Prophet, the Urim and Thummim.

Fourth, in this section, Oliver is again told that he would be granted the spirit of revelation, and in addition to that he would be given another gift, the "gift of Aaron," by which he had already learned many things. Certainly the things he had learned included that which is contained in Doctrine and Covenants 6 and 7, both of which were received by the use of the Urim and Thummim.

Fifth, it would be difficult to suppose that Joseph was attempting to obscure anything in making the change from "rod of nature" (Book of Commandments) to "gift of Aaron" (1835 Doctrine and Covenants), given that he left intact the promise that Oliver would hold this gift in his hands. We know of no seeric device that Oliver could have held in his hands except the Urim and Thummim.

Finally, both Joseph and Oliver had been promised the "keys of this gift" (D&C 6:28). Joseph never used a rod in translation. The gift he used, in common with Oliver, was the Urim and Thummim. Lucy Mack Smith said that Joseph referred to the Urim and Thummim as "a key." It was by this key that "the angel manifested those things to him that were shown him in vision; by which also he could at any time ascertain the approach of danger, either to himself or the record, and for this cause he kept these things constantly about his person" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 145). In yet another instance, Lucy Mack Smith recorded that Joseph told her he had "a key" by which he translated. She said she did not know what he meant, but he placed the "article in [her] hands and, examining it with no covering but a silk handkerchief, found that it consisted of two smooth three- cornered diamonds set in glass, and the glasses were set in silver bows connected with each other in much the same way that old-fashioned spectacles are made" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 139).

We conclude, therefore, that the gift promised to Oliver Cowdery could be nothing other than the Urim and Thummim and that Joseph's purpose in making this change was to clarify rather than conceal its meaning. This change assumes that the reader will know that the gift given the high priest in ancient times was the Urim and Thummim, but then the whole story of the Restoration assumes knowledge of the ancient order of things.

It may be that the Urim and Thummim were referred to as a rod because they were connected by a rod to the breastplate Joseph received with the plates. The Prophet's brother William described the means by which the Urim and Thummim were attached to the breastplate, saying "A pocket was prepared in the breastplate on the left side, immediately over the heart. When not in use the Urim and Thummim was placed in the pocket, the rod being of just the right length to allow it to be deposited. This instrument could, however, be detached from the breastplate when away from home, but Joseph always used it in connection with the breastplate when translating, as it permitted him to have both hands free to touch the plates" (Smith, Rod of Iron 1, 3 [February 1924]: 7). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 10:1. As to "nature" in the phrase "rod of nature," the dictionary of Joseph Smith's day defined nature as comprehending "the works of God" (Webster, Dictionary, 1828).

8:9 By means of the Urim and Thummin. Oliver receives the promise that he too will be able to translate as did Joseph.

8:10 It appears that the Urim and Thummim functioned according to the same principles as did the Liahonaaccording to the "faith and diligence" of those using it (Alma 37:41).
