Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 123

DATE: MARCH 1839

PLACE: JAIL AT LIBERTY, MISSOURI

This section is an excerpt of the same letter from which the previous two sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were selected. The letter was written by the Prophet Joseph Smith while he was illegally incarcerated in Liberty, Missouri. See introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 121.

The Saints Should Collect and Publish an Account of Their Sufferings and Persecutions

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 123:1-6

123:1-6 Dr. Clark V. Johnson, professor of Church history and doctrine at Brigham Young University, compiled and published over 700 redress petitions of the Saints regarding the conflicts in Missouri. He has written: "As an outgrowth of the Mormon War, Joseph Smith spent the winter of 1838-39 confined to jail in Liberty, Missouri. While imprisoned, he instructed the Saints to assemble all their grievances against Missouri, to organize a committee, and to present the information to the U.S. government (D&C 123:1-6). Joseph sent word to the Saints to prepare affidavits of their recent experiences with the design of securing redress from the federal government for the losses they had suffered in Missouri at the hands of mobocrats. In 1839 Church members commenced writing affidavits of their Missouri experiences and swearing to their authenticity before civil authorities, including justices of the peace, clerks of the court, clerks of the circuit court, clerks of county commissioner's courts, and notary publics in two counties in Iowa and ten counties in Illinois. Thus the Saints took every precaution to send sworn, legal documents authenticated by the seals of local government officials. They even sent documents authenticating the officials themselves. During the ensuing years the Mormons presented these documents to the federal government in an effort to obtain reparation for their sufferings in Missouri.

"The petitions indicate that the Nauvoo Saints made at least three and probably four separate attempts to obtain redress from Congress. . . . Church leaders made the first appeal beginning late in 1839. . . . Joseph Smith led the Mormon delegation, which originally consisted of Elias Higbee, Sidney Rigdon, and Orrin Porter Rockwell; Robert Foster later joined the group as a physician to Sidney Rigdon. The Prophet and Higbee were the first members of the delegation to reach Washington, D.C., arriving 28 November 1839. On the following day they met with President Martin Van Buren, who showed some sympathy but offered no assistance. By 23 December 1839, Rigdon, Foster, and Rockwell had arrived in Washington, D.C. Together the five members of this delegation made every effort to place the Mormon cause before the U.S. Congress. Besides the introductory memorial signed by Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, and Elias Smith, they presented 491 individual claims to Congress (Smith, History of the Church, 4:74). Nothing came from these attempts. Frustrated by their lack of success, Joseph, Porter Rockwell, and Dr. Foster left Washington late in February 1840 (Smith, History of the Church, 4:81). Rigdon and Higbee remained in Washington a few weeks more continuing the effort. However, nothing came of this final attempt, and Higbee returned to Nauvoo, followed shortly by Rigdon" (Clark, Mormon Redress Petitions, xix- xxi).

123:2 The petitions for redress ranged from terse to tedious. Stephen Blackman, for example, was very concise in his written statement: "State of Missouri Dr [due] to Stephen Blackman For damage and loss of property by burning and being driven from the State $150 For damage by loss of Son there is no earthly consideration can compensate" (Clark, Mormon Redress Petitions, 143).

123:6 Claim that promise which shall call him forth from his hiding place. After the Saints were driven from Jackson County, Missouri, the Lord gave them instructions to importune at the feet of the judge, the governor, and the president for redress (D&C 101:86-89). It was only after the Saints had done their part to follow the procedures of justice delineated in the Constitution of the United States and were not upheld in their rights that the Lord would "arise and come forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation" (D&C 101:89). In order for the Saints to have claim on the Lord's promise they needed to obey his commands concerning the presentation of affidavits to the government leaders (D&C 82:10). That the Lord did come out in his fury against the nation is evidenced by the Civil War. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:15; 121:1.

The Same Spirit That Established False Creeds Also Leads to Persecution of the Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 123:7-10

123:7-10 The Prophet Joseph Smith attributes the persecutions of the Saints to the religious bigotry of the Missourians. Regardless of historical commentary attributing the conflict between the Saints and the old settlers to cultural differences, political power, or economic advantage, the main complaint that the Missourians had against the Saints was their religion. For example, Captain Samuel Bogart, who led a company of Caldwell County Militia against the Saints, was a Methodist minister. He and two other ministers, Neil Gilliam and Sashel Woods, led much of the opposition to the Saints. The theme of religious persecution is borne out even more plainly by the fact that many Saints were given the opportunity to remain in Missouri if "they would deny their faith or their religion" (Clark, Mormon Redress Petitions, 158).

123:7 The most damning hand of murder. The Savior referred to those of his day that sought to kill him as having the devil for their father (John 8:44). Murderers will be "thrust down to hell . . . [and] shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last resurrection" (D&C 76:84-85). The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the Saints, "your friends who have been murdered for the truth's sake in the persecutions shall triumph gloriously in the celestial world, while their murderers shall welter for ages in torment, even until they shall have paid the uttermost farthing" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 359).

The fathers, who have inherited lies. Jeremiah prophetically described the day of Restoration saying, "O Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit. Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods? Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name is the Lord" (Jeremiah 16:19-21).

123:7-8 It would be hard to overstate the wickedness or the darkness that has been spawned by the creeds of historical Christianity. By their very nature they deny the principle of revelation, enshrining in its stead the philosophical vagaries of men. They are the banners of tyrants and the colors under which the enemies of agency, and freedom of religion have marched. They have been the source of license by which the Saints of God have been hounded, pillaged, tortured, and slain in one generation after another. They are the children of priestcraft born to mystify the simple truths of heaven in such a manner as to convince the honest truth seeker that only those who have been baptized in the sophistry of men can understand them. Thus by blocking the light of heaven they cause a spiritual eclipse and establish themselves as the way the truth and the light. Wherever creeds are found one can also expect to find a paid clergy, the simple truths of the gospel cloaked in the dark robes of mystery, religious intolerance, and a history of bloodshed.

Many among All Sects Will Yet Receive the Truth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 123:11-17

123:11-17. The need has never been greater for publishing the truth to all of the world. Satan has set up a kingdom whose doctrines include all manner of lies concerning the Lord's people and his church. Many people among the religions of the world know instinctively that the creeds of their faith are incorrect. They know by the Spirit of God that they are his children and that they were created in his image. The apostasy left the world barren of the fruits of truth. The Restoration of the fulness of the gospel provided the truths that the honest in heart seek. Yet they are left to wander the earth seeking the word of the Lord (Amos 8:11-12). We are stewards of the Restoration and must do all within our power to publish the glad tidings of truth. Thus, the answer to attacks against the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon is to flood the earth with copies of that volume, allowing all people to judge for themselves as they read and pray concerning its testimony of Jesus Christ. Likewise, the answer to every attack against the kingdom of God is to publish the truth as far and wide as our means will permit through members, full- time missionaries, books, newspapers, magazines, the Internet, videos, television and radio interviews, and any other means at our disposal through which the Spirit of God might witness to the heart of those who are seeking the truth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 71:1-4.
