Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124

DATE: 19 JANUARY 1841

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

This revelation was given during a brief period of respite that followed the expulsion of the Saints from Missouri and included the escape of the Prophet and his companions from their imprisonment in the Liberty Jail. It preceded the expulsion of the Saints from the state of Illinois and their great westward movement. Along with matters that dealt with the building of the city of Nauvoo, this revelation directed the Saints once again to build a temple to their God. This was done at the cost of all the energy, strength, faith, and means available to them. For which in turn they were granted the crowning revelations of the Restoration. It is in this revelation that the doctrine of baptism for the dead is first announced. This was followed almost immediately by the revelation of the fulness of the ordinances of the temple. Surely it can be said that the revelations received during this period constitute the strength, power, glory, and genius of Mormonism. Truly the spirit of Mormonism is the spirit of Nauvoo.

Joseph Smith Is Commanded to Make a Solemn Proclamation of the Gospel to the President of the United States, the Governors, and the Rulers of All Nations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:1-14

124:1 That I might show forth my wisdom through the weak things of the earth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:19.

124:2 This stake which I have planted to be a cornerstone of Zion. It is the city of Nauvoo to which reference is made here. Today a new stake is organized when there are sufficient people in a given geographic area to provide leadership and to sustain the various priesthood and auxiliary programs of the Church. In the early history of the Church a city-stake, Kirtland for instance, was laid out first and then the people came to live in it. Nauvoo was such a city- stake. A plan for the city was created and then people purchased lots and commenced to build up Zion, or the city. Thus, to say that Nauvoo is or was "a cornerstone of Zion" is to say that the city was built according to the master plan by which all city-stakes were to be built.

The "corner-stone" of the temple, an important civic edifice, has provided rich scriptural imagery. It is used in at least three different ways: first, it is that upon which the rest of that which is built is to rest (Job 38:6); second, it ties two walls together, thus keeping them straight and true, or just and right (Isaiah 28:16); and third, it describes the function performed by a keystone, or capstone, which holds the other stones in the building in place (Psalm 118:22). In each instance the imagery fits the city- stake of Nauvoo. The city represented the capstone of the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The revelations received here hold everything in place that was restored or revealed to him. The power with which the Saints were endowed in its temple enabled them to go west in the faith that they could do the impossible, which they did. Thereafter the doctrines of Nauvoo become the theological foundation upon which all subsequent generations have built.

Shall be polished with the refinement which is after the similitude of a palace. The Saints were to build up cities that, as stakes of Zion, reflected the glory of God. The spirit of this counsel is found in the instruction given by Brigham Young to the Saints as they colonized the West. He charged them saying, "Let the people build good houses, plant good vineyards and orchards, make good roads, build beautiful cities in which may be found magnificent edifices for the convenience of the public, handsome streets skirted with shade trees, fountains of water, crystal streams, and every tree, shrub and flower that will flourish in this climate, to make our mountain home a paradise and our hearts wells of gratitude to the God of Joseph, enjoying it all with thankful hearts, saying constantly, 'not mine but thy will be done, O Father'" (Young, Journal of Discourses, 10:3-4).

124:2-14 Make a solemn proclamation of my gospel. The Prophet Joseph Smith was killed before he could write this proclamation. Initially, his efforts were hindered by the death of his assistant, Robert B. Thompson, who died 27 August 1841. Later efforts were hampered by the apostasies of John C. Bennett and William Law, both of whom were called to assist the Prophet in issuing the proclamation (vv. 16-107). Following the death of brother Thompson, further efforts were made to write the proclamation 22 December 1841. The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: "This evening I commenced giving instructions to the scribe [Willard Richards] concerning writing the proclamation to the kings of the earth, mentioned in the revelation given January 19, 1841" (History of the Church, 4:483-84). Other concerns intervened with these efforts until finally in November 1843 the Prophet Joseph Smith "instructed Elders Richards, Hyde, Taylor, and Phelps to write a 'Proclamation to the Kings of the Earth'" (History of the Church, 6:80). But again other concerns took the Prophet's immediate attention, particularly the building of the Nauvoo Temple. The need to fulfill this responsibility was still upon his mind, however (Smith, History of the Church, 6:176-77). William W. Phelps reported that he did write a twenty-two- page manuscript under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith in the spring of 1844, but that he stopped after the martyrdom. A 16-page pamphlet was written in behalf of the Twelve Apostles by Parley P. Pratt and published in 1845 by Wilford Woodruff in Liverpool, England, entitled "Proclamation of the Twelve to the Kings of the World," which ultimately fulfilled the Lord's command in this revelation (Smith, History of the Church, 7:558).

Hyrum Smith, David W. Patten, Joseph Smith Sen., and Others Are Blessed for Their Integrity and Virtues

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:15-21

124:15 Hyrum Smith. Hyrum Smith was described by his Prophet brother as having "the mildness of a lamb, and the integrity of a Job, and in short, the meekness and humility of Christ" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:338). When John Taylor looked upon Hyrum's slain body, he reflected, "He was a great and good man, and my soul was cemented to his. If ever there was an exemplary, honest, and virtuous man, an embodiment of all that is noble in the human form, Hyrum Smith was its representative" (Smith, History of the Church, 7:107).

124:16 John C. Bennett. In 1840 Bennett arrived in Nauvoo offering to help the Saints obtain a city charter and joined the Church shortly thereafter. A man of some ability he was called to serve as an assistant to the Prophet while Sidney Rigdon struggled with bad health and was also elected the first mayor of Nauvoo in 1841. In May of 1842 he apparently intended to do harm to the Prophet during a sham battle conducted by the Nauvoo Legion. After "the gentle breathings of [the] Spirit [whispered to the Prophet Joseph Smith] that there was mischief concealed in that sham battle," Bennett's conduct was investigated (Smith, History of the Church, 5:4). The inquiry found him guilty of adultery and of teaching that his illicit sexual behavior was condoned by Church leaders.

His behavior having been exposed, he sought to even the score and in 1842 published The History of the Saints; or, An Exposé of Joe Smith and Mormonism in which he charged Joseph Smith with being "one of the grossest and most infamous impostors that ever appeared upon the face of the earth" (Bennett, History of the Saints, 3).

124:18 Lyman Wight. A companion of the Prophet Joseph Smith in Liberty Jail, Lyman Wight was chosen to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve created by the death of David W. Patten. After the Prophet's death he refused to acknowledge the right of Brigham Young or the Quorum of the Twelve to preside over him. Contrary to their direction he led a group of Saints from Wisconsin to settle in Texas. He was excommunicated 3 December 1848.

Bear him up as on eagle's wings. Speaking of those who "wait upon the Lord," Isaiah said, they "shall renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint" (Isaiah 40:31). The same promise is given those who keep the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89:19-20).

124:19 The three men named in this verse David W. Patten (thirty-eight), of the Quorum of the Twelve; Edward Partridge (forty-six), first bishop of the Church; and Joseph Smith Sr. (sixty-nine), first patriarch to the Churchall died as a result of the Missouri persecutions.

John Taylor commented: "There is something said concerning Joseph Smith, Sen., the father of the Prophet Joseph Smith, of whom it is said that he sitteth with Abraham, at his right hand. (See D & C 124:19.) Who was Abraham? A patriarch. Who was Father Joseph Smith? A patriarch. It is quite fitting, therefore, that he should associate with Abraham, who was and is also a patriarch" (Gospel Kingdom, 184).

124:20-21 George Miller was the first man in the history of the Church to serve as a bishop over a ward. Earlier Edward Partridge and Newel K. Whitney served as regional or traveling bishops (D&C 20:66). Bishop Partridge served the Saints in Missouri and the surrounding areas; Bishop Whitney received responsibility for Ohio and the eastern states.

At the suggestion of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the City council divided Nauvoo into four political divisions called wards on 1 March 1841 (Smith, History of the Church, 4:305-6). Consequently, four bishops, Newel K. Whitney, George Miller, Isaac Higbee, and Vinson Knight (D&C 124:141), were assigned to preside over these areas. As part of their stewardship they were responsible to receive the consecrations, or tithes and offerings, of the Saints living within those ward boundaries. Their responsibilities dealt primarily with temporal concerns, whereas spiritual matters were administered through the Melchizedek Priesthood. On 20 August 1842 the Nauvoo Stake High Council determined, "that the city of Nauvoo be divided into ten [ecclesiastical] wards, according to the division made by the temple committee; and that there be a bishop appointed over each ward; and also that other bishops be appointed over such districts immediately out of the city and adjoining thereto as shall be considered necessary" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:119).

This pattern of geographical areas being assigned bishops to preside over the temporal needs of the members continued as the Saints moved to Winter Quarters during the exodus from Nauvoo and as they settled the Great Basin. On 6 April 1847, Newel K. Whitney was sustained as the presiding bishop of the Church. Others were called as bishops within stakes of Zion, which practice has continued to the present day.

The Saints Are Commanded to Build Both a House for the Entertainment of Strangers and a Temple in Nauvoo

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:22-28

124:23 A house that strangers may come from afar to lodge therein. It was not intended that the Latter-day Saints isolate themselves from the world. This revelation called for the building of what is called the Nauvoo House to provide comfortable lodgings for visitors to their city. Joseph Smith explained, "It is important that the Nauvoo House should be finished, that we may have a suitable place wherein to entertain the great ones of the earth, and teach them the truth" (History of the Church, 5:137).

The Prophet Joseph Smith emphasized the significance of the Nauvoo House in bringing the Church out of obscurity in the April 1843 general conference. He stated: "It is necessary that this conference give importance to the Nauvoo House. A prejudice exists against building it, in favor of the Temple; and the conference is required to give stress to the building of the Nauvoo House. This is the most important matter for the time being; for there is no place in this city where men of wealth, character and influence from abroad can go to repose themselves, and it is necessary we should have such a place. The Church must build it or abide the result of not fulfilling the commandment" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:328).

The Nauvoo House was never completed as originally designed. After the martyrdom of the Prophet, his wife, Emma, inherited the unfinished building (v. 56). She later married Lewis C. Bidamon, who tore down one wing of the Nauvoo House to complete a smaller two-story house on the southwest corner of the original building.

124:26-27 These verses, which refer to the building of a temple in Nauvoo, extend the invitation to scattered Israel to return as their fathers did anciently, bringing with them their rich treasures that they might aid in the building of the house of the Lord. John Snyder (v. 22) was appointed to receive funds and materials for the building of the temple. The History of the Church under 22 December 1841 reads, "The word of the Lord came unto Joseph the Seer, verily thus saith the Lord, let my servant John Snyder take a mission to the eastern continent, unto all the conferences now sitting in that region; and let him carry a package of epistles, that shall be written by my servants the Twelve making known unto them their duties concerning the building of my houses which I have appointed unto you, saith the Lord, that they may bring their gold and their silver, and their precious stones, and the box-tree, and the fir- tree, and all fine wood to beautify the place of my sanctuary, saith the Lord; and let him return speedily with all means which shall be put into his hands, even so. Amen" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:483).

124:27 Build a house to my name. In the general conference October, 1840 the Saints appointed a committee to build the House of the Lord (Smith, History of the Church, 4:186, 205).

124:28 Restore again that which was lost. Latter-day Saints could hardly claim to be in possession of the faith of ancient Israel and not at the same time claim to have received as a part of that restoration the concept of temple worship. Whenever the Lord has had a people that he acknowledged as his own, they have been a temple- building people. Thus from the days of Adam to the time of Christ temples existed in which sacred ceremonies and ordinances were performed, revelations were given, and the Lord manifested himself to the faithful. That the blessings of the holy temple were available to the former- day Saints is made clear in the Prophet's translation of the Egyptian papyri. We are told that one particular figure represents "God, sitting upon his throne, clothed with power and authority; with a crown of eternal light upon his head; representing also the grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood, as revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed" (Facsimile 2, Explanation, Figure 3; see also D&C 124:38-39).

The fulness of the priesthood. In a broad sense the fulness of the priesthood includes the authority to administer the ordinances of the house of the Lord for both the living and the dead. The keys of the fulness of the priesthood were conferred upon the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple by Moses, Elias, and Elijah (D&C 110:11-16). More specifically, to receive the fulness of the priesthood is to receive the highest ordinances of the temple. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 322). A man can receive the fulness of the priesthood only after he has entered into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. That marriage covenant must be sealed "by the Holy Spirit of promise, by him who is anointed" (D&C 132:19). To this the Prophet Joseph Smith added, "If a man gets a fullness of the priesthood of God he has to get it in the same way that Jesus Christ obtained it, and that was by keeping all the commandments and obeying all the ordinances of the house of the Lord" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 308).

William Clayton recorded these additional instructions from Brigham Young, while the Twelve were preparing the temple and the ordinances to be administered therein: "We have been ordained to the Melchisedeck (sic) Priesthood, which is the highest order of Priesthood, and it has many branches or offices. And those who have come in here and have received their washing and anointing will be ordained Kings and Priests, and will then have received the fullness of the Priesthood, all that can be given on earth, for Brother Joseph said he had given us all that could be given to man on earth" (Smith, Intimate Chronicle, 234).

"In setting forth as much as can, with propriety, be spoken outside of the temple," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "the Lord says that 'the fulness of the priesthood' is received only in the temple itself. This fulness is received through washings, anointings, solemn assemblies, oracles in holy places, conversations, ordinances, endowments, and sealings. (D&C 124:40.) It is in the temple that we enter into the patriarchal order, the order of priesthood that bears the name 'the new and everlasting covenant of marriage'" (New Witness, 315).

Baptisms for the Dead Are to Be Performed in Temples

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:29-36

124:29 My saints, may be baptized for those who are dead. The revelation on baptism for the dead came while the Twelve were laboring in the British Isles. Joseph Smith wrote to them saying: "I presume the doctrine of 'baptism for the dead' has ere this reached your ears, and may have raised some inquiries in your minds respecting the same. I cannot in this letter give you all the information you may desire on the subject; but aside from knowledge independent of the Bible, I would say that it was certainly practiced by the ancient churches; and St. Paul endeavors to prove the doctrine of the resurrection from the same, and says, 'Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?'

"I first mentioned the doctrine in public when preaching the funeral sermon of Brother Seymour Brunson: and have since then given general instructions in the Church on the subject. The Saints have the privilege of being baptized for those of their relatives who are dead, whom they believe would have embraced the Gospel, if they had been privileged with hearing it, and who have received the Gospel in the spirit, through the instrumentality of those who have been commissioned to preach to them while in prison" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 179). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 127; 128.

With the announcement of the doctrine of baptism for the dead it became apparent for the first time in this dispensation that the priesthood can be used to perform the ordinances of salvation for those who passed from this life without the opportunity to receive them. In so doing priesthood bearers act upon the same principle as that governing the atonement of Christ. In his atoning sacrifice Christ did for us that which we could not do for ourselves. So it is that in the performance of vicarious ordinances we do for others that which they were unable to do for themselves. Thus we can stand in the stead of those who died without the opportunity to be baptized in the performance of that sacred ordinance and make that covenant in their behalf. It then becomes their right to accept or reject that which was done in their behalf.

124:30 This ordinance belongeth to my house. "It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. Jesus did everything to gather the people, and they would not be gathered, and He therefore poured out curses upon them. Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles.

"It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances and endowments, washings and anointings, etc. One of the ordinances of the house of the Lord is baptism for the dead. God decreed before the foundation of the world that that ordinance should be administered in a font prepared for that purpose in the house of the Lord" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 308).

Thus only in their poverty when they are unable to do otherwise does the Lord permit his people to perform this sacred ordinance some place other than a temple. Even then, the ordinances performed outside the temple, are generally redone after a temple becomes available.

124:31-35 Before the Nauvoo temple was completed, the baptismal font for the dead was dedicated by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Concerning these verses Elder Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "In the months when the saints were without a Temple the Lord granted them the privilege of baptizing for their dead in the Mississippi River, but with the understanding that this was a special privilege which would end when they had been given sufficient time to prepare a place in the Temple where this ordinance could be performed. For baptism for the dead, as well as other ordinances for the dead, are to be performed in a house built to the name of the Lord and for that holy purpose. Therefore we find the members of the Church engaging in baptisms for the dead in the river from the time the privilege was granted until the time arrived when the font in the house of the Lord was prepared for that ordinance, and when that time arrived all baptisms for the dead in the river ceased by divine command. The Lord said: [D&C 124:32-33].

"And if ye do not these things at the end of the appointment [v. 32], obviously does not mean 'if ye do not build a temple at the end of the appointment,' as our critics infer it does, but it refers to the ordinances that were to be performed in the Temple, and the failure on the part of the Saints to perform these ordinances for their dead was the thing that would cause their rejection with their dead, and not the failure to build the Temple, which was merely the edifice in which the saving principles were to be performed. This is in harmony with the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said that if we neglect the salvation of our dead, we do it at the peril of our own salvation! Why? Because we without them cannot be made perfect [D&C 128:15]" (quoted in Doxey, Latter-day Prophets, 4:265-66).

124:36 This is a marvelously prophetic verse. Not only does it foreshadow a day when temples will be common to the stakes of Zion, as we now see happening with the building of smaller temples, but it also foresees the building of a temple in which baptisms for the dead will be performed in Jerusalem. Some have supposed that the temple prophesied to be built in Jerusalem in the last days can be built by a people other than the Latter-day Saints. This could hardly be the case if it is to be built to accommodate the performance of baptisms for the dead and by implication other vicarious ordinances.

The Lord's People Always Build Temples for the Performance of Holy Ordinances

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:37-44

124:37-38 Such ordinances as baptisms for the dead (vv. 32-33) are to be performed in a temple but may be performed elsewhere for a given time and season when the Lord's people are unable to build a temple. Such circumstances, however, are expected to be only temporary. Thus the Lord commanded the children of Israel to build a tabernacle or portable temple that they could carry with them in the wilderness. When they obtained their promised land, however, it was understood that the tabernacle would be replaced with a temple.

The ordinances performed in the holy edifice of the Lord, be it a tabernacle or the temple, were first taught to us in the councils of heaven. They are as eternal as the covenants and promises associated with them.

124:39 Ordinances had been administered and solemn assemblies held in the Kirtland Temple. They were placed in their proper order as part of the endowment in Nauvoo. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 109:6, 35.

Memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi. According to the promise of Malachi and in conjunction with the authority restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist, the sons of Levi, as a part of the restoration of all things, are to offer again the same offering that they offered anciently (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 172-73). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:68-75, page 117.

Oracles in your most holy places. Revelations or prophecy.

You receive conversations. The 1828 Webster's Dictionary defines conversation as a "familiar discourse" or as "unrestrained talk."

Your statutes and judgments. Statutes are laws, and the covenants made in the temple include promises to keep the laws of God. Elder James E. Talmage explained: "The ordinances of the endowment embody certain obligations on the part of the individual, such as covenant and promise to observe the law of strict virtue and chastity, to be charitable, benevolent, tolerant and pure; to devote both talent and material means to the spread of truth and the uplifting of the race; to maintain devotion to the cause of truth; and to seek in every way to contribute to the great preparation that the earth may be made ready to receive her Kingthe Lord Jesus Christ. With the taking of each covenant and the assuming of each obligation a promised blessing is pronounced, contingent upon the faithful observance of the conditions" (House of the Lord, 84).

Those who receive the endowment understand to a greater degree the justice and judgments of God according to the faithfulness given to his commandments. The judgment sought being that one is worthy and acceptable before the Lord to enter into his rest or into his presence (D&C 84:19-24).

Elder James E. Talmage further commented: "The Temple Endow ment, as administered in modern temples, comprises instruction relating to the significance and sequence of past dispensations, and the importance of the present as the greatest and grandest era in human history. This course of instruction includes a recital of the most prominent events of the creative period, the condition of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, their disobedience and consequent expulsion from that blissful abode, their condition in the lone and dreary world when doomed to live by labor and sweat, the plan of redemption by which the great transgression may be atoned, the period of the great apostasy, the restoration of the Gospel with all its ancient powers and privileges, the absolute and indispensable condition of personal purity and devotion to the right in present life, and a strict compliance with Gospel requirements" (House of the Lord, 83-84).

My holy house, which my people are always commanded to build unto my holy name. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 124:28, "Restore again that which was lost."

In the fear that he might be killed before the Nauvoo Temple was completed, the Prophet was prompted to administer the ordinances of the temple to the Quorum of the Twelve and a few other trusted Saints before construction of the temple was completed. These ordinances were first administered in the upper room of the Red Brick Store in Nauvoo. For instance, we read the following entry in Joseph's journal for the 4th of May in 1842. "I spent the day in the upper part of the store, that is in my private office (so called because in that room I keep my sacred writings, translate ancient records, and receive revelations) and in my general business office, or lodge room (that is where the Masonic fraternity meet occasionally, for want of a better place) in council with General James Adams, of Springfield, Patriarch Hyrum Smith, Bishops Newel K. Whitney and George Miller, and President Brigham Young and Elders Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards, instructing them in the principles and order of the Priesthood, attending to washings, anointings, endowments and the communication of keys pertaining to the Aaronic Priesthood, and so on to the highest order of the Melchisedek Priesthood, setting forth the order pertaining to the Ancient of Days, and all those plans and principles by which any one is enabled to secure the fullness of those blessings which have been prepared for the Church of the First Born, and come up and abide in the presence of the Eloheim in the eternal worlds. In this council was instituted the ancient order of things for the first time in these last days. And the communications I made to this council were of things spiritual, and to be received only by the spiritual minded: and there was nothing made known to these men but what will be made known to all the Saints of the last days, so soon as they are prepared to receive, and a proper place is prepared to communicate them, even to the weakest of the Saints; therefore let the Saints be diligent in building the Temple, and all houses which they have been, or shall hereafter be, commanded of God to build; and wait their time with patience in all meekness, faith, perseverance unto the end, knowing assuredly that all these things referred to in this council are always governed by the principle of revelation" (History of the Church, 5:1-2).

124:41 The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "The dispensation of the fullness of times will bring to light the things that have been revealed in all former dispensations; also other things that have not been before revealed" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 193; see also D&C 128:18).

124:41-42 During the April 1844 conference of the Church the Prophet said, "The declaration this morning is, that as soon as the Temple and baptismal font are prepared, we calculate to give the Elders of Israel their washings and anointings, and attend to those last and more impressive ordinances, without which we cannot obtain celestial thrones. But there must be a holy place prepared for that purpose. There was a proclamation made during the time that the foundation of the Temple was laid to that effect, and there are provisions made until the work is completed, so that men may receive their endowments and be made kings and priests unto the Most High God, having nothing to do with temporal things, but their whole time will be taken up with things pertaining to the house of God. There must, however, be a place built expressly for that purpose, and for men to be baptized for their dead. It must be built in this central place; for every man who wishes to save his father, mother, brothers, sisters and friends, must go through all the ordinances for each one of them separately, the same as for himself, from baptism to ordination, washing and anointings, and receive all the keys and powers of the Priesthood, the same as for himself" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 362-63).

124:43 Ye shall build it on the place where you have contemplated building it. A site had already been chosen for the temple on the crest of the hill rising to the east above the flats of Nauvoo.

The Saints Are Excused from Building the Temple in Jackson County Because of Oppression by Their Enemies

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:45-55

124:45-48 These verses return us to the fact that the Lord requires that we become a covenant people or a covenant community; we are not simply a community of covenant individuals. We do not work out our salvation separately and singly but rather together. If one man chooses to pollute the water it is not he alone who suffers. All who drink it, regardless of how innocent they may be, will be poisoned. While if another man choose to raise the blinds so that the light of heaven might enter the otherwise darkened room, all within the room are thereby enabled to see. All of us have been both blessed and cursed by that which others have done. These verses return us to both the promises and warnings of Jackson County and Kirtland, Ohio (D&C 101:1-8; 112:24-26). Nauvoo is to be to them a place of refuge and safety if the Saints abide in the counsels of the Lord, but if some of their number choose to pursue another course, all will suffer, and again as history attests such was the case.

124:49-55 Though Zion and its temple were not built within the appointed generation, and though the early Saints were excused from this labor, these things will yet come to fruition. On 8 March 1833, the Lord promised: "I, the Lord, will contend with Zion, and plead with her strong ones, and chasten her until she overcomes and is clean before me. For she shall not be removed out of her place" (D&C 90:36-37). All that has been prophesied must yet be fulfilled and every labor assigned the Saints of this dispensation must be accomplished.

124:52 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:15.

Directions Are Given for the Building of the Nauvoo House

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:56-83

124:56-60 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 124:23.

124:58 Joseph: In thee and in thy seed shall the kindred of the earth be blessed. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110:12.

124:61 Plants of renown, and as watchmen upon her walls. Those the Lord has chosen to lead his people are here referred to in the imagery of the Bible as "plant[s] of renown" (Ezekiel 34:29), and as "watchmen upon [her] walls" (Isaiah 62:6).

124:62-83 George Miller, Lyman Wight, John Smith, and Peter Haws were appointed as "the quorum of the Nauvoo House" (D&C 124:119). As such they were given the responsibility to oversee the building of the boarding house for strangers that the Lord commanded to be built in Nauvoo (v. 23). Although it was to be a boarding house for strangers, the Lord revealed that the Nauvoo House was to "be built unto my name" (v. 24). It was to be a place where the weary traveler could "contemplate the word of the Lord . . . [and] the glory of Zion" (vv. 23, 60). Due to the sacred nature of the building, the Lord commanded that each individual who held stock in the Nauvoo House must be "a believer in the Book of Mormon" and the revelations given to Joseph Smith (v. 119). Those mentioned as worthy to hold stock in this sacred enterprise were Joseph Smith, Vinson Knight, Hyrum Smith, Isaac Galland, William Marks, Henry Sherwood, and William Law (vv. 56, 74, 77-78, 80-82).

124:83 I, the Lord, will build up Kirtland, but . . . have a scourge prepared for the inhabitants thereof. See Doctrine and Covenants 112:23-26.

Hyrum Smith Is Called to Be a Patriarch and to Receive Keys and Stand in the Place of Oliver Cowdery

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:84-96

124:84 Almon Babbitt, a very capable man, was caught up in his own importance and thought he ought be the one who stood at the head of the Church. Writing to Oliver Granger about Almon Babbitt, Joseph Smith said, "It is in consequence of aspiring men that Kirtland has been forsaken. How frequently has your humble servant been envied in his office by such characters, who endeavored to raise themselves to power at his expense, and seeing it impossible to do so, resorted to foul slander and abuse, and other means to effect his overthrow. Such characters have ever been the first to cry out against the Presidency, and publish their faults and foibles to the four winds of heaven. . . .

"When I think that others who have lately come into the Church should be led to Kirtland instead of to this place, by Elder Babbitt; and having their confidence in the authorities lessened by such observations as he (Elder Babbitt) has thought proper to make, as well as hearing all the false reports and exaggerated accounts of our enemiesI must say that I feel grieved in spirit, and cannot tolerate such proceedings neither will I; but will endeavor to disabuse the minds of the Saints, and break down all such unhallowed proceedings.

"It was something new to me when I heard there had been secret meetings held in the Lord's House, and that some of my friendsfaithful brethren men enjoying the confidence of the Church, should be locked out. Such proceedings are not calculated to promote union, or peace, but to engender strife; and will be a curse instead of a blessing. To those who are young in the work, I know they are calculated to be, and must be, injurious. Those who have had experience, and who should know better than to reflect on their brethrenthere is no excuse for them.

"If Brother Babbitt and the other brethren wish to reform the Church, and come out and make a stand against sin and speculation, &c., they must use other weapons than lies, or their object can never be effected; and their labors will be given to the house of the stranger, rather than to the House of the Lord.

"Proceedings of Brother Babbitt were taken into consideration at a meeting of the Church at this place, when it was unanimously resolved, that fellowship should be withdrawn from him until he make satisfaction for the course he has pursued: of which circumstance I wish you to apprise him without delay, and demand his license" (History of the Church, 4:166-67).

After regaining his membership in the Church, Almon Babbitt moved to Ramus, Illinois, and presided over a branch of the Church there. He crossed the plains to Salt Lake City and was elected as a delegate to Congress in Washington, D.C., to request statehood for the territory of Deseret. On his return trip, he refused to heed the counsel to travel with a large group across the plains and was killed by Indians.

124:86 Those faithful Saints who die "are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:12). This does not mean, however, that they cease to labor in the kingdom of God. Rather, "faithful elders of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel . . . in the great world of the spirits of the dead" (D&C 138:57).

124:87 Cease to fear . . . because of the sickness of the land. When the Saints first settled the city of Commerce, Illinois, later renamed Nauvoo, it was a place of sickness. During the first two years many of the Saints died due to the ague, or malaria, especially those who were weakened from their cruel expulsion from Missouri.

124:91-97 These verses have been the source of much discussion, and like those verses describing the legal right of a descendant of Aaron to claim the office of presiding bishop, they have been, and undoubtedly yet will be, used to sustain spurious claims to the office of Church patriarch. Thus it may not be inappropriate to remind the reader that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints is governed by the Spirit of revelation as it rests on its living oracle rather than the revelations given one of his predecessors. It would be our understanding that the promises here given to Hyrum Smith belong to him alone.

124:91 Let my servant William be appointed, ordained, and anointed. The reference in this text is to William Law who is being called to take the place of Hyrum Smith as the second counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. Having been "appointed" by revelation he was then "ordained" or as we use terms today "set apart" to his office. He was "anointed," or endowed on 4 May 1842, in the Red Brick Store.

Rejecting the principles revealed in Doctrine and Covenants 132, William Law became an avowed enemy of Joseph Smith. After his excommunication in April of 1844, Law fought openly against the Prophet, seeking even the destruction of Nauvoo. In league with his brother Wilson and other apostates, he organized a short-lived church with himself as its president. These same men published a slanderous newspaper called the Nauvoo Expositor. It was the decision of the Nauvoo city council to destroy this paper that precipitated the arrest and murder of Joseph and Hyrum Smith in Carthage. Willard Richards, who was with the Prophet at the time of his death, identified Wilson Law as part of the Carthage mob.

Hyrum may take the office of Priesthood. Hyrum Smith, in turn, is called to "take the office of Priesthood," which had previously been held by Oliver Cowdery. Oliver had been excommunicated from the Church at Far West in 1838. This office was peculiar to Joseph and Oliver, and centers in the fact that these two men were present whenever keys or authority were restored. That two men should always be present on such occasions was necessitated by the law of witnesses. By virtue of this office, Oliver functioned as an Assistant or Associate President of the Church and as such stood above the counselors in the First Presidency and the members of the Quorum of the Twelve. Had Joseph Smith died while Oliver Cowdery was still in good standing, it would have been Oliver's right and responsibility to assume the leadership of the Church (D&C 124:94-95).

And Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by blessing and also by right. In addition to "the office of Priesthood," meaning his position as associate president of the Church, Hyrum was to hold the office of Church Patriarch. He had a double claim upon this office, it being his by blessing and by birthright. As one of his last mortal acts, Hyrum's father, Joseph Smith Sr., laid his hands upon his head and said, "My son, Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing which I placed on your head before, for that shall be verified. In addition, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall have a season of peace, so that you shall have a sufficient rest to accomplish the work which God has given you to do. You shall be as firm as the pillars of heaven unto the end of your days. I seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the people. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of Jesus. Amen" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 433-34).

In a blessing previously given to his brother Hyrum, the Prophet had said, "He shall stand in the tracks of his father and be numbered among those who hold the right of Patriarchal Priesthood, even the Evangelical Priesthood and power shall be upon him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 40). This is the same office and priesthood held by the ancient patriarchs of which our revelation states, "order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made" (D&C 107:40).

In addition to this blessing by his father, Hyrum had a right by birth to the office of patriarch as his oldest surviving son. Joseph Smith Sr. laid claim to the patriarchal office as the oldest lineal descendant of Joseph of Egypt (D&C 107:40; Smith, History of the Church, 3:381). The only other lineal office in the Church is that of presiding bishop when that office is held by a direct lineal descendant of Aaron (D&C 68:16-21).

124:92 He shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings. "Two different usages of the term keys are found in the revelations. One has reference to the directive powers whereby the Church or kingdom and all its organizations are governed, the keys of the kingdom being the powers of presidency. The other usage refers to the means provided whereby something is revealed, discovered, or made manifest" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 409-10). As used in this text the term keys is not intended to refer to the right to govern or direct. The Church patriarch does not preside over a quorum of patriarchs nor is it his right to give direction or instruction to them save he does so under the direction of the First Presidency or the Twelve. The patriarch holds keys in the sense that he can unlock the mysteries of heaven by way of the Spirit of revelation and in the instance of Hyrum Smith in the sense that he is here promised the authority by which the fulness of temple blessings are conferred (v. 124). Joseph Smith explained that, "Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 322).

124:95 That he might act in concert with my servant Joseph. In assuming the office held by Oliver Cowdery it was necessary for Hyrum Smith to both receive the keys which he held and to share the testimony that Oliver Cowdery had of those events. "Thus, according to promise, the Lord opened to the vision of Hyrum Smith and showed to him those things which were necessary to qualify him for this exalted position, and upon him were conferred by Joseph Smith all the keys and authorities by which he, Hyrum Smith, was able to act in concert with his younger brother as a prophet, seer and revelator, and president of the Church, 'as well as my servant Joseph'" (Smith, "Patr. Hyrum G. Smith," 23:51-52).

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "The Lord conferred upon Hyrum Smith, however, another important and special honor, in making him as well as Joseph Smith a holder of the keys of authority in this dispensation of the fulness of times. These are the words of that appointment: 'And from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and a seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph.'

"This was a special blessing given to Hyrum Smith, and in accepting it he took the place of Oliver Cowdery, upon whom these keys had previously been bestowed. It should be remembered that whenever the Lord revealed priesthood and the keys of priesthood from the heavens, Oliver Cowdery stood with Joseph Smith in the presence of the heavenly messengers, and was a recipient, as well as Joseph Smith, of all this authority. They held it conjointly, Joseph Smith as the first and Oliver Cowdery as the second elder of the Church.

"Thus the law pertaining to witnesses was fully established, for there were two witnesses standing with authority, keys, and presidency, at the head of this the greatest of all dispensations. When through transgression Oliver Cowdery lost this wonderful and exalted blessing, Hyrum Smith was chosen by revelation of the Lord to take his place" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:165-66).

The keys whereby he may ask and receive. This promise, also given to William Law (D&C 124:97), is directed to the system of importuning the heavens, which we now associate with temple worship.

William Law and Others Are Counseled in Their Labors

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:97-122

124:102 William Law and Hyrum Smith were appointed to travel to the eastern states. They left Nauvoo, 4 September 1842, to counter false statements of John C. Bennett and to attend a conference of the Church in Philadelphia (Smith, History of the Church, 5:146). They returned on 4 November (Smith, History of the Church, 5:183).

124:103-4 Like many of the Saints, Sidney Rigdon was very concerned about the poor health conditions along the Mississippi River. Despite this he remained in Nauvoo for a time in accordance with the Lord's counsel in this revelation. At a conference held 20 August 1842, he testified that God had miraculously raised his daughter, Eliza, from the dead. Hyrum Smith, who spoke after him, "cited Elder Rigdon's mind back to the revelation concerning him, that if he would move into the midst of the city and defend the truth, he should be healed, &c.; and showed that what Elder Rigdon felt in regard to the improvement in his health was a fulfillment of the revelation" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:123).

124:119 The principle that all those who contributed to the building of the Nauvoo House be founded upon a testimony of the Book of Mormon found a rather literal expression in the building itself. Ebenezer Robinson, one-time editor of the Times and Seasons, recalled: "After the brethren had assembled at the southeast corner of the foundation, where the cornerstone was to be laid, President Joseph Smith said: 'Wait, brethren, I have a document I wish to put in that stone,' and started for his house, which was only a few rods away, across Main Street. I went with him to the house, and also one or two other brethren. He got a manu script copy of the Book of Mormon, and brought it into the room where we were standing, and said: 'I will examine to see if it is all here.' and as he did so I stood near him, at his left side, and saw distinctly the writing, as he turned up the pages until he hastily went through the book and satisfied himself that it was all there . . . It was written on foolscap paper, and formed a package, as the sheets lay flat, of about two or two and a half inches thick, I should judge. It was written mostly in Oliver Cowdery's handwriting, with which I was intimately acquainted, having set many pages of type from his handwriting, in the church printing office at Kirtland, Ohio. Some parts of it were written in other handwriting. He took the manuscript and deposited it in the cornerstone of the Nauvoo House, together with other papers and things, including different pieces of United States coin" (Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:159-60n).

Years after the Saints made their exodus from Nauvoo to the Rocky Mountains, they acquired much of the original manuscript of the Book of Mormon from Lewis Bidamon, Emma's second husband. He came across the cornerstone box while tearing down the walls of the eastern wing of the Nauvoo House. He graciously imparted pages of the manuscript to interested parties over a number of years. The pages were forwarded to Salt Lake City, where they are now preserved in the Church historians office (Jessee, "Original Book of Mormon Manuscript," 264-72).

General and Local Officers Are Named, Along with Their Duties and Quorum Affiliations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 124:123-45

124:124 A patriarch has sealing power only so far as can be pronounced in patriarchal blessings. He does not have authority as a patriarch to administer ordinances of salvation and exaltation. He is under the direction of those who preside over him. In the case of the patriarch to the Church, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve preside over him. In the case of a patriarch in a stake of Zion, the stake president presides over him as the president of the high priests quorum. Hyrum Smith was unique among those who have been ordained patriarchs because he was also set apart as the Assistant President of the Church and had been given keys to preside over the entire Church under the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith. See commentary on verses 91-97.

124:125 A translator, a revelator, a seer, and a prophet. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 21:1, "Seer" and "A prophet."

124:127 Because of the apostasy and excommunication of Thomas B. Marsh, who had been the president of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, and the death of Elder David W. Patten, who was second in seniority in that quorum, Brigham Young became its president. The keys he held as president of the Quorum of the Twelve made him the presiding officer in the Church at the deaths of Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. Thus the responsibility falls to the president of the Quorum of the Twelve to preside over the Church at the death of the prophet.

124:130 David Patten I have taken unto myself. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 114; 124:19.

Another may be appointed. According to the Lord's instructions in conference 8 April 1841, "President Smith observed that it was necessary that someone should be appointed to fill the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, in the room of the late Elder David W. Patten; whereupon President Rigdon nominated Elder Lyman Wight to that office; and he was unanimously accepted. Elder Wight stated that it was an office of great honor and responsibility, and he felt inadequate to the task; but, inasmuch as it was the wish of the authorities of the Church that he should take that office, he would endeavor to magnify it" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:341). See commentary on verse 18.

124:131-32 See introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 102.

124:133-36 Today the stake president presides over the high priest quorum in his stake. Thus he is a "standing officer," meaning that he has no authority outside the boundaries of his stake (vv. 133-34). Explaining the responsibilities of high priests, John Taylor said: "It is the duty of High Priests to preside; the principle of Presidency is connected with them . . . What is the duty of that quorum? To meet together to instruct one another in regard to the principles of the government of the church and kingdom of God; that its members may understand the various organizations of the Church, the laws, and the principles of government thereof, and the various duties they may be called upon to fill; it may be to occupy the position of a President of a Stake; it may be a Counselor to the President; it may be a High Counselor; it may be a Bishop or his Counselor. There are divers positions that High Priests are called to occupy, as deaths and other changes often transpire, and new Stakes and Wards are being organized" (Journal of Discourses, 24:33-34).

124:137 Elders quorums are organized within wards and stakes of Zion. The presidency of the quorum direct and train the elders over whom they preside. The elders themselves may travel to preach the gospel abroad as missionaries to the world. However, they remain members of the elders quorum from which they left for their missions.

124:138-40 The Seventies' quorum is a presiding quorum. Today members of the First and Second Quorum of the Seventy are considered General Authorities in that wherever they travel throughout the earth, they preside over the local officers of the Church.

124:144 Approve of those names which I have mentioned, or else disapprove of them. The Church and kingdom of God is governed by the law of common consent. Even the prophet himself cannot preside without first having received the sustaining vote of the Church. Accordingly, Church officers are selected by the Spirit of revelation as it rest upon those appointed to choose them, but before any officers may serve in the offices to which they have been called they must receive a formal sustaining vote of the people over whom they are to preside. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 26:2.

124:145 The upper floor or attic of the Nauvoo Temple contained 12 rooms for offices, as the Lord directed in this revelation. They were located on each side of the inner court, consisting of the examination, waiting, creation, garden, telestial, terrestrial, and celestial rooms, which were set aside for administering the endowment (Brown, "Sacred Departments," 368-69). President Brigham Young recorded: "The main room of the attic story is eighty-eight feet two inches long and twenty- eight feet eight inches wide. It is arched over, and the arch is divided into six spaces by cross beams to support the roof. There are six small rooms on each side about fourteen feet square. The last one on the east end on each side is a little smaller.

"The first room on the south side beginning on the east is occupied by myself, the second by Elder Kimball, the third by Elders Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt; the fourth by John Taylor, George A. Smith, Amasa Lyman and John E. Page; the fifth by Joseph Young and Presidents of Seventies: the sixth, a preparation room.

"On the north side, the first east room is for Bishop Whitney and the lesser priesthood, the second is for the high council, the third and fourth for President George Miller and the high priests' quorum, the fifth the elders' room, and the sixth the female preparation room" (Smith, History of the Church, 7:542).
