Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM

DATE: MARCH AND APRIL 1842

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

The book of Abraham is a translation of ancient records purchased by the Church in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835. It was first published in Nauvoo, Illinois, in the Times and Seasons in the spring of 1842.

This work was translated by the Prophet Joseph Smith from a papyrus record taken from the catacombs of Egypt. Abraham was the original author of that portion of the papyrus that is known to us by his name. The papyrus was purchased in behalf of the Church from Michael H. Chandler, a traveling entrepreneur from Pennsylvania. It had been exhumed on the west bank of the Nile River opposite the ancient city of Thebes (Luxor), sometime between 1817 and 1821.

Joseph Smith began translation soon after the purchase of the manuscript in 1835. As a prophet and seer he did not use conventional methods of translation, but, as with the Book of Mormon, he accomplished the labor of translation by the "gift and power of God." The book of Abraham was first printed in three issues of the Times and Seasons in the spring of 1842. Harassment by his enemies prevented the Prophet from publishing more of the record. It was formally canonized as part of the Pearl of Great Price in a general conference of the Church in October 1980.

It would be hard to overstate the doctrinal significance of the Book of Abraham. It is falsely supposed by many that what Joseph Smith restored was a New Testament Church. The idea of returning to New Testament Christianity was more than common on the American frontier. It was from such movements that many of the early converts to the Church came. The gospel restored by Joseph Smith was clearly rooted in the Old Testament as a review of the keys that were restored to him illustrates. He received the Aaronic Priesthood from John the Baptist who was the last of the Old Testament prophets and who traced his authority to Aaron (D&C 84:27). He received the higher priesthood from Peter, James, and John, but that which they brought him was the priesthood and authority known to and held by Melchizedek. Every other angelic ministrant who came to him to restore keys and authority came from that period known to us as the Old Testament.

What Joseph Smith restored, and this is in perfect accord with the purpose and message of the Book of Mormon, was the Abrahamic covenant. It rather misses the point to suppose that the purpose of the Restoration was to reestablish the organization of the New Testament church. Salvation is not found in the organizational structure of a church. We should not argue that we are the only true and living church on the face of the earth because we claim the same offices that existed in the primitive Church. This would be to argue against the salvation of those who lived in Old Testament times. Salvation is found in covenants, not offices or organizational structure. Indeed, salvation is a family affair that centers in the Abrahamic covenant. The genius of the Restoration is the restoration of that principle. It centers in restoring a knowledge of that covenant and the authority by which one receives it. Our schoolmaster in these principles is the Book of Abraham; from it we learn how father Abraham sought after and received the fulness of these blessings. In short, it gives us our most perfect rendering of the Abrahamic covenant. These principles, first restored to the Prophet in Kirtland, Ohio, become the foundation for all that would follow when the Saints turn to Nauvoo in search of the same promises and blessings sought and received by Abraham.

Abraham Seeks the Blessings of the Patriarchal Order

ABRAHAM 1:1-5

Abraham 1:1-5 In these verses we read that Abraham sought for "the blessings of the fathers" to which he was a rightful heir notwithstanding the apostate condition of his own immediate "fathers."

He identifies himself in these verses as "a follower of righteousness," who desired to possess greater knowledge and to be "a greater follower of righteousness," which he identifies as one who is "a father of many nations," and a "prince of peace." Thus he said he became a "High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers." All of which is to say that Abraham sought after and received "the patriarchal order," including what we would know as the "fulness of the priesthood" or the fulness of temple blessings.

Tracing these blessings back to Abraham's righteous fathers takes us all the way back to father Adam. Adam and Eve knew of the fulness of the gospel and taught it to their children. Because our first parents were faithful in all things, the Lord said to them, "Thou art after the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years, from all eternity to all eternity" (Moses 6:67). Of the events that followed, President Ezra Taft Benson said, "Three years before Adam's death, a great event occurred. He took his son Seth, his grandson Enos, and other high priests who were his direct- line descendants, with others of his righteous posterity, into a valley called Adam-ondi-Ahman. There Adam gave to these righteous descendants his last blessing.

"The Lord then appeared to them.

"The vast congregation rose up and blessed Adam and called him Michael, the prince and archangel. The Lord himself declared Adam to be a prince forever over his own posterity.

"Then Adam in his aged condition rose up and, being filled with the spirit of prophecy, predicted 'whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.' [See D&C 107:53-56.]

"The Prophet Joseph Smith said that Adam blessed his posterity because 'he wanted to bring them into the presence of God' [Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 159]" ("What I Hope," 8-9). President Benson then quoted from Section 107 as follows: "The order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were made. This order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in [order] . . . that his posterity should be the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end of the earth" (vv. 40-42).

President Benson then asked, "How did Adam bring his descendants into the presence of the Lord?" to which he responded, "The answer: Adam and his descendants entered into the priesthood order of God. Today we would say they went to the House of the Lord and received their blessings . . .

"But this order is otherwise described in modern revelation as an order of family government where a man and woman enter into a covenant with Godjust as did Adam and Eve to be sealed for eternity, to have posterity, and to do the will and work of God throughout their mortality" ("What I Hope," 9).

Abraham 1:3 The firstborn, or the first man, who is Adam. The text affirms that Adam was "born," not simply created. See Moses 6:22.

Or first father. In earlier editions of the Pearl of Great Price this text read "our" first father rather than "or" father. The correction, which comes from a more careful reading of original handwritten documents, affirms that the name Adam means "first father." Brigham Young taught, "In the first place the name of the man is given, a new name, Adam, signifying the first man, or Eve, the first Woman. Adam's name was more ancient than he was. It was the name of a man long before him, who enjoyed the Priesthood" (Smith, Intimate Chronicle, 238). Thus, the name Adam represents the first man or the first father of all.

False Priests Attempt to Kill Abraham, He Is Saved by Jehovah

ABRAHAM 1:6-17

Abraham 1:6-17 The idolaters of Abraham's day embraced the practice of offering up their own children to the supposed pleasure of dumb idols. Abraham himself was so offered. "The priests laid violence upon me, that they might slay me also," he attests. He further testified that it was only by the hand of Jehovah that he was spared such a fate. Surely such an experience must have made the great Abrahamic test wherein he was commanded to offer his son, Isaac, as a sacrifice all the more difficult. The knowledge that he had been delivered once, however, would surely increase his trust in the Lord's purposes and that all would be right.

Origins and Government of Egypt

ABRAHAM 1:18-31

Abraham 1:25-27 When Abraham writes saying that Pharaoh, a righteous man, sought "to imitate that order established by the fathers in the first generations," even that order established in the days of Adam, he had reference to the very order by which he sought and obtained the promise that he could become the "father of many nations," and "a prince of peace," which right he could obtain only as "a High Priest." Pharaoh had been blessed by Noah with "the blessings of the earth and with the blessings of wisdom," but he had been "cursed" as "pertaining to the Priesthood." Where we are told that Abraham had "right" to the Priesthood, we are now told that Pharaoh was of that lineage by which he had no "right of Priesthood." The seeming injustice of this caused Abraham's father, Terah, to reject God in preference to idolatry.

Abraham 1:31 The records of the fathers . . . concerning the right of Priesthood. "We talk frequently about the fact that the Melchizedek Priesthood is not reserved for a particular lineage, which is true in the sense in which we quote the revelations and use them," observed Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "but there is another sense in which the Melchizedek Priesthood is reserved for a particular lineage." The revelation in which Joseph Smith and the early brethren of this dispensation were told that they were "lawful heirs, according to the flesh" was cited by Elder McConkie.

"We talk about Aaronic Priesthood. Aaronic Priesthood anciently came by lineage. That is the perfect system of Aaronic Priesthood. The expression that the ancients would have used was that the Aaronic Priesthood came to one because of father and because of mother in other words through birth. You got it automatically if you were a Levite 30 years of age. To contrast the Melchizedek Priesthood with that order of priesthood which came to people because they were Levites, Paul said the Melchizedek priesthood was 'without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life.' (Hebrews 7:3.) This is the contrast between the Aaronic and the Melchizedek Priesthoods. The Melchizedek Priesthood comes because of faithfulness and righteousness and not because you are born into the tribe of Levi, as was the case anciently with the Aaronic Priesthood. We tend to emphasize that the Melchizedek Priesthood comes by righteousness, and sometimes we overlook the fact that there is a chosen and select and foreordained lineage who are entitled as of right to the Melchizedek Priesthood. That lineage is Abraham and his descendants. The Lord says to Abraham, 'Your descendants have a right to the priesthood.' Then the Lord says to Joseph Smith, 'You are a descendant of Abraham, and you are a lawful heir according to the flesh of the priesthood that I promised Abraham, your father, you would inherit'" ("Eternal Family," 4-5).

I shall endeavor to write . . . for the benefit of my posterity. This record was not written as a missionary tract to all the world nor do we use it as such. It was written by Abraham for the benefit of his posterity, that is, it was written for those with believing blood. Bruce R. McConkie explains, "The concept of a chosen and favored people, a concept scarcely known in the world and but little understood even by the saints of God, is one of the most marvelous systems ever devised for administering salvation to all men in all nations in all ages. Israel, the Lord's chosen people, were a congregation set apart in the preexistence. In large measure, the spirit children of the Father who acquired a talent for spirituality, who chose to heed the divine word then given, and who sought, above their fellows, to do good and work righteousness all these were foreordained to be born in the house of Israel. They were chosen before they were born. This is the doctrine of election. They were true and faithful in the premortal life, and they earned the right to be born as the Lord's people and to have the privilege, on a preferential basis, of believing and obeying the word of truth. Believing blood, the blood of Abraham, flows in their veins. They are the ones of whom Jesus said: 'My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: And I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand' (John 10:27-28)" (Millennial Messiah, 182-83).

Appropriately, Joseph Smith, to whom this record rather miraculously found its way, for the purpose of translation had already been told by revelation that he was a literal descendant of Abraham (D&C 132:30).

The Lord Covenants with Abraham

ABRAHAM 2:1-11

Abraham 2:6 An everlasting possession. The promise of an "everlasting possession" is quite literal, given that in a future day this earth is destined to become a celestial planet and that those inheriting that glory will live on it and will enjoy their inheritance everlastingly. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:17.

When they hearken to my voice. The Lord promised the land from the river of Egypt to the Euphrates to Abraham and his seed as an everlasting possession (Genesis 15:18). Jew and Arab have fought over this land for thousands of years, forgetting that it was promised only to those who hearken to the voice of Jehovah, the God of Abraham. Only those who embrace the same God, the same faith, and the same covenants as did Abraham can lay claim to the same land and to the same promises.

Abraham 2:9-11 These verses represent the most perfect expression of the Abrahamic covenant extant in holy writ, placing it in the context of priesthood and the gospel. That gospel, these verses declare, is to be taken to all the families of the earth by the literal seed of Abraham who alone have right to the priesthood. Those not of the seed of Abraham who embrace the gospel are through that process adopted into it. Thus salvation becomes a family affair, with Abraham marking the true path to Christ and salvation.

Abraham 2:9 They shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations. The right to the priesthood belongs exclusively to the posterity of Abraham. With that right goes the responsibility to take the authority of that priesthood to all nations. See commentary on Abraham 1:1-5, page 995.

Abraham 2:10 The principle being announced here is the doctrine of adoption. Joseph Smith said that when a Gentile (meaning someone who was not a literal descendant of Abraham) received the Holy Ghost that an "actual" change would take place in their blood that they might be numbered among the seed of Abraham (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50).

Abraham 2:11 The Church and kingdom of God requires legal administrators. Here we are told once again that all such must be the literal seed of Abraham. No one else has the authority to declare the doctrines of salvation or perform the ordinances through which we are granted the promise of eternal life.

Kolob and Christ

ABRAHAM 3:1-17

Abraham 3:1-17 Through the use of the Urim and Thummim, Abraham learned about the sun, moon, and stars, their rotations, order, and relationship to each other. The order that exists among these heavenly bodies constitutes a remarkable allegory for the order of heaven. Comparing the characteristics of Kolob with spiritual descriptions of Christ and the characteristics of stars with those of spirits shows that Kolob is a type for Christ and the stars of the heavens are types for spirits.

Stars and Spirits

ABRAHAM 3:18-28

The stars or planets in Abraham 3, with their various rotations, provide a natural parallel with the "noble and great ones" described in the latter part of the chapter. We can summarize this likeness as follows concerning the nature and order of the planets:

Now note what Abraham is taught concerning the premortal spirits:

The Creation

ABRAHAM 4 AND 5

Abraham 4 and 5 detail the story of the creation of the earth. They differ from the account in Genesis (or its Joseph Smith Translation equivalent as found in Moses 2 and 3) in that they are an account of the council of the Gods at which the plan for the creation of the earth was made. Commonly referred to as the blueprint of creation, these accounts make constant reference to the "Gods" who sat in council together and who would do the labor of creation. These references to the "Gods" traces back to the noble and great ones referred to in Abraham 3:22-23, thus suggesting that at least the valiant among the premortal host were involved in the work of creation.
