Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

WENTWORTH LETTER

DATE: 1 MARCH 1842

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

What has become known as the Wentworth Letter was written by the Prophet Joseph Smith to a Mr. John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat, one of the state's leading newspapers. Mr. Wentworth indicated that his request had come in turn from a Mr. George Bastow, a friend who was writing a history of New Hampshire. What was desired was a brief history of the Church and a statement of its doctrines. At the conclusion of his letter the Prophet penned thirteen statements of belief, known today as the Articles of Faith.

No evidence exists that this history or the Articles of Faith were ever published by Mr. Wentworth in his newspaper, though a number of issues from that period were destroyed by the great fire of 1871. Mr. Bastow made no reference to Joseph Smith or the Mormons in his History of New Hampshire. The letter was published, however, in the Times and Seasons (1 March 1842), and in 1844 by I. Daniel Rupp in his work An Original History of the Religious Denominations At Present Existing in the United States. We have taken the liberty to divide this letter into sections and verses.

Section One

Family History and the First Vision

WENTWORTH LETTER 1

It is a significant guide to those involved in missionary work that the Prophet in telling the story and teaching the doctrines of the Restoration chooses to begin with what we have come to call the First Vision. Evidence suggests that this was his pattern. At present we have nine contemporary reports of his doing so. As the circumstances in which the story was told were different, so his telling of the story differs in length and detail. As would be expected, the richest view of what he experienced is obtained by a careful reading of each of these accounts. In order they are (1) An account apparently in the handwriting of John Whitmer, then the Church historian. This 1832 account indicates that the search that led Joseph Smith to the Sacred Grove was three or four years in length. (2) A Church secretary's account of a conversation the Prophet had with a visi tor in Kirtland calling himself Joshua and claiming to be a Jewish minister. In this account the Prophet tells us that he saw many angels in the vision. (3) The formal account now found in the Pearl of Great Price and in common use in missionary pamphlets. (4) Orson Pratt's publication of the vision in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1842. (5) Orson Hyde's revision of Elder Pratt's pamphlet published in 1842 in Frankfurt, Germany. (6) The Wentworth Letter here being considered. (7) A terse diary entry by Levi Richards written in Nauvoo. (8) A newspaper interview published in the fall of 1843. (9) A very rough but moving account written in the diary of Alexander Neibaur, a German convert in Nauvoo. (For a consideration of these accounts see Anderson, "Joseph Smith's Testimony," 10-21). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:1-26, page 3.

WL 1:7-8 Considering that all could not be right. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:6, "A scene of great confusion," page 6.

Section Two

The Coming Forth of the Book of Mormon

WENTWORTH LETTER 2

WL2:4 The covenant which God made with ancient Israel was at hand to be fulfilled. This statement is of considerable importance in understanding the message of the Restoration. Joseph Smith was not restoring a New Testament Church nor is the necessity to do so the message of the Book of Mormon. Rather, Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of the Lord by which the "promises made to the fathers," will find fulfillment. The great promise of the Book of Mormon is that Israel will return to Christ, to his Church, and to the covenants of salvation that she might once again have rightful claim upon her ancient lands of promise.

WL 2:12 Having received many visits from the angels of God. In addition to Moroni, Joseph Smith's tutors included ancient prophets and apostles of both hemispheres. Among those who instructed him who had known Christ during their earthly ministries were Adam (Journal of Discourses, 18:336; 9:41; Smith, History of the Church, 2:247); John the Baptist (D&C 13; Joseph Smith-History 1:68-72); Peter, James, and John (D&C 27:12; Journal of Discourses, 18:326); and the Three Nephites (Andrus, Joseph Smith, 95). Other ancient prophets to whom Christ had manifested himself during their mortal ministries and who in turn tutored Joseph Smith were: Seth (Smith, History of the Church, 5:24; 6:30); Enoch (Journal of Discourses, 21:94; Moses 7:4); Noah (History of the Church, 3:386; Moses 8:27); Abraham (Journal of Discourses, 21:94; Abraham 3:11); Jacob (Journal of Discourses, 21:94; Genesis 32:30); Moses (D&C 110:11; Moses 1:1-11); Nephi (Journal of Discourses, 21:161; 2 Nephi 11:2-3); Paul (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180; 2 Corinthians 12:1-4); and Mormon (Journal of Discourses, 17:374; Mormon 1:15).

WL 2:18 Through the medium of the Urim and Thummim. This may have been Joseph Smith's last written expression about how the Book of Mormon was translated. Contrary to the argument of some of our modern historians that he translated by the use of a seer stone, the Prophet consistently maintained that he did the labor of translation by use of the Urim and Thummim. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6-9.

WL 2:20 The descendants of Joseph. Indeed the Book of Mormon is the stick of Joseph.

WL 2:24 They had Apostles. Here the Prophet tells us that the Twelve chosen by Christ in the New World were "apostles" in every sense of the word, not simply "disciples." In the text of the Book or Mormon, Moroni refers to "miracles wrought by the hands of the apostles." We would think that in doing so he had reference to the apostles who labored among this people in the New World, for no record of the labors of the apostles in the Old World would have been available to him (Mormon 9:18). Again, he encouraged his readers to "seek this Jesus of whom the prophets and apostles have written" (Ether 12:41), leaving us to suppose that he was referring to those known in the account he was writing. Still again, he speaks of Christ giving the Nephite apostles the authority to confer the gift of the Holy Ghost (Moroni 2:2).

Nephi explained that the Old World Twelve would judge the twelve tribes of Israel, including the Nephite Twelve (1 Nephi 12:8-9). Mormon added the understanding that the New World Twelve would be respon sible, under the Old World Twelve, to judge their own people (Mormon 3:18-19).

Section Three

The Church Is Organized and Converts Made

WENTWORTH LETTER 3

WL 3:1 6th of April. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:1-2.

WL 3:4 They saw visions . . . devils were cast out. Joseph Smith records that after the Church was organized, he "went on a visit to the residence of Mr. Joseph Knight, of Colesville, Broome county, New York. . . . Mr. Knight and his family were Universalists, but were willing to reason with me upon my religious views, and were, as usual, friendly and hospitable. We held several meetings in the neighborhood; we had many friends, and some enemies. Our meetings were well attended, and many began to pray fervently to Almighty God, that He would give them wisdom to understand the truth.

"Amongst those who attended our meetings regularly, was Newel Knight, son of Joseph Knight. He and I had many serious conversations on the important subject of man's eternal salvation. We had got into the habit of praying much at our meetings, and Newel had said that he would try and take up his cross, and pray vocally during the meeting; but when we again met together, he rather excused himself. I tried to prevail upon him, making use of the figure, supposing that he should get into a mud-hole, would he not try to help himself out? And I further said that we were willing now to help him out of the mud-hole. He replied, that provided he had got into a mud-hole through carelessness, he would rather wait and get out himself, than to have others help him; and so he would wait until he could get into the woods by himself, and there he would pray. Accordingly, he deferred praying until next morning, when he retired into the woods; where, according to his own account afterwards, he made several attempts to pray, but could scarcely do so, feeling that he had not done his duty, in refusing to pray in the presence of others. He began to feel uneasy, and continued to feel worse both in mind and body, until, upon reaching his own house, his appearance was such as to alarm his wife very much. He requested her to go and bring me to him. I went and found him suffering very much in his mind, and his body acted upon in a very strange manner; his visage and limbs distorted and twisted in every shape and appearance possible to imagine; and finally he was caught up off the floor of the apartment, and tossed about most fearfully.

"His situation was soon made known to his neighbors and relatives, and in a short time as many as eight or nine grown persons had got together to witness the scene. After he had thus suffered for a time, I succeeded in getting hold of him by the hand, when almost immediately he spoke to me, and with great earnestness requested me to cast the devil out of him, saying that he knew he was in him, and that he also knew that I could cast him out.

"I replied, 'If you know that I can, it shall be done;' and then almost unconsciously I rebuked the devil, and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to depart from him; when immediately Newel spoke out and said that he saw the devil leave him and vanish from his sight. This was the first miracle which was done in the Church, or by any member of it; and it was done, not by man, nor by the power of man, but it was done by God, and by the power of godliness; therefore, let the honor and the praise, the dominion and the glory, be ascribed to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.

"This scene was now entirely changed, for as soon as the devil had departed from our friend, his countenance became natural, his distortions of body ceased, and almost immediately the Spirit of the Lord descended upon him, and the visions of eternity were opened to his view. So soon as consciousness returned, his bodily weakness was such that we were obliged to lay him upon his bed, and wait upon him for some time. He afterwards related his experience as follows:

"I now began to feel a most pleasing sensation resting on me, and immediately the visions of heaven were opened to my view. I felt myself attracted upward, and remained for some time enwrapt in contemplation, insomuch that I knew not what was going on in the room. By and by, I felt some weight pressing upon my shoulder and the side of my head, which served to recall me to a sense of my situation, and I found that the Spirit of the Lord had actually caught me up off the floor, and that my shoulder and head were pressing against the beams.

"All this was witnessed by many, to their great astonishment and satisfaction, when they saw the devil thus cast out, and the power of God, and His Holy Spirit thus made manifest. As may be expected, such a scene as this contributed much to make believers of those who witnessed it, and finally the greater part of them became members of the Church. . . .

"On the ninth day of June, 1830, we held our first conference as an organized Church. Our numbers were about thirty, besides whom many assembled with us, who were either believers or anxious to learn. Having opened by singing and prayer, we partook together of the emblems of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. We then proceeded to confirm several who had lately been baptized, after which we called out and ordained several to the various offices of the Priesthood. Much exhortation and instruction was given, and the Holy Ghost was poured out upon us in a miraculous manner many of our number prophesied, whilst others had the heavens opened to their view, and were so overcome that we had to lay them on beds or other convenient places; among the rest was Brother Newel Knight, who had to be placed on a bed, being unable to help himself. By his own account of the transaction, he could not understand why we should lay him on the bed, as he felt no sense of weakness. He felt his heart filled with love, with glory, and pleasure unspeakable, and could discern all that was going on in the room; when all of a sudden a vision of the future burst upon him. He saw there represented the great work which through my instrumentality was yet to be accomplished. He saw heaven opened, and beheld the Lord Jesus Christ, seated at the right hand of the majesty on high, and had it made plain to his understanding that the time would come when he would be admitted into His presence to enjoy His society for ever and ever. When their bodily strength was restored to these brethren, they shouted hosannas to God and the Lamb, and rehearsed the glorious things which they had seen and felt, whilst they were yet in the spirit" (History of the Church, 1:81-85).

WL 3:11 We could obtain no redress. Be it remembered that these events took place in the 1830s and that it was not until after the Civil War and the passage of the 14th Amendment that states were forbidden to deny their citizens the protections guaranteed them in the Bill of Rights. Section 1 of this amendment defined citizenship and provided that "No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws" (as quoted in Melville, "Joseph Smith," 73). The 14th Amendment extended for the first time the protection of the federal government around the rights of life, liberty, and property which the states of Missouri had ignored in allowing the Latter- day Saints to be pillaged and driven from her borders.

The 14th Amendment was passed at the cost of the Civil War. Intended to protect the rights of Black- Americans against unfavorable legislation by the states, it assures that the federal government can never again sit by as an accessory to their crimes of proclaiming as did Martin Van Buren when Joseph Smith presented the case of the Saints to him, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:80).

WL 3:34-38 The Standard of Truth has been erected. This powerful expression, known to us today as "The Standard of Truth," is quite appropriately often memorized and quoted by missionaries. It centers in the sure promise of the Lord that the gospel will yet go to all who are willing to hear it. Prophecy is of two kinds: conditional and unconditional. Most prophecies have conditions attached, their fulfillment is predicated upon the righteousness of those to whom they are given or their wickedness as the case may be. Virtually all the promises given in patriarchal blessings are conditioned on the worthiness of those to whom they are given. In like manner the calamities prophesied to come upon the nations of the earth prior to the return of Christ assume that they will reject those he has sent in his name. These dire events could all be averted if people choose, accept, and live according to his gospel. By contrast unconditional prophecies such as the return of Christ, the resurrection, and the judgment are all certain. Nothing can or will change them. Chief among the unconditional prophecies is the promise that the restored gospel will go to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Daniel assured us that the kingdom of God, when restored in the last days, "shall never be destroyed," and that it "shall not be left to other people," that is, no other dispensation of the gospel will be necessary and no other people will have to be raised up to take the place of those to whom it would be given. In likening the restored gospel to a stone, he said it would roll forth to fill the whole earth. His prophecy, he said, "is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure" (Daniel 2:45). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 65.

The stone spoken of by Daniel, we are told, was "cut out of the mountain without hands," meaning that it is not the work of men but that of God, and that as it goes forth it will do so by his power and the authority of his priesthood, not by the authority of men or nations (Daniel 2:45). The gospel, this proclamation declares, will go forth "boldly and independent." That is, it will go forth without making any earthly alliances as did historical Christianity when she joined hands with Constantine and Rome and brought upon humankind a thousand years of darkness, as opposed to the thousand years of light and glory promised as a part of Christ's millennial reign.
