Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

THE ARTICLES OF FAITH

DATE: 1 MARCH 1842

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

As a conclusion to his brief history of the rise of the Church addressed to Mr. Wentworth, Joseph Smith wrote thirteen single-sentence statements of doctrinal beliefs held by the Latter- day Saints. They subsequently appeared in various forms and on occasion had other expressions of beliefs added to them to respond to other questions of the day. Publishing them in a missionary tract, Orson Pratt added an article to testify of the literal nature of the resurrection. Orson Hyde, in a publication directed to the Saints, added an expression about avoiding idleness. After the Saints had established themselves in the Salt Lake Valley, George A. Smith published them with an additional statement pertaining to patriarchal or plural marriage. In 1851, when Franklin D. Richards published them in his mission publication (a paperback book he titled A Pearl of Great Price), he had them printed as they appeared in the original Times and Seasons article. Thirty years later, in October 1880, this publication was accepted as one of the standard works of the Church. Thus these thirteen statements by the Prophet Joseph Smith, first called the Articles of Faith in the 1888 publication of the Pearl of Great Price, have become a part of the standard works of the Church.

Before the Wentworth Letter, other accounts of the coming forth of the Church had been prepared and published. They too contained brief statements of our beliefs. For example, in the October 1834 Latter-day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, Oliver Cowdery penned a brief letter wherein he stated eight items of our belief, centered around the doctrines restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Elder Orson Pratt published a tract in 1842 in Scotland, entitled An Interesting Account of Several Remarkable Visions and of the Late Discovery of Ancient American Records. It contained an account of the First Vision and the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. At the conclusion of the pamphlet he also presented a number of articles or statements of belief designed to demonstrate the distinctiveness of Latter- day Saint beliefs. The writings of both Elder Cowdery and Elder Pratt are similar to the Articles of Faith later written by Joseph Smith.

Drawing on these earlier references as evidence, some authors have mistakenly attempted to show that Joseph Smith was not the author of the Articles of Faith. It need only be remembered that both Oliver Cowdery and Orson Pratt were writing for the purpose of testifying that Joseph Smith had restored the doctrines about which they wrote. Similarly, some scholars have argued that Christ was not the author of the gospel of Jesus Christ because they have found similar ideas, teachings, proverbs, prayers, beatitudes, blessings, and expressions in earlier sources. What they have overlooked is that it was Jesus Christ who gave these very truths to the prophets and righteous men in those earlier dispensations. So it was with Oliver and Orson. They wrote of that which they had been taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Articles of Faith

1-13

The Articles of Faith were written by Joseph Smith in response to often-asked questions about the faith of the Mormon people. His purpose in writing them was to clearly silhouette the doctrines of the Restoration against the confusion and darkness common to historical Christianity. There was no thought in their writing that they constituted either a statement of creed or that they represented a comprehensive summary of Latter- day Saint beliefs. For instance, they say nothing about resurrection, judgment, or eternal rewards. They make no mention of temples or the ordinances performed in them. Doctrines distinctive to Mormonismsuch as a universal apostasy, premortal life, the teaching of the gospel to those who have died, and the various degrees of glory after the resurrectiongo unmentioned. Similarly, such teachings as the Word of Wisdom, temple marriage, a lay priesthood, and full-time missionary service are also not included. This is not a matter of oversight nor does it suggest that the doctrines and practices that are not mentioned are of less importance than those that were. The Prophet simply addressed those things he thought to be of greatest interest to those to whom he was writing.

The principles outlined by the Prophet are quite adequate to give the inquirer after truth a concise and meaningful understanding of the dis tinctiveness of the restored gospel. They established our reverence for the faith of those spoken of in the Bible while freeing us from the heresies that typified the Apostasy. In Article of Faith 1 the Prophet separates the Latter- day Saints from Trinitarians and the idea of a God who is without body, parts, and passions. In Article of Faith 2 he refutes the idea of original sin; in Article of Faith 3 he rejects Calvinism and the idea of salvation by grace without obedience to the laws of the gospel; in Articles of Faith 4 though 10 the Prophet emphasizes the restoration of the faith known to the ancients; and Articles of Faith 11 through 13 respond to the charges commonly levied by enemies of The Church that the Latter-day Saints are neither law abiding or honorable.
