Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 127

DATE: 1 SEPTEMBER 1842

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

No more perfect illustration that historical Christianity is without the authority to speak for God could be given than the inability to adequately answer the question about what becomes of those who died without having heard of Christ and his gospel. It is only in the doctrine of baptism for the dead that we find a soul-satisfying answer to this dilemma. This revelation contains instruction on how baptisms for the dead are to be performed.

In May 1838 the Prophet responded to a series of questions about Mormonism. One of the questions was, "If the Mormon doctrine is true, what has become of all those who died since the days of the Apostles?" Joseph Smith replied: "All those who have not had an opportunity of hearing the Gospel, and being administered unto by an inspired man in the flesh, must have it hereafter, before they can be finally judged" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 121).

The first public discourse on the subject of baptism for the dead had been given on 15 August 1840 at the funeral of Seymour Brunson, who had been a member of the high council in Nauvoo. Simon Baker made an account of what Joseph Smith had said on that occasion. "He [the Prophet] read the greater part of the 15th chapter of Corinthians and remarked that the Gospel of Jesus Christ brought glad tidings of great joy, and then remarked that he saw a widow in that congregation that had a son who died without being baptized, and this widow in reading the sayings of Jesus 'except a man be born of water and of the spirit he cannot enter the kingdom of heaven,' and that not one jot nor tittle of the Savior's words should pass away, but all should be fulfilled. He then said that this widow should have glad tidings in that thing. He also said the apostle [Paul] was talking to a people who understood baptism for the dead, for it was practiced among them. He went on to say that people could now act for their friends who had departed this life, and that the plan of salvation was calculated to save all who were willing to obey the requirements of the law of God" (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 49).

Persecution and Tribulation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 127:1-4

127:1 By the summer of 1842, the enemies of the Prophet were hounding him to the point that he was forced into hiding for the preservation of his life. This revelation was recorded in an epistle written by the Prophet in the home of John Taylor's father, a resident of Nauvoo, where the Prophet was hiding at the time. Before this revelation was communicated to the Saints, an attempt had been made on the life of Lilburn Boggs, former governor of Missouri. With no evidence other than their own bitterness, enemies of the Prophet in Missouri accused Orrin Porter Rockwell, bodyguard and faithful friend of the Prophet's, as being the hapless would- be assassin, with Joseph Smith as his accessory. They hoped to extradite Joseph to Missouri to answer the charge so that they could get him back into the hands of the Missouri mobbers. Rockwell's response to the charge was that if he had taken aim at the former governor, he would not have missed.

Responding to the question as to why the Prophet was constantly subjected to such harassment, Brigham Young said, "Why was he hunted from neighborhood to neighborhood, from city to city, from State to State, and at last suffered death? Because he received revelations from the Father, from the Son, and was ministered to by holy angels, and published to the world the direct will of the Lord concerning his children on the earth. Again, why was he persecuted? Because he revealed to all mankind a religion so plain and so easily understood, consistent with the Bible, and so true. It is now as it was in the days of the Savior; let people believe and practise these simple, Godlike truths and it will be as it was in the old world, they will say, if this man be let alone he will come and take away our peace and nation" (Journal of Discourses, 18:231).

Falsehood of the blackest dye. Brigham Young observed that "Joseph, our Prophet, was hunted and driven, arrested and persecuted, and although no law was ever made in these United States that would bear against him, for he never broke a law, yet to my certain knowledge he was defendant in forty- six lawsuits, and every time Mr. Priest was at the head of and led the band or mob who hunted and persecuted him. And when Joseph and Hyrum were slain in Carthage jail, the mob, painted like Indians, was led by a preacher" (Journal of Discourses, 14:199).

127:2 I was ordained from before the foundation of the world. "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I suppose I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365).

I shall triumph over all my enemies. On another occasion the Prophet said, "I shall triumph over my enemies: I have begun to triumph over them at home, and I shall do it abroad. All those that rise up against me will surely feel the weight of their iniquity upon their own heads. Those that speak evil of me and the Saints are ignorant or abominable characters, and full of iniquity. All the fuss, and all the stir, and all the charges got up against me are like the jack-a-lantern, which cannot be found" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 258).

127:3 A just recompense. Jedediah M. Grant explained, "It is good that all men in the different dispensations of the Almighty, each in his situation, calling, capacity, and sphere of action, are to be, and of right should be, rewarded according to his works. We do not wish to reverse this law in relation to our enemies, we only wish them to be rewarded according to their works; we do not desire to warp the law in the least.

"I am aware that many suppose that we entertain some unchristian feelings to those out of the Church, but this is a mistake; we only wish that persons who have shed the blood of our Apostles may be rewarded just according to their works. And we expect that, sooner or later, they will have meted out to them that reward which the Almighty actually knows that they deserve. When speaking of governors, rulers, kings, emperors, judges, and officers of nations and states, would we wish to reverse the general law that every person shall be rewarded according to their works? No. It would not do to have some men die as soon as many might desire, for they would not meet their proportionate reward on the earth" (Journal of Discourses, 3:126).

127:4 It can justly be said that the revelations received in Nauvoo and the ordinances performed in its temple rank among the most important events in earth's history. Events of such spiritual grandeur require a matching expression of faith. The building and completion of the Nauvoo Temple constituted evidence sufficient for all the hosts of heaven to know that the Lord had indeed raised up a people worthy of the endowment of power that he deigned to put upon them. In the labor of building that temple, the nation of Israel was born anew and the announcement made to all the world that the stone seen by Daniel had commenced to roll forth and that there was no power in heaven or on earth that could stop it.

Records of Baptisms for the Dead Must Be Kept

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 127:5-12

127:6 Baptism is an ordinance of salvation by which men obtain entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Of necessity it must be performed by one having authorityone properly commissioned to act and of equal necessity others sharing that same authority must act as witnesses of the event. They are also to see that proper records are kept. Such is the order of heaven.

127:8 It was in Nauvoo that the fulness of the priesthood was restored. Here the keys of the kingdom were given to those who would succeed Joseph Smith in this great latter- day work. Here the Twelve received the rights of the priesthood and all the powers and blessing of the temple. Here thousands of Latter- day Saints were clothed in the blessings of the priesthood and endowed with power from on high. Those sensitive to the things of the Spirit cannot walk the streets where old Nauvoo stood without the sense that they walk on sacred ground, the staging place for great events of our dispensation.

127:11 The prince of this world cometh, but he hath nothing in me. These words come from John 14:30 and were spoken by the Savior to the disciples at the Last Supper. In the Joseph Smith Translation this passage reads, "For the prince of darkness, who is of this world, cometh, but hath no power over me, but he hath power over you [meaning the Twelve]."
