Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128

DATE: 6 SEPTEMBER 1842

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

The circumstances under which Doctrine and Covenants 128 was written were the same as those noted for section 127. "Brother Joseph was hid up in my house from his enemies from Missouri," wrote Edward Hunter. "During that time, Joseph revealed the last part of the baptism for our dead. I was present with William Clayton" (Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 6:323).

Recorders Must Certify Facts for Baptisms for the Dead

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128:1-5

128:2-4 Rudger Clawson explained that "in the early days of the Church, some baptisms for the dead that were not properly witnessed and recorded, were rejected of the Lord, and the work had to be done over again. We know that great care and attention is given to this matter today in our Temples and that efficient help must be secured to do this. . . . Truly it is a great and marvelous work, and not the least important thing about it is that these ordinances are all carefully recorded in the books and are filed away in the archives of the Temple, to be brought forth in due time. From these records the people who have gone to that house will be judged. Nothing that is done in that Temple will be accepted of the Lord, except it is properly witnessed and recorded" (Conference Report, April 1900, 43-44).

128:2 Reference is to Doctrine and Covenants 127.

128:5 By conforming to the ordinance and preparation that the Lord ordained and prepared before the foundation of the world. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that the Lord contemplated all things regarding the plan of salvation before the earth was ever created. "He knows the situation of both the living and the dead," he taught further, "and has made ample provision for their redemption, according to their several circumstances, and the laws of the kingdom of God, whether in this world, or in the world to come" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 220). Wilford Woodruff recorded the following from a talk given by Joseph Smith on 11 June 1843: "A large assembly of Saints met at the Temple & were addressed by President Joseph Smith[.] He took for the foundation of his discourse the words of Jesus to the Jews how oft would I have gatherd you togetherd as a hen gathereth her chickens under wings But ye would not &c. He then asked what was the object of Gathering the Jews together or the people of God in any age of the world, the main object was to build unto the Lord an house whereby he could reveal unto his people the ordinances of his house and glories of his kingdom & teach the peopl the ways of salvation for their are certain ordinances & principles that when they are taught and practized, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose this was purposed in the mind of God before the world was & it was for this purpose that God designed to gather together the Jews oft but they would not it is for the same purpose that God gathers togethe the people in the last days to build unto the Lord an house to prepare them for the ordinances & endowment washings & anointing &c. one of the ordinances of the house of the Lord is Baptism for the dead, God decreed before the foundation of the world that that ordinance should be administered in a house prepared for that purpose. If a man gets the fulness of God he has to get [it] in the same way that Jesus Christ obtain it & that was by keeping all the ordinances of the house of the Lord" (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 212-13).

The dead who should die without a knowledge of the gospel. "In the same world there are also the spirits of Catholics and Protestants of every sect who all have need to be taught and to come to the knowledge of the true, unchangeable gospel, in its fulness and simplicity, that they may be judged the same as if they had been privileged with the same in the flesh. There is also the Jew, the [Muslim], the infidel who did not believe in Christ while in the flesh. All these must taught, must come to the knowledge of the crucified and risen Redeemer, and must hear the glad tiding of the gospel.

"There are also all the varieties of the heathen spirits: the noble and refined philosopher, poet, patriot, or statesmen of Rome or Greece; the enlightened Socrates, Plato, and their like; together with every grade of spirits down to the most uncultivated of the savage world. All these must be taught, enlightened, and bow the knee to the eternal King, for the decree hath gone forth that unto him every knee shall bow and every tongue confess.

"O what a field of labor, of benevolence, of missionary enterprise now opens to the apostles and elders of the Church of the Saints! As this field opens they will begin to realize more fully the extent of their divine mission, and the meaning of the great command to 'preach the gospel to every creature.' (D&C 68:8.)

"In this vast field of labor, holders of the priesthood are, in a great measure, occupied during their sojourn in the world of spirits while awaiting the resurrection of the body; and at the same time they themselves are edified, improved, and greatly advanced and matured in the science of divine theology" (Pratt, Key, 81-82; emphasis added).

Records Binding on Earth and in Heaven

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128:6-9

128:6 The books were opened. "What books? The Standard Works of the Church, the holy scriptures wherein the law of the Lord is recorded and the instruction given as to how men should walk in this mortal probation; also, the records of the Church wherein are recorded the faith and good works of the saints the records of their baptism, celestial marriage, tithe paying, missionary service, and their acts of devotion and worship" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:578).

The book of life. "What is it? Figuratively, it is our own life, and being, the record of our acts transcribed in our souls, an account of our obedience or disobedience written in our bodies. Literally, it is the record kept in heaven of the names and righteous deeds of the faithful" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:578).

128:7 The dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books. The dead are judged by the law of the gospel as found in the scripture known to them and out of the records attesting to the nature of their works.

The book of life is the record which is kept in heaven. Heaven too keeps its record of all that we do. This record will stand as a second witness with the record kept on earth in the determination of our standing before God.

128:8 The nature of this ordinance consists in the power of the priesthood. A knowledge of the priesthood is essential to understanding the true meaning of Old and New Testament prophecy. In this text the Prophet ties the prophecy of the Revelator about our being judged by our works to the power of the priesthood to bind on earth and bind in heaven or to loose on earth and loose in heaven. See Revelation 20:12.

128:9 Those men did in authority. Never in earth's history has the gospel been taught or its saving ordinances practiced save these things were done under the direction of the priesthood (D&C 84:19). As gospel principles are everlastingly the same, so is the priesthood. Thus we read this prophecy restored to the book of Genesis in the Joseph Smith Translation, "Now this same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also" (Moses 6:7; JST Genesis 6:7). For that to be the case, a restoration of priesthood and keys had to take place, for both had been lost to the world.

It is not without significance that the purpose and place of priesthood ranks chief among the plain and precious things taken from the Old Testament by evil and designing men. Independent of a knowledge of the priesthood, the biblical texts lose much of their meaning while for the same reason the Bible-believing world wanders in confusion.

The revelations of the Restoration are consistent in restoring to us an understanding of priesthood. From the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis 14, we learn much about how the priesthood was used "in the beginning" or in the early years of earth's history. Similarly, the first two chapters of the book of Abraham restore much to our understanding of the workings of the priesthood in that ancient day. Moroni placed the prophecy relative to the return of Elijah in the context of revealing to us an understanding of the purposes of the priesthood (D&C 2). By revelation the Prophet placed the events associated with the gathering of Israel and the redemption of Zion as prophesied by Isaiah in the context of priesthood direction (D&C 113), while in this epistle the Prophet assures us that Malachi had his eye on the restoration of the priesthood (D&C 128:17).

A Baptismal Font in Similitude of the Grave

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128:10-14

128:10 Thou art Peter. The name Peter (petros) means "small rock"; Christ is using a subtle word play here. When he says "upon this rock" (petra), meaning bedrock, "I will build my church," he is telling Peter that he will be a revelator and that the Church will be founded upon the principle of revelation. At the time of their first meeting, Christ told Peter that he would be called "Cephas," which is by interpretation a "seer," or a "stone" (JST John 1:42).

Upon this rock. Here the Prophet quotes the classic New Testament text dealing with the doctrine of the keys of the kingdom. The text itself is one over which there has been much argument and debate among the various sects of Christendom. One of the traditional arguments holds that Christ was telling Peter that he was the rock upon which the Church was to be built, with the bishops of Rome as his successors in that authority. Three observations ought be made in response to this supposition. First, the argument itself did not appear before the 5th century and grows out of the struggle to determine whether the highest bishop of the church would be the bishop of Rome or the bishop of Constantinople. Today the argument is retained by Roman Catholics and rejected by the Eastern Orthodox churches. Second, the issue can be settled by simply noting to whom Christ gave the keys of the kingdom. It was not to Peter alone that the keys were given but to all of the Twelve (Matthew 18:18-20). Third, the Church was not and cannot be founded on a man. "If it be called in the name of a man then it [the Church] be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel" (3 Nephi 27:8).

The rock to which reference is made is of course the rock of revelation, more especially and particularly the revelation that Jesus is the Christ. All who legitimately profess Christ must know him to be such by the spirit of revelation, and "if it be some other way it is not of God" (D&C 50:20). It is of particular importance that as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints we embrace no doctrine that has not come to us by direct revelation. It is our testimony to all the world that to deny revelation, meaning revelation that is immediate to our day, is to deny the very foundation upon which all true Christianity must rest. Further, we testify that to reject the living voice of God as given to those of our day in the name of loyalty to such revelations as given to those of ages past is to represent the spirit of apostasy as it has fought against the truth in ages past. Significantly, every argument against Joseph Smith and the message of the Restoration is borne of that dark spirit.

"What then is the principle upon which the Lord has built up his Church and established his kingdom in all ages?" asked Bruce R. McConkie. "Always, invariably, eternally, exclusively, Deity has and does operate upon the principle of revelation. By revelation his mind and will is made known and his kingdom established; without it he becomes an unknown God, an immaterial nothing; without it men substitute their own creeds and theories for his plans and purposes. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, the Brother of Jared, Nephi, Joseph Smith, and every prophet through whom the God of heaven set up his earthly kingdom, received their commission and direction by revelation. Where there is revelation, there is the kingdom of God on earth; where there is no revelation, there the kingdom of God is not" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:386). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 18:4, "My gospel, and my rock."

My Church. "There is and can be only one true Church, even as there is only one true science of mathematics or chemistry. Two different churches, teaching conflicting doctrines, cannot both be true. If one group of religionists affirms that God is a personal being in whose image man is created, and that he has a body of flesh and bones which is as tangible as man's; and if another assembly of so- called believers professes to think that Deity is a spirit essence which fills the immensity of space, an immaterial nothingness that is everywhere and nowhere in particular present, a spirit that is incorporeal, uncreated, immaterial and unknowable (all of which is found in the false creeds of Christendom)then both of these concepts cannot be true. Two and two cannot be four and also be three" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:388).

The gates of hell shall not prevail. As used in scripture, hell has reference to the place of departed spirits (Bible Dictionary, 699). In some passages, though certainly not all, it refers to the place of torment or the abiding place of wicked spirits. The point of this passage of scripture is that the keys being promised to Peter will have power to open such gates. A gate prevails when it keeps something in or out of a particular place. For keys to prevail is for them to either lock or unlock such a gate so that people can enter or leave the gated area.

Those who obey the laws and ordinances of the gospel have the promise that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them (D&C 10:69; 17:8; 21:4-6; 98:22). This is generally thought to mean that they are safe from the threat of ending up in the place of torment when they die. It is also generally supposed that in the context of the present text it is saying that hell or the devil will not prevail against Peter. In fact, what is being said is that Peter will have power to direct the ministering of the gospel in the world of the spirits and that he, and for that matter all faithful Saints acting under his direction, will have the power to move freely from one part of the spirit world to another.

The keys of the kingdom of heaven. "Keys are the right of presidency, the directing, controlling, governing power. The keys of the kingdom are the power, right, and authority to preside over the kingdom of God on earth (which is the Church) and to direct all of its affairs" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 411; emphasis in original). "These keys include the sealing power, that is, the power to bind and seal on earth, in the Lord's name and by his authorization, and to have the act ratified in heaven. Thus if Peter performed a baptism by the authority of the sealing power here promised him, that ordinance would be of full force and validity when the person for whom it was performed went into the eternal worlds, and it would then admit him to the celestial heaven. Again, if Peter used these sealing keys to perform a marriage, then those so united in eternal marriage would continue as husband and wife forever. When they attained their future heaven, they would find themselves bound together in the family unit the same as they were on earth" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:389-90).

128:11 The man standing at the head of the Church and Kingdom of God, the prophet, seer, and revelator, to whom the keys of the kingdom have been given, has the right to unlock the heavens and obtain whatever intelligence is necessary to direct the sealing work in our temples or to direct the teaching of the gospel and the performance of gospel ordinances among any who dwell upon the earth. Of the Prophet Joseph Smith the Lord said, "I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming" (D&C 35:18). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:19, "Even the key of the knowledge of God."

128:12-13 According to the plan of heaveneven before the creation of the earth all gospel ordinances were instituted as types to testify of Christ and the principles of his gospel. Relative to baptism, Paul testified to the Saints in Rome, saying, "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin" (Romans 6:3-6).

In harmony with this symbolism, the baptismal font in which baptisms are performed for the dead in our temples is always to be placed below the surface of the earth. Thus, those for whom we are baptized are symbolically invited to come forth from their grave into the kingdom of God.

128:14 As noted in the previous verse, the Prophet here quotes 1 Corinthians 15:46-48. Verse 46 reads more clearly in the Joseph Smith Translation: "Howbeit, that which is natural first, and not that which is spiritual; but afterwards, that which is spiritual."The thrust here is simply to say that that which is natural will become spiritual, meaning immortal. See Moses 3:5, 7.

The keys of the kingdom, which consist in the key of knowledge. See Doctrine and Covenants 128:11.

Elijah Restored Power Relative to Baptism for the Dead

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128:15-17

128:15 No one is saved separately and singly. Salvation is a community affair, and the covenant of salvation is made with the community of Saints rather than with people individually. The Lord had Moses lead the children of Israel to Sinai that he might make of them a holy nation. To Moses he said, "If ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel" (Exodus 19:5-6).

So it was that covenants were made between the generations long before we were born to do a work and labor for each other. Elder John A. Widtsoe explained: "In our preexistent state . . . we made a certain agreement with the Almighty. The Lord proposed a plan. . . . We accepted it. Since the plan is intended for all men, we became parties to the salvation of every person under that plan. We agreed, right then and there, to be not only saviors for ourselves but . . . saviors for the whole human family. We went into a partnership with the Lord. The working out of the plan became then not merely the Father's work, and the Savior's work, but also our work. The least of us, the humblest, is in partnership with the Almighty in achieving the purpose of the eternal plan of salvation.

"That places us in a very responsible attitude towards the human race. By that doctrine, with the Lord at the head, we become saviors on Mount Zion, all committed to the great plan of offering salvation to the untold numbers of spirits. To do this is the Lord's self-imposed duty, this great labor his highest glory. Likewise, it is man's duty, self-imposed, his pleasure and joy, his labor, and ultimately his glory" ("Worth of Souls," 25:189).

Illustrating the covenants made before we were born that exist between the generations, Wilford Woodruff bore the following testimony, "I am going to bear my testimony to this assembly, if I never do it again in my life, that those men who laid the foundation of this American Government and signed the Declaration of Independence were the best spirits the God of Heaven could find on the face of the earth. They were choice spirits, not wicked men. George Washington and all the men that labored for the purpose were inspired of the Lord. Another thing I am going to say here, because I have a right to say it. Every one of those men that signed the Declaration of Independence with General Washington called upon me, as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Temple at St. George two consecutive nights, and demanded at my hands that I should go forth and attend to the ordinances of the house of God for them. Men are here, I believe, that know of this Brothers J. D. T. McAllister, David H. Cannon and James C. Bleak. Brother McAllister baptized me for all these men, and I then told these brethren that it was their duty to go into the Temple and labor until they got endowments for all of them. They did it. Would those spirits have called upon me, as an Elder in Israel, to perform that work if they had not been noble spirits before God? They would not. I bear this testimony because it is true. The spirit of God bore record to myself and the brethren while we were laboring in that way" (cited in Lundwall, Temples of the Most High, 82). To President Woodruff they said, "You have had the use of the Endowment House for a number of years and yet nothing has ever been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God" (Journal of Discourses, 19:229). See commentary on verse 18.

128:17 This most glorious of all subjects. The specific reference is to the ordinance of baptism for the dead. In the broad and general sense, reference would be to all the ordinances of the house of the Lord as they are made available to both the living and the dead. It is evident that more will have the opportunity to be baptized and receive these ordinances vicariously than will ever be given the opportunity to receive baptism for themselves while in mortality. The salvation of God's children is predicated upon the ordinances performed for them by others in their behalf.

He shall turn the heart of the fathers. On a subsequent occasion, the Prophet told us that the word "turn" in this text could have been translated as "bind," or "seal" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 330). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 2; Joseph Smith-History 1:37-39, page 23.

Keys, Powers, and Authorities of Past Dispensations Have Been Restored

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128:18-21

128:18 A . . . welding together of dispensations. Having quoted this text, Elder Orson F. Whitney observed that "Paul the apostle also referred to this great and final period as one in which God would gather together all things in Christ, both in heaven and upon earth.

"Involved in this mighty scheme of bringing together all things that are Christ's, is the gathering of the scattered house of Israel, the children of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the chosen people, through whom God has worked from the beginning for the salvation and betterment of mankind; and Joseph Smith, a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt, was the divinely appointed instrument for lifting up the ensign for the gathering of Israel in the last days.

"And what is the object in view? Why all this stupendous labor and sacrifice? Why must the house of Israel be assembled? Why must the gospel dispensationslinks of a mighty chain extending from the creation down to the end of timebe bound together in one? It is because God is coming down upon the earth, and the way must be prepared before him. Jesus Christ is coming to reign as King of kings, to inaugurate the millennial era of universal freedom, righteousness and peace; and in order that his coming, which is designed as a blessing, may not prove a curse, a calamity, through the unpreparedness of his people and the world at large, he has set his hand in these days to perform the marvelous work and wonder that the Prophet Isaiah foretold. Israel must be gathered because this God who is coming is the God of Israel, and no other people have the right to receive him. He will come to his own as he came anciently, but his own will not reject him as they did before. Neither will he come again as a lamb led to the slaughter; he will come as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, to sit upon the throne of David and reign for a thousand years, sanctifying the earth and preparing it for future glory, when it will become a heaven, a celestial abode for the righteous. God raised up Joseph Smith and revealed to him anew the everlasting gospel, and conferred upon him the powers of the eternal Priesthood, that he might lift up the ensign as a rallying center for the tribes of Israel, that a people might be ready to receive the Lord when he comes" (Conference Report, April 1918, 74-75).

128:19 Truth out of the earth. "Truth" is the name by which the Nephite record known to us as the Book of Mormon was spoken of in prophecy. For instance, Enoch speaking for the Lord prophetically described the final gospel dispensation, saying, "And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City" (Moses 7:62; emphasis added). Drawing on this text, the psalmist wrote, "Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look down from heaven" (Psalm 85:11).

Glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead. Though the coming forth of the Book of Mormon would certainly be a cause for rejoicing among those who faithfully compiled this record that it might in some future day come into the hands of their descendants (D&C 10:46-48), we would understand this text to mean that as the Book of Mormon is destined to gather Israel among the living so it is destined to be used in like manner among the dead. If they are to be judged according to men in the flesh (1 Peter 4:6; D&C 138:10), they too must be called upon to accept or reject the testimony of scripture.

How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring glad tidings. This phrase comes from an Isaiah prophesy about the latter- day redemption of Zion (Isaiah 52:7). It is an expression of the love that those who are brought into the faith have for the missionaries who found them and taught the gospel to them.

128:20 The fulfilment of the prophets. No subject was of greater interest to Israel's prophets than the latter- day gathering and redemption of Israel. This was a dominant theme with both the prophets of the Old Testament and the prophets of the Book of Mormon. The coming forth of the Book of Mormon signaled the beginning of these long-looked-for events.

A voice of the Lord in the wilderness of Fayette, Seneca county. It was not far from the log home of Peter Whitmer Sr. that Moroni appeared to the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. In addition to that shown them by Moroni, they heard the audible voice of the Lord attesting to the truth of the book (Testimony of Three Witnesses, in the introductory pages of the Book of Mormon). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 17.

Michael . . . detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light. No account has been preserved of the occasion when Michael, or Adam, appeared to aid the Prophet in detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light. Lehi, in his great discourse on the Atonement, refers to the fact that the devil attempted to deceive Adam and Eve in the same manner (2 Nephi 9:9). This may suggest that Adam by virtue of his own experience in such things came to aid the Prophet as a mentor on this occasion. See introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 129.

The voice of Peter, James, and John. Reference is to the occasion on which Peter, James, and John restored the Melchizedek Priesthood. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:12.

In the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and Colesville, Broome county. Though no formal account exists of the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood, we have two reminiscences that bear examination. Addison Everett in a letter to Oliver B. Huntington written in 1881 states as follows: "I heard the following conversation between Joseph & Hyrum a few days before they were martyred. . . .

" . . . Oliver Cowdery was spoken of and Joseph went on to state that 'at Coalville [Colesville] he & Oliver were under arrest on charge of Deceiving the people & in court he stated that the first miracle done was to create this earth.' About that time his attorney told the court that he wanted to see Mr. Smith alone a few moments. When alone Mr. Reid said that there was a mob in front of the house & hosting [hoisting] the window, Joseph & Oliver went to the woods in a few rods, it being night, and they traveled until Oliver was exhausted & Joseph almost carried him through mud and water. They traveled all night and just at the break of day Olive[r] gave out entirely and exclaimed 'O! Lord! How long Brother Joseph have we got to endure this thing,'

"Brother Joseph said that at that very time Peter, James & John came to them and Ordained them to the Apostleship.

"They had 16 or 17 miles to travel to get back to Mr. Hales his father in law and Oliver did not complain anymore of fatigue" (Porter, "Priesthood Restored," 403).

Elements of this account can be accepted but only with some reservation. John Reid was involved in Joseph Smith's June-July 1830 trial, which took place a year later than Brother Everett is remembering it. In relation to the fleeing from enemies, however, Erastus Snow gave a similar account in an address given at a conference held in Logan, Utah, in 1882:

"In due course of time, as we read in the history which he [Joseph] has left, Peter, James and John appeared to him it was at a period when they were being pursued by their enemies and they had to travel all night, and in the dawn of the coming day when they were weary and worn, who should appear to them but Peter, James and John, for the purpose of conferring upon them the Apostleship, the keys of which they themselves had held while upon the earth, which had been bestowed upon them by the Savior. This Priesthood conferred upon them by those three messengers embraces within it all offices of the Priesthood from the highest to the lowest" (Journal of Discourses, 23:183).

128:21 The voice of God in the chamber of old Father Whitmer. It was in the chamber or upper room of the Whitmer home that Joseph and Oliver labored on much of the translation of the Book of Mormon. It was here too that the revelation was given directing that they proceed with the organization of the Church.

Gabriel, and of Raphael. The Prophet learned by revelation that Gabriel was Noah (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith,157). Raphael may have been Enoch. This conclusion is deduced by listing the six major gospel dispensations prior to our ownAdam's, Enoch's, Noah's, Abraham's, Moses', and the meridian of time, and then noting that we can identify someone coming to restore keys from each of them except Enoch's. Since we have both a name and a dispensation unaccounted for, the answer may be found in putting the two together.

All declaring their dispensation. The genius of the Lord is evident in the return of all of these ancient prophets to restore the keys and authority that were peculiar to their dispensation. In this process all are united in the same great redemptive work. Their having come creates a link and a tie between the faithful of their day and the faithful of our day. No gospel dispensation can stand independent of the others, and we cannot be saved separately and singly. From the first man to the last, all must be saved by the very same truths and the very same powers.

In an earlier revelation, the Lord had said that the powers of the priesthood were being given "for the last days and for the last time, in the which is the dispensation of the fulness of times. Which power you hold," he told Joseph Smith and his counselors in the first presidency, "with all those who have received a dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation; for verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent down from heaven unto you" (D&C 112:30-32).

Glad Tidings Acclaimed for the Living and the Dead

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 128:22-25

128:22 For the prisoners shall go free. In a marvelous Messianic prophecy, Isaiah spoke in behalf of the promised Messiah, saying, "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn" (Isaiah 61:1-2; emphasis added). Some 750 years later, Jesus would quote these same words in the synagogue at Nazareth to identify himself as the promised Messiah and formally begin his ministry among men (Luke 4:16-21). Following his crucifixion, and while his body lay in the borrowed tomb of Joseph of Arimathea, Christ visited the spirits in prison to announce that through his resurrection all might eventually be freed from that prison. There he commissioned missionaries to teach the gospel to those bound by sin and ignorance that they too might be free to stand in the light of the gospel. Only with the restoration of the gospel is the true meaning of such text made known to us. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 138.

128:24 This verse is often misused and misunderstood. In its first sentence, it simply draws upon the language of Malachi relative to the role to be played by the literal sons of Levi in the last days. Joseph Smith identified this as animal sacrifice (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 172-73). In the second sentence, the Prophet says that since the sons of Levi are going to make their offering, let us also make our offering. Our sacrifice is to center in the labor we do in behalf of our kindred dead in the house of the Lord. That is, if the sons of Levi are going to be true to their office and calling, let us in like manner be true to ours. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:31.
