Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 129

DATE: 9 FEBRUARY 1843

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

True religion, according to the Prophet Joseph Smith, is one of individual participation. If one man can dream dreams, see visions, entertain angels, or stand in the presence of God, so can all others by complying with the same principles. Thus, it was necessary to educate the Saints that they not be deceived by counterfeit revelations or by the devil appearing as an angel of light. As previous revelations had been given to teach the Saints how to distinguish a true revelation from a false one, this revelation announced principles or keys by which the devil or one of his own could be discerned when posing as a messenger from God.

When the Prophet first learned these principles is not known. We can be confident, however, that it was some time before this section was recorded. Given that all priesthood and keys restored in this dispensation were conferred upon the Prophet by angelic ministrants, and given Satan's insatiable desire to deceive, the keys of discernment must have been given to Joseph Smith quite early. As it is presently found in the Doctrine and Covenants, this section comes from the journal of William Clayton. He recorded it as the Prophet gave it in conversation with Parley P. Pratt, who had just returned from a mission in England. It was first included in the 1876 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (Cook, Revelations, 286).

Wilford Woodruff had recorded the following in his journal on 27 June 1839 as part of the instruction given to the Twelve by the Prophet prior to their departure for a mission to England:

"In order to detect the devel when he transforms himself nigh unto an angel of light. When an angel of God appears unto man face to face in personage & reaches out his hand unto the man & he takes hold of the angels hand & feels a substance the Same as one man would in shaking hands with another he may then know that it is an angel of God, & he should place all Confidence in him Such personages or angels are Saints with there resurrected Bodies, but if a personage appears unto man & offers him his hand & the man takes hold of it & he feels nothing or does not sens[e] any substance he may know it is the devel, for when a Saint whose body is not resurrected appears unto man in the flesh he will not offer him his hand for this is against the law given him" (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 6).

On 2 July of the same year, the Prophet taught that "an angel of God never has wings. Some will say that they have seen a spirit; that he offered them his hand, but they did not touch it. This is a lie. First, it is contrary to the plan of God; a spirit cannot come but in glory; an angel has flesh and bones; we see not their glory. The devil may appear as an angel of light. Ask God to reveal it; if it be of the devil, he will flee from you; if of God, He will manifest Himself, or make it manifest" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 162).

The version of the Prophet Joseph Smith's instructions contained in this section was given for the benefit of Elder Parley P. Pratt. The Prophet's earlier instructions to the Twelve in late June and early July 1839 concerning the keys to discern angels of God and angels of the devil had been given after Joseph and his fellow prisoners were set free from Liberty Jail but while Elder Pratt was still in the jail at Richmond, Missouri, so he missed this instruction. Following his return from England, where he had remained a year and a half longer than the other apostles, presiding over the Saints there and serving as editor of the Church publication, the Millennial Star, Elder Pratt and the Prophet Joseph visited for the better part of the afternoon. The following day, when these instructions were given, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded in his journal: "Spent most of the day in conversation with Parley P. Pratt and others" (History of the Church, 5:267). As part of these instructions, the Prophet told of a man who came to him "in Kirtland," saying he had seen an angel and described his dress. "I told him," the Prophet said, "he had seen no angel, and that there was no such dress in heaven. He grew mad, and went into the street and commanded fire to come down out of heaven to consume me. I laughed at him, and said, You are one of Baal's prophets; your God does not hear you; jump up and cut yourself: and he commanded fire from heaven to consume my house" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:267-68).

Even earlier than this the Prophet acknowledged, "There have also been ministering angels in the Church which were of Satan appearing as an angel of light. A sister in the state of New York had a vision, who said it was told her that if she would go to a certain place in the woods, an angel would appear to her. She went at the appointed time, and saw a glorious personage descending, arrayed in white, with sandy colored hair; he commenced and told her to fear God, and said that her husband was called to do great things, but that he must not go more than one hundred miles from home, or he would not return; whereas God had called him to go to the ends of the earth, and he has since been more than one thousand miles from home, and is yet alive. Many true things were spoken by this personage, and many things that were false. How, it may be asked, was this known to be a bad angel? By the color of his hair; that is one of the signs that he can be known by, and by his contradicting a former revelation" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 214-15).

The Prophet recorded that Michael (Adam) appeared to him "on the banks of the Susquehanna, detecting the devil when he appeared as an angel of light!" (D&C 128:20). It would appear that this experience took place while Joseph was translating the Book of Mormon in Harmony, Pennsylvania. It was here that John the Baptist restored to the Prophet and Oliver Cowdery the "keys of the ministering of angels" (Joseph Smith- History 1:69; D&C 13:1). Thus, the right to receive the ministration of angels and the ability to discern true messengers of God from counterfeits came before the Church was organized.

Perhaps it is of more than passing interest that we have ancient stories that have been preserved for us in what is known as the Book of Adam and Eve, or The Conflict of Adam and Eve with Satan, in which Satan constantly tries to deceive our first parents in order to obtain the garments they had received from the Lord in Eden. In one of those episodes, Satan "took the form of an angel, and with him two others" in order to imitate a threesome who had come to them from the presence of the Lord. In this story Adam and Eve were initially deceived by them "because, when they came to Adam the first time, there came upon him from them, peace and joy, through their bringing him good tokens; so Adam thought that they were come a second time to give him other tokens for him to rejoice withal. For he did not know it was Satan; therefore did he receive them with joy and companied with them" (Lost Books of the Bible, 49).

It appears that the recording of the three revelations in our current edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (sections 128, 129, 132), along with the translation of the Book of Abraham, all took place in the Prophet's office on the upper floor of the Red Brick Store in Nauvoo. It was there that the ordinances of the temple were restored and first practiced in this dispensation (Launius and McKiernan, Joseph Smith, Jr.'s Red Brick Store, 26-29). These events appear to tie closely with the recording of this revelation. Speaking to the newly formed Relief Society on 28 April 1842, the Prophet said that the Church would not be fully organized until the temple was complete. He further spoke of the sisters receiving the "keys," or knowledge through the priesthood, by which they could "detect everything false" if they would sustain their husbands and those the Lord had called to lead his Church. The Prophet further promised the sisters that in the temple they would learn how to ask of God and how to receive answers. "If you live up to your privileges," the Prophet promised them, "the angels cannot be restrained from being your associates." Women, he added, "if they are pure and innocent, can come in the presence of God" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:603-7).

Speaking to the Saints in the grove on Sunday, 1 May 1842, the Prophet said, "The keys are certain signs and words by which false spirits and personages may be detected from true, which cannot be revealed to the Elders till the Temple is completed. . . . There are signs in heaven, earth and hell; the Elders must know them all, to be endowed with power, to finish their work and prevent imposition" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:608).

This revelation was added to the Doctrine and Covenants along with twenty-five other sections in 1876.

Messengers from God May Be Either Resurrected Beings or Unembodied Spirits

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 129:1-3

129:1-3 In a subsequent revelation, we learn that "there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it" (D&C 130:5). The angels who ministered to father Adam and those of his dispensation of necessity would have been unembodied spirits, that is, righteous men yet to be born on this earth. In Old Testament times there would have been no angels who were resurrected beings. During that period it appears that translated beings played a larger role as divine messengers than they do in our dispensation. In stating that there are "two kinds of beings in heaven," which it names as resurrected beings and just men made perfect, this revelation seems to be suggesting that unembodied or premortal spirits are not sent to those of our dispensation. Translated beings who have remained upon the earth (and thus are not "in heaven") also continue to minister to us and can be discerned by the same keys as resurrected beings or just men made perfect.

129:1 In heaven. As used in this revelation, the phrase "heaven" has reference to the abiding places of the righteous dead, be it a degree of glory or paradise.

129:3 Just men made perfect. The righteous dead in paradise who in the resurrection will inherit the fulness of the Father are referred to as "just men made perfect." David Patten, one of the Twelve, had been killed in the Battle of Crooked River in Missouri in 1838. He is used here as an illustration of a "Just man made perfect." It had been stated at the funeral of Seymour Brunson in August of 1840 that Elder Patten was the spirit who came to escort him to his rightful place in the spirit world (Cook, Revelations, 345). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:69.

Keys by Which True Messengers Can Be Known

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 129:4-9

129:4-9 Why would Satan or one of his angels extend his hand knowing that so doing would unveil his true identity? The answer is found in understanding the authority of God in establishing laws by which all things, including the devil and his angels, are governed (D&C 88:36-38, 42). As mortals we are bound by the law of gravity and find physical objects a hindrance. Angels know no such limitations, and yet they are not free to converse with mortals, save it be according to the order of heaven. Similarly, evil spirits have bounds beyond which they cannot pass (D&C 122:9). The laws given to the prince of darkness and his legions include the sign of the dove, which the Prophet tells us was "instituted before the creation of the world, a witness for the Holy Ghost, and the devil cannot come in the sign of a dove" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 276). We know that it "is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable" before the Lord (D&C 29:47). In like manner Nephi tells us that Satan cannot tempt translated beings and that he has no power over them (3 Nephi 28:39). Thus, God, who governs all things, has placed limits and bounds on the adversary as to what he can and cannot do. In the instance here cited, Satan, or those acting in his name, must either extend his hand or withdraw, and in either case he will be detected. William Clayton recorded the Prophet as saying in 1840 that "if an angel or spirit appears, offer him your hand; if he is a spirit from God, he will stand still and not offer you his hand. If from the Devil, he will either shrink back from you or offer his hand, which if he does you will feel nothing, but be deceived.

"A good Spirit will not deceive.

"Angels are beings who have bodies and appear to men in the form of man" (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 44; syntax and spelling standardized).

129:9 Three grand keys. As used in this context, "keys" consist of the knowledge necessary to discern the true messenger of God from angels of the devil when they appear as angels of light in an attempt to deceive.

129:1-9 You may know whether any administration is from God. As found in Joseph Smith's diary, this revelation reads thus: "There are 3 administrater[s]: Angels, Spirits, [and] Devils. One [manner of] dress in heaven. Angels [are] the spirits of Just men made perfect. Innumerable co[mpany] of angels and spirits of Just men made perfect. [If] an Angel appears to you how will you prove him? Ask him to shake hands. If he has flesh and bones he is an angel. 'Spirit hath not flesh and bones.' Spirit of a Just man made perfect. Person[age] in its tabernacle could [not] hide its glory. If David Patten or the Devil come how would you determine? Should you take hold of his hand you would not feel it. If it were a false administrater he would not do it. True spirit will not give his hand. The Devil will. 3 keys" (Faulring, American Prophet's Record, 300).
