Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130

DATE: 2 APRIL 1843

PLACE: RAMUS, ILLINOIS

On 1 April 1843 Joseph Smith, Orson Hyde, and William Clayton traveled from Nauvoo to Ramus, twenty miles to the east, where they spent the evening with Benjamin F. Johnson. Of the events of the next day, Joseph Smith recorded the following: "Sunday, 2.Wind N. E. Snow fell several inches, but melted more or less.

"At ten a. m. went to meeting. Heard Elder Orson Hyde preach, comparing the sectarian preachers to crows living on carrion, as they were more fond of lies about the Saints than the truth. Alluding to the coming of the Savior, he said, 'When He shall appear, we shall be like Him, &c. He will appear on a white horse as a warrior, and maybe we shall have some of the same spirit. Our God is a warrior (John 14:23). It is our privilege to have the Father and Son dwelling in our hearts, &c.'

"We dined with my sister Sophronia McCleary, when I told Elder Hyde that I was going to offer some corrections to his sermon this morning. He replied, 'They shall be thankfully received'" (History of the Church, 5:323).

The following were among items of instruction given by the Prophet that day.

The Father and the Son May Appear Personally to Men

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:1-3

130:1 When the Savior shall appear we shall see him as he is. When the resurrected Christ ascended into heaven, two angels stood by testifying to the Twelve who were with him, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven" (Acts 1:11). It was a man with "flesh and bones" who ascended from their sight that day, one whom they had embraced and felt the warmth of his body, one with whom they had taken meat, walked, talked, and shared the sociality known to them before his death upon the cross. "That which is without body, parts and passions is nothing," the Prophet declared. "There is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181).

130:2 That same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there. The whole system and plan of salvation centers in the idea that we are the children of a loving father and mother from whom we have been temporarily separated and to whose society we seek to return. It embraces the idea that our family relationships here in mortality are intended to be eternal, that the love a mother feels for her children is as endless as God himself, and that the love of a man and woman is as timeless as eternity. All other descriptions of heaven leave the soul as empty as a life without love and as cold as the grave.

130:3 John 14:23. This verse (John 14:23) is part of the discourse about two comforters that the Savior gave to the meridian Twelve. "Now what is this other Comforter?" asked the Prophet Joseph Smith. "It is no more nor less than the Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and this is the sum and substance of the whole matter; that when any man obtains this last Comforter, he will have the personage of Jesus Christ to attend him, or appear unto him from time to time, and even He will manifest the Father unto him, and they will take up their abode with him, and the visions of the heavens will be opened unto him, and the Lord will teach him face to face, and he may have a perfect knowledge of the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; and this is the state and place the ancient Saints arrived at when they had such glorious visions Isaiah, Ezekiel, John upon the Isle of Patmos, St. Paul in the three heavens, and all the Saints who held communion with the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150-51).

Angels Reside in a Celestial Sphere

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:4-7

130:4 The reckoning of . . . time. Time is a relative measurement of duration that enables us to think and speak in terms of past, present, and future. Its meaning is subject to constant change. The period of time we measure as a year passes relatively slowly for children and quickly for adults. The same unit of time passes slowly when we are waiting, particularly when associated with anxiety, and quickly when we are busy or having an enjoyable experience. The measurement of time as known to us in our premortal estate was very different than known to us in this mortal world. Eons, as we measure time, were involved in our preparation prior to coming to this earth. Abraham told us that "Kolob [the planet nearest to that upon which God resides] was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in the revolutions thereof; that one revolution was a day unto the Lord, after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob" (Abraham 3:4).

The present text suggests a difference in the spectrum of time between prophets and men. This would have to have reference to the measurement of time as seen by a prophet when giving prophetic descriptions of future events. For instance, Joseph Smith said, "Now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 64:23) and in 1836 he said, "The great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors" (D&C 110:16).

130:5 Angels who administer to this earth . . . belong to it. It is interesting that, while only those who have lived or will live upon this earth can be ministering spirits to it, some from this earth will be permitted to minister to those on other planets. The Prophet said, "Many have supposed that the doctrine of translation was a doctrine whereby men were taken immediately into the presence of God, and into an eternal fullness, but this is a mistaken idea. Their place of habitation is that of the terrestrial order, and a place prepared for such characters He held in reserve to be ministering angels unto many planets, and who as yet have not entered into so great a fullness as those who are resurrected from the dead" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 170).

President Joseph F. Smith taught: "We are told by the Prophet Joseph Smith, that 'there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it.' Hence, when messengers are sent to minister to the inhabitants of this earth, they are not strangers, but from the ranks of our kindred, friends, and fellow-beings and fellow-servants. The ancient prophets who died were those who came to visit their fellow creatures upon the earth. . . . In like manner our fathers and mothers, brothers, sisters, and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the earth again, bringing from the divine Presence messages of love, of warning, or reproof and instruction, to those whom they had learned to love in the flesh" (Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 435-36).

The Celestial Earth Will Be a Great Urim and Thummim

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:8-9

130:9 This earth in its sanctified and immortal state. Brigham Young said, "This earth, when it becomes purified and sanctified, or celestialized, will become like a sea of glass; and a person, by looking into it, can know things past, present, and to come; though none but celestialized beings can enjoy this privilege. They will look into the earth, and the things they desire to know will be exhibited to them, the same as the face is seen by looking into a mirror" (Journal of Discourses, 9:87).

"If the people could fully understand this matter," Brigham Young said, "they would perceive that it is perfectly reasonable and has been the law to all worlds. And this world, so benighted at present, and so lightly esteemed by infidels, as observed by Brother Clements, when it becomes celestialized, it will be like the sun, and be prepared for the habitation of the Saints, and be brought back into the presence of the Father and the Son. It will not then be an opaque body as it now is, but it will be like the stars of the firmament, full of light and glory; it will be a body of light. John compared it, in its celestialized state, to a sea of glass" (Journal of Discourses, 7:163).

Will be made like unto crystal. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:1.

A White Stone Is Given to All Who Enter the Celestial World

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:10-11

130:10-11 Revelation 2:17 states: "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it." Those "who overcome by faith" (D&C 76:53) inherit the celestial kingdom. Such have received the "hidden manna" or the revealed knowledge of Christ and his gospel. To them will be given a white stone symbolizing their innocence and purity before God. On the white stone will be written "a new name," which symbolically suggests that they are ready to enter into a new life on a higher stage of existence.

130:10 The white stone. The custom observed by judges in ancient times in announcing their decision as to guilt or innocence was to give the accused either a white or black stone. The white stone meant they had been pardoned or found innocent. The black stone meant guilt and condemnation. (Clarke, Clarke's Commentary, 3:979). One commentator described the white stone as "the imperishable token of acquittal, like . . . the pebble used in contemporary courts of justice in rendering a favorable verdict" (Alleman, New Testament Commentary, 687).

130:11 The new name is the key word. A new name implies entrance into a new lifethe one receiving it is to enter into a higher stage of existence (Dummelow, Commentary on the Bible, 1075). Ancient tradition holds that possession of the "white stone" (viewed as an amulet having magical powers) could, by use of the name written on it, "secure entrance into heaven." One commentator notes that "the power of a secret name to open closed portals and to give the user supernatural powers was widespread" (Eiselen, et al., Abingdon Bible Commentary, 1374).

The Time of the Second Coming Is Withheld from the Prophet

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:12-17

130:12-13 See introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 87.

130:14-17 In Matthew 24:36, the Savior is recorded as saying of the time of his own return, "But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only." Recording the same expression, Mark states that neither man or angels would know, not even "the Son," but only the Father (Mark 13:32). The Joseph Smith Translation rendering of this text deletes the words "neither the Son," suggesting that Christ and the Father know the time of his return. That no man was to know the time of his return was affirmed for the Prophet in a revelation given him in March of 1831. Thus, it appears that the Prophet was knowingly asking for something for which he should not have asked. It also appears that the Lord was deliberately giving a response that the Prophet could not interpret.

Intelligence Gained in This Life Rises with Us in the Resurrection

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:18-19

130:19 Knowledge and intelligence . . . through . . . diligence and obedience. It is not the knowledge obtained from textbooks that rises with us in the resurrection. The learned professor will have no advantage over the unschooled Saint through his mastery of human knowledge. The intelligence that rises with us in the resurrection is equated in scripture with "light and truth" (D&C 93:36). Such knowledge is obtained only by obedience, and remains forever unknown to those who are impure (2 Timothy 3:7). Those who worship at the shrine of their own intellect have chosen a rather foolish god, one who has no authority to bestow blessings in the world to come. None have articulated the principles here involved better than Jacob who said, "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish. But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God" (2 Nephi 9:28-29). To which Nephi added, "Cursed is he that putteth his trust in man, or maketh flesh his arm, or shall hearken unto the precepts of men, save their precepts shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Nephi 28:31). That intelligence that rises with us in the resurrection comes only when we forsake evil, come to the Lord, call on his name, obey his voice, and keep his commandments (D&C 93:1-2, 28, 37). This same intelligence is lost through disobedience and loyalty to false traditions (D&C 93:39).

All Blessings Come by Obedience to Law

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:20-21

130:20-21 The question is asked, What effect did our premortal life have on our position and condition in this life? To which the answer is, The same effect that what we do in this life will have on who and what we are in the world to come. If there is a God in heaven, it can be no other way. We begin each day where we left off the previous day. The principle is immutable. We cannot begin a journey from where we are not or from where we wish were. All journeys must begin from where we are; all that we learn is based upon what we already know; all that we can do will be the result of what we have previously done. So it was in our premortal life, so it is here, and so it will be in the worlds to come.

The Father and the Son Have Bodies of Flesh and Bones

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 130:22-23

130:22 The Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also. The crowning revelation of the New Testament is the Fatherhood of God. In every recorded instance in which Christ addressed the God of heaven, he called him "Father." He used such expressions as "my Father," "our Father," and "the Father," but it was always the "Father" that he addressed. With the restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith comes the knowledge that in so doing Christ was not simply using a pleasant metaphor as believed in historical Christianity but rather had in mind the plain and simple meaning of the word. Our testimony to all the world is that "Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the most literal sense," said President Ezra Taft Benson. "The body in which He performed His mission in the flesh was sired by that same Holy Being we worship as God, our Eternal Father. Jesus was not the son of Joseph, nor was He begotten by the Holy Ghost. He is the Son of the Eternal Father!" (Come unto Christ, 4). So it was that in every recorded instance in which the Father addressed the Savior in scripture, it was as "Son." Again, through the restoration of the gospel, we have come to know that what was intended in his so doing is found in the plain and simple meaning of the word. Christ is the Son of God in the same sense that we are the sons of our fathers. As we obtained tangible bodies through the process of mortal birth, so did he; and as he suffered death through the separation of the body and the spirit, so will we; and as his body and spirit were inseparably united in the Resurrection, so it will be with us. Joseph Smith testified that "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible,I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 345). See commentary on King Follett Discourse 4:2, "God . . . is an exalted Man," page 1085.

The Holy Ghost . . . is a personage of Spirit. The Holy Ghost is a spirit man, a spirit son of God the Father. Joseph Smith taught that an "everlasting covenant was made between three personages before the organization of this earth, and relates to their dispensation of things to men on the earth; these personages . . . are called God the first, the Creator; God the second, the Redeemer, and God the third, the witness or Testator" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 190). "The Holy Ghost as a personage does not inhabit the bodies of mortal men, but that member of the Godhead dwells in a man in the sense that his promptings, the whisperings of the Spirit, find lodgment in the human soul. When the Holy Spirit speaks to the spirit in man, the Holy Ghost is thereby dwelling in man, for the truths that man then gives forth are those which have come from the Holy Ghost" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:738).

Those present when the prophet made this statement affirmed that he taught that the Holy Ghost, as a personage, cannot enter into a man's heart (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 170).

130:23 It may descend upon him and not tarry with him. Man can neither predict nor program the Spirit of the Lord. To suggest that a sequence of deeds or performances will always result in an unusual outpouring of the Spirit, or to teach that spiritual gifts may be had through following a carefully constructed list of steps, may be misleading. The Lord knows best our spiritual capacity and is thus able to decide perfectly what measure of spiritual experience we should receive. Although he grants to the children of men according to their desires and their works, he does so "in his own time, and in his own way, and according to his own will" (D&C 88:68). We simply cannot force spiritual things. Further, we cannot restrain the Spirit from determining the times of his comings and goings. "The presentation or 'gift'of the Holy Ghost," President Joseph F. Smith explained, "simply confers upon a man the right to receive at any time, when he is worthy of it and desires it, the power and light of truth of the Holy Ghost, although he may often be left to his own spirit and judgment" (Gospel Doctrine, 60-61). That is to say, the Holy Ghost "may be conferred upon men, and he may dwell with them for a while, or he may continue to dwell with them in accordance with their worthiness, and he may depart from them at his will" (Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 466).
