Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 131

DATE: 16 AND 17 MAY 1843

PLACE: RAMUS, ILLINOIS

Doctrine and Covenants 131 consists of three different doctrinal statements made by the Prophet Joseph Smith while visiting members of the Church in Ramus, Illinois. They were recorded by his personal scribe, William Clayton, who was among those who accompanied him. The History of the Church reads as follows:

"Tuesday, 16.At eleven o'clock, with George Miller, William Clayton, Eliza and Lydia Partridge and J. M. Smith, I started for Carthage where we tarried about half-an-hour conversing with different individuals, when we started for Ramus; arrived about half-past three, p. m., and stayed at William G. Perkins for the evening; then went to Benjamin F. Johnson's with William Clayton to sleep. Before retiring, I gave Brother and Sister Johnson some instructions on the priesthood; and putting my hand on the knee of William Clayton, I said: Your life is hid with Christ in God, and so are many others. Nothing but the unpardonable sin can prevent you from inheriting eternal life for you are sealed up by the power of the Priesthood unto eternal life, having taken the step necessary for that purpose.

"Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory. The unpardonable sin is to shed innocent blood, or be accessory thereto. All other sins will be visited with judgment in the flesh, and the spirit being delivered to the buffetings of Satan until the day of the Lord Jesus.

"The way I know in whom to confideGod tells me in whom I may place confidence" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:391-92). Then followed verses 1 through 4 as found in Doctrine and Covenants 131.

Celestial Marriage Is Essential to Exaltation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 131:1-4

131:1-3 In this revelation we learn that in the celestial kingdom there are three degrees of glory and that eternal marriage is required to enter into the highest of those degrees.

131:2 This order of the priesthood. Joseph Smith explained that there are "three grand orders of priesthood" (not three priesthoodsbut three orders of the priesthood); they are the Levitical order, the Melchizedek order, and the patriarchal order as spoken of in this verse (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 322). "All priesthood," he said, "is Melchizedek" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180).

"What was the power of Melchizedek?" the Prophet inquired, "'Twas not the Priesthood of Aaron which administers in outward ordinances, and the offering of sacrifices. Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings. In fact, that Priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam.

"Abraham says to Melchizedek, I believe all that thou hast taught me concerning the priesthood and the coming of the Son of Man; so Melchizedek ordained Abraham and sent him away. Abraham rejoiced, saying, Now I have a priesthood" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 322-23).

As to what is involved in the patriarchal order of the priesthood, Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed, "Joseph Smith says that in the temple of God there is an order of priesthood that is patriarchal. 'Go to the temple,' he says, 'and find out about this order.' So I went to the temple, and I took my wife with me, and we kneeled at the altar. There on that occasion we entered, the two of us, into an 'order of the priesthood,' When we did it, we had sealed upon us, on a conditional basis, every blessing that God promised Father Abrahamthe blessings of exaltation and eternal increase. The name of that order of priesthood, which is patriarchal in nature, because Abraham was a natural patriarch to his posterity, is the New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage"("Eternal Family," 7).

Meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. Responding to the question, "What is the new and everlasting covenant?" President Joseph Fielding Smith said, "I regret to say that there are some members of the Church who are misled and misinformed in regard to what the new and everlasting covenant really is. The new and everlasting covenant is the sum total of all gospel covenants and obligations, and I want to prove it. In the 66th section of the Doctrine and Covenants, verse 2, I read: 'Verily I say unto you, blessed are you for receiving mine everlasting covenant, even the fulness of my gospel, sent forth unto the children of men, that they might have life and be made partakers of the glories which are to be revealed in the last days, as it was written by the prophets and apostles in days of old.'

"More definitely stated is the definition of the new and everlasting covenant given to us in section 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Now I am going to say before I read this that marriage is not the new and everlasting covenant. If there are any here that have that idea I want to say that right to them. Baptism is not the new and everlasting covenant. Ordination to the priesthood is not the new and everlasting covenant. In section 22 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord says that baptism is 'a new and an everlasting covenant, even that which was from the beginning.' Marriage in the temple of the Lord for time and for eternity is 'a' new and everlasting covenant" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:156).

131:4 He cannot have an increase. "Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 300-301).

Being Sealed unto Eternal Life

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 131:5-6

131:5 More sure word of prophecy. Joseph Smith taught: "After a person has faith in Christ, repents of his sins, and is baptized for the remission of his sins and receives the Holy Ghost (by the laying on of hands), which is the first Comforter, then let him continue to humble himself before God, hungering and thirsting after righteousness, and living by every word of God, and the Lord will soon say unto him, Son, thou shalt be exalted. When the Lord has thoroughly proved him, and finds that the man is determined to serve Him at all hazards, then the man will find his calling and election made sure, then it will be his privilege to receive the other Comforter" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151). For a man to receive the other Comforter is to have Christ appear to him and to see the visions of eternity.

131:6 It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance. Though it is certainly true that there is no salvation in ignorance, meaning ignorance of the saving truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ, contextually this statement is an extension of the previous verse and as such means that there is no salvation independent of participation in the necessary ordinances of salvation.

All Spirit Is Matter

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 131:7-8

131:7-8 "The laws of truth are omnipotent and unalterableno power in heaven or on earth can break them in the least degree. Among these laws we find that two and two make just four that five from eight leave three, and that nothing added to nothing is nothing still. And ten thousand nothings multiplied together cannot increase the amount.

"If it still be argued that something can be made from nothing, we would inquire how many solid feet of nonentity it would require to make one solid foot of material substance? The very idea is the climax of absurdity.

"Therefore we argue that it is a self-evident fact, clearly manifested to every reflecting mind, that the elements of matter are eternal. That the earth was formed out of the eternal elements, and man's body out of the earth. These facts are not only proven from scripture, reason and philoso phy, but are also demonstrated or confirmed by daily experience. The work of creation has been proceeding in every age up to the present time upon the same unchangeable principles. That is, all material organization in our world is produced from the earth, or from its own elements, as we daily witness while there is not a single instance of a thing, or being, produced from nothing, so far as has come within the sphere of man's observation. . . .

"But to return to the main thread of our subject, viz: the impossibility of the annihilation of matter, we would inquire in the first place what the scriptures reveal on the subject.

"The Psalmist declares that the heavens and the earth shall be folded as a vesture and that they shall be changed.

"Isaiah and other prophets testify that they will be burned; and pass away and there will be a new heavens and a new earth.

"The Apostles adopt the same language on this subject with this addition that the 'elements shall melt with fervent heat.' And finally the Lord declares by the mouth of John saying: 'Behold, I make all things new.' Now every one the least acquainted with terms, must know that none of these expressions convey the least idea of annihilation; but on the contrary they clearly reveal the destiny of the material world, viz: that the elements are to be melted, changed, purified, and renewed; even ALL THINGS. And it is further said, the new heaven and the new earth shall endure forever.

"Therefore the scriptures decide in the most definite terms that nothing will be annihilated; but that all things will be made new.

"The science of chemistry serves to illustrate the subject in the most clear and lucid manner. For instance, by burning or melting any substance, not one particle is annihilated, they are only separated, decomposed, analyzed and changed, and could the whole operation be reversed they would be restored to their former state without the loss of a single particle.

"If then, we find ourselves composed of, and associated with material substance, which is eternal in its elementary principles, and inseparably connected with all organized existence in all worlds, past, present, and to come, we must feel the same interest in, and the same solicitation for the salvation, exaltation, and perfection of our bodies that we do for our souls, or spirits" (Pratt, Writings, 29-33; emphasis in original).
