Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132

DATE: 12 JULY 1843

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

The principles here recorded, though not committed to writing until 12 July 1843, were revealed to Joseph Smith in 1831 while he was working on his inspired translation of the Bible. The question as to how the Old Testament patriarchs were justified in having many wives would natu rally arise during that labor, and it would be natural that Joseph Smith would inquire about it at that time.

It will be profitable for the student of this revelation to give careful consideration to the way the Lord answered the Prophet when he asked this question. The Lord first establishes himself as a God of law and order who deals with men by way of covenant. Thus his people have always been a covenant people. All such covenants, we are told, were decreed before the world was and are neither to be added to or taken from in this mortal sphere. Further, all such covenants must be performed by the authority of the priesthood, by someone holding the appropriate keys or presidency, and must be sealed by the Holy Spirit of Promise to be of efficacy, virtue, or force after men are dead. The composite of all the covenants of salvation is identified as the "new and everlasting covenant."

The Lord then takes the principle of marriage to illustrate what he is teaching. Marriage was ordained in the councils of heaven to be eternal but will be such only if it complies with the order there established. Again, it must be performed by the authority of the priesthood, it must be done by someone holding the proper keys, and it must be ratified or sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which is to say that the Holy Ghost must affirm that both the man and the woman have abided by the terms of their covenant. To ensure that this is understood, the Lord uses three case studies: first, a marriage which was not intended to be binding in the world to come (vv. 15-17); second, a marriage in which the hope of an eternal union was expressed though the marriage was performed without the authority of the priesthood, or having been performed by the priesthood was not ratified by the Holy Ghost (v. 18); and third, a marriage that complies with the order established in this revelation with a description of the blessings that will attend it (v. 19). A brief discussion of exaltation and the doctrine of eternal lives (meaning the endless continuation of seed) follows (vv. 20-25). Then comes a warning of the depths of suffering that will come to those who have received such sacred covenants and promises and then turned against them (vv. 25-27).

Having taught the principles here announced, the Lord tells Joseph Smith that he is going to give him "the law of my Holy Priesthood" (v. 28), which law is the promise of exaltation and eternal increase. In teaching this law, the Lord takes Abraham as his illustration. The revelation then identifies Joseph Smith as a descendant of Abraham and thus an heir of the promises made to Abraham relative to his posterity (vv. 30-31). If, however, he is to receive these promises, he must do the "works of Abraham" (v. 32), that is, he must comply with the same law given to our ancient father (v. 33).

After these principles have been established, the Lord begins, in verse 34, to answer the question with which the revelation began: Why did some of the faithful in ages past have plural wives? The temple of our understanding has now been "fitly framed" by an understanding of the law of the Holy Priesthood. We now see that the plurality of wivesas with all the principles that come from the throne of heaven is governed by law, and is acceptable to God only according to that law and those covenants agreed upon before the foundations of the earth. The plurality of wives, which practice was discontinued by Wilford Woodruff in 1890, is an appendage to the greater principle of eternal marriage. The principle of eternal marriage, being a law of heaven, is inseparably associated with the holy priesthoodthus, where there is no holiness, the other prin ciples will not be found either. The exaltation of the man and the woman consists in the eternal preservation of the roles unique to their gender. It is in fatherhood and motherhood that the glories of eternity are found. Only in the sacred institution of marriage can we find exaltation.

Exaltation Is Gained through the New and Everlasting Covenant

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:1-6

132:1 Solomon. See commentary on verse 38.

Concubines. As relates to the ancient patriarchs, a concubine was a legal and lawful plural wife of a lower social order than the primary wives.

132:3 All those who have this law revealed unto them must obey the same. No law of God can be ignored with impunity. When any truth from heaven is revealed, we are obligated to accept and live it. There is no salvation to be found in picking and choosing among the commandments of God or the truths of salvation, supposing that we can live some and ignore others. We cannot, for instance, profess to accept the Bible while rejecting the Book of Mormon, or accept the Book of Mormon while rejecting the direction of our living prophets. Thus, those to whom the law of the priesthood, or eternal marriage, has been revealed are obligated to live the same. It would be equally improper to assume offices to which we had not been called or to claim privileges to which we have not been ordained. Some have attempted to find justification for the practice of polygamy in this verse. It simply is not there. The law to which reference is made is that of eternal marriage, not the plurality of wives. There is but one man on earth at a time who can authorize the performance of such marriages: the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (v. 7).

132:4-6 Marriage, when performed by the authority of God, is here announced to be "a" new and "an" everlasting covenant. In like manner, baptism is "a" new and "an" everlasting covenant (D&C 22:1) as are all other "covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations" intended to be of "efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection" (v. 7). The composite or sum of these individual covenants is "the" new and everlasting covenant. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 22:1.

132:5 The law which was appointed for that blessing. "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicatedAnd when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21). "The law"to which reference is made in this revelation is the law of the holy priesthood (v. 38), or eternal marriage.

The conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. Referring to our premortal life, President Spencer W. Kimball said, "We committed ourselves to our Heavenly Father, that if He would send us to the earth and give us bodies and give to us the priceless opportunities that earth life afforded, we would keep our lives clean and would marry in the holy temple and would rear a family and teach them righteousness. This was a solemn oath, a solemn promise" ("Be Ye Therefore Perfect," 2).

132:6 It was instituted for the fulness of my glory. It is in and through the new and everlasting covenant that we obtain the fulness of God's glory. There is no salvation independent of such a covenant (v. 31).

The Terms and Conditions of the New and Everlasting Covenant

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:7-14

132:7 Sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:53.

Of him who is anointed. This refers to Joseph Smith and, by implication, his rightful successors in the office of president of the high priesthood, or president of the Church. Though the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve all hold the keys of the kingdom, they can exercise those keys only under the direction of their president, who is referred to repeatedly in this revelation as "him who is anointed."

Keys of this priesthood. Applying the principle here stated to plural marriage, Joseph Smith observed: "In the afternoon, rode . . . to show some of the brethren some land. Evening, at home, and walked up and down the streets with my scribe. Gave instructions to try those persons who were preaching, teaching, or practicing the doctrine of plurality of wives; for, according to the law, I hold the keys of this power in the last days; for there is never but one on earth at a time on whom the power and its keys are conferred; and I have constantly said no man shall have but one wife at a time, unless the Lord directs otherwise [5 October 1843]" (History of the Church, 6:46; see D&C 132:45-47).

In the worlds to come, only those ordinances which were ordained of God, performed by his priesthood, sealed by him who is anointed, and ratified by the Holy Ghost will be of "efficacy, virtue, or force."

132:8-11 Having announced that his house is one of order, the Lord here asks three questions to illustrate the point. "Will I," he asks, "accept of an offering that is not made in my name?" Were he to do so, he would negate the purpose of priesthood authority. Priesthood authority is either necessary or it is not, we cannot have it both ways. If everyone had the right to act in the name of the Lord, then salvation would simply be an individual matter. There could be no collective salvation, or kingdom of God, in the worlds to come, for there would be no universal standard as to who could be admitted and who must be excluded. There could be neither good nor evil, right nor wrong. The idea denies the very existence of God for, as Lehi explained, "If ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there is no righteousness. And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness. And if there be no righteousness nor happiness there be no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not there is no God. And if there is no God we are not, neither the earth; for there could have been no creation of things, neither to act nor to be acted upon; wherefore, all things must have vanished away" (2 Nephi 2:13).

In the second of his three questions, the Lord asks, "Will I receive that . . . which I have not appointed?" To respond in the affirmative would be to liken the system of salvation to a flea market where we barter and trade for the blessings of salvation. The price of such blessings would be subject to inflation or deflation; one man could pay for them with his life, while another might obtain them for simply saying, "Praise the Lord, I believe."

The third question emphasizes the eternal nature of the gospel. The Lord asks, "Will I appoint unto you anything that did not accord with the laws and ordinances of the gospel as they have existed since before the world was created?" If God were at liberty to change the terms that constitute the covenant of salvation as he may choose, we would be without any sure knowledge that the course we were following was approved by him. The example of one man would be of no value to another in such a circumstance, nor would there be any particular value in scripture, for the word of the Lord may prove to be of no more worth than that of a scheming scoundrel.

Only the knowledge that God is constant, that he changes not, that all principles that flow from him are everlastingly the same, enables us to exercise faith in him. If God is not a God of order, he is no God at all.

Celestial Marriage and the Continuation of the Family Unit Enables Us to Obtain Exaltation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:15-20

132:15-20 Marriage was ordained of God, and it is expected that where possible, at the appropriate age, members of the Church seek the opportunity to find a worthy and suitable spouse. Further, it is expected that all such marriages be entered into in accordance with the laws of the land. Such temporal unions, however, are dissolved at death because the authority to marry for eternity belongs exclusively to the priesthood. Agreementsbe they private or public to extend a marriage beyond death are without authority. As far as the eternities are concerned, all marriages performed by the authority of men have at the same time a built-in divorce clause, often expressed with the phrase, "Till death do ye part." Only those marriages performed by priesthood authority in the manner prescribed in this revelation will be binding in the world to come.

Those who accept the gospel of Jesus Christin this life or the next will be given the opportunity to go to the house of the Lord with the companion of their choice and be married for time and eternity. Those who reject that opportunity are destined to "remain separately and singly" throughout the endless eternities. These, we are told, will be "ministering servants" to those who have been married for time and eternity.

132:17 They cannot be enlarged. These will not be exalted; they "cannot have an increase" (D&C 131:4); they will not enjoy the "continuation of the lives" (v. 22), that is they will not enjoy the privileges of the family unit nor will they be able to have posterity. As Malachi said, they will be left with neither "root nor branch" (Malachi 4:1).

In their saved condition. As generally used in the scriptures, the terms "saved" or obtain "salvation" are synonymous with exaltation or eternal life (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 670). This is not the case in the present text, where the term carries much the same meaning as immortal life in some condition less than exaltation.

132:19 And it shall be sealed unto them. Elder Bruce R. McConkie referred to verses 19 and 26 as the "most difficult and least understood" verses among all the revelations of the Restoration. These verses speak simultaneously of eternal marriage and having one's calling and election made sure. The promised blessings require both. The chain of thought is as follows: a man and woman must be married according to the law of the Lord, meaning they must enter into the eternal covenant of marriage. They must then go forth and so live that they can receive the promise through the Lord's anointed that they will come forth in the first resurrection to inherit thrones and kingdoms. Having received that promise, which is certainly not given to them at the time of their marriage, their salvation is sure, unless they so transgress that they become perdition (v. 26). With that promise, they have received all that is necessary to their exaltation as long as they do not commit the unpardonable sin (v. 26).

And it shall be said . . . next resurrection. The order of resurrection is from most righteous to most wicked. Those who are celestial will come forth before those who are terrestrial, and so forth. Thus, all who are celestial will come forth in a "first resurrection." It was a first resurrection that brought forth the righteous dead from Adam to Christ (Mosiah 15:21; Alma 40:16). The righteous dead from our dispensation will also come forth in a first resurrection (D&C 88:98). Those who live on into the millennium or the "next resurrection," as referred to in this verse, will also be part of a first resurrection.

Lamb's Book of Life. "The book of life, or Lamb's book of Life, is the record kept in heaven which contains the names of the faithful and an account of their righteous covenants and deeds (D. & C. 128:6-7; Ps. 69:28; Rev. 3:5; 21:27). The book of life is the book containing the names of those who shall inherit eternal life; it is the book of eternal life (Dan. 12:1-4; Heb. 12:23; D. & C. 76:68; 132:19). It is "the book of the names of the sanctified, even them of the celestial world" (D. & C. 88:2). Names of faithful saints are recorded in the book of life while they are yet in mortality (Luke 10:20; Philip. 4:3; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9). But those names are blotted out in the event of wickedness (Rev. 13:8; 17:8; 22:19)" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 97).

Commit no murder whereby to shed innocent blood. See commentary on verse 27.

They shall pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there, to their exaltation. "Your endowment," explained Brigham Young, "is to receive all those ordinances in the House of the Lord, which are necessary for you, after you have departed this life, to enable you to walk back to the presence of the Father, passing the angels who stand as sentinels, being enabled to give them the key words, the signs and tokens, pertaining to the Holy Priesthood, and gain your eternal exaltation in spite of earth and hell" (Journal of Discourses, 2:31).

Which glory shall be a fulness and a continuation of the seeds forever and ever. The explanation of this text as it applies to faithful women was given by President Joseph F. Smith: "Some of you will understand when I tell you that some of these good women who have passed beyond have actually been anointed queens and priestesses unto God and unto their husbands, to continue their work and to be the mothers of spirits in the world to come. The world does not understand thisthey cannot receive itthey do not know what it means, and it is sometimes hard for those who ought to be thoroughly imbued with the spirit of the gospeleven for some of us, to comprehend, but it is true" (Gospel Doctrine, 461).

132:20 Therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue. Everlasting to everlasting means from eternity past to eternity future. It is from the premortal life through the temporal (mortal) life to the eternity following the resurrection (Smith, Answers, 2:127). It can properly be said of those obtaining exaltation that they are from eternity to eternity or from everlasting to everlasting.

The Strait and Narrow Way That Leads to Eternal Lives

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:21-25

132:22 Continuation of the lives. To obtain eternal life is also to obtain eternal "lives," that is, the continuation of seed throughout eternity. Similar terms are "increase" (D&C 131:4), "enlarged" (v. 17), and "a continuation of the seeds" (v. 19).

132:25 The deaths. "If a man is deprived of the 'continuation of the lives' for ever and not to have these blessings is referred to as leading to the deaths, or the lack of the continuation of the lives, or increasethen he cannot 'worlds without end' reach the celestial glory; for the celestial glory is the continuation of the lives or increase eternally; it is to be gods, even the sons of God" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:33).

The Law Relative to Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:26-27

132:26 He or she shall commit any sin or transgression of the new and everlasting covenant. This verse is a brief restatement of what was said in verse 19. A superficial reading of the verse has led some to suppose that it is saying that those who have entered into the eternal covenant of marriage are assured salvation as long as they do not commit murder wherein they shed innocent blood. This simply is not the case. The promises here given apply exclusively to those who, having been married for time and eternity, advance to that station wherein they have had their calling and election made sure. On this matter, President Joseph Fielding Smith observed, "Verse 26, in section 132, is the most abused passage in any scripture. The Lord has never promised any soul that he may be taken into exaltation without the spirit of repentance. While repentance is not stated in this passage, yet it is, and must be, implied. It is strange to me that everyone knows about verse 26, but it seems that they have never read or heard of Matthew 12:31-32, where the Lord tells us the same thing in substance as we find in verse 26, section 132" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:95).

"The Lord said by his own mouth: And he that endureth not unto the end, the same is he that is also hewn down and cast into the fire, from whence they can no more return, because of the justice of the Father. And this is the word which he hath given unto the children of men. And for this cause he fulfilleth the words which he hath given, and he lieth not, but fulfilleth all his words. And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end.

"So we must conclude that those spoken of in verse 26 are those who, having sinned, have fully repented and are willing to pay the price of their sinning, else the blessings of exaltation will not follow. Repentance is absolutely necessary for the forgiveness, and the person having sinned must be cleansed" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:95-96).

Shed innocent blood. See commentary on verse 27.

Destroyed in the flesh. "To be 'destroyed in the flesh' means exactly that. We cannot destroy men in the flesh, because we do not control the lives of men and do not have power to pass sentences upon them which involve capital punishment. In the days when there was a theocracy on the earth, then this decree was enforced. What the Lord will do in lieu of this, because we cannot destroy in the flesh, I am unable to say, but it will have to be made up in some other way" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:96-97).

Delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption. "To be turned over to the buffetings of Satan is to be given into his hands; it is to be turned over to him with all the protective power of the priesthood, of righteousness, and of godliness removed, so that Lucifer is free to torment, persecute, and afflict such a person without let or hindrance. When the bars are down, the cuffs and curses of Satan, both in this world and in the world to come, bring indescribable anguish typified by burning fire and brimstone. The damned in hell so suffer" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 108).

Commenting on this verse, Joseph Fielding Smith said, "Here is something which those who contend that the Lord has granted immunity from their sins to some [the claim is made by some who have been married in the temple], if they have received certain sealings by the Holy Spirit of promise, have overlooked in this passage. I call attention to these two things. If covenants are broken and enormous sins are committed, but not unto death, there are certain punishments to be inflicted. The mere confession is not enough; the sinners are: 1to 'be destroyed in the flesh'; and 2to 'be delivered unto the buffetings of Satan unto the day of redemption.'

"Who in the world is so foolish as to wish to sin with the hope of forgiveness, if such a penalty is to be inflicted? No one but a fool! . . .

"Who wishes to endure such torment? No one but a fool! I have seen their anguish. I have heard their pleadings for relief and their pitiful cries that they cannot endure the torment. This was in this life. Add to that, the torment in the spirit world before the redemption comesall of this, mark you, coming after severe and humble repentance!" (Doctrines of Salvation, 2:96-97).

132:27 Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. What is "blasphemy against the Holy Ghost"? Having quoted this verse, Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "The unpardonable sin consists in denying Christ, in fighting the truth, in joining hands with those who crucified him, knowing full well, and with a perfect knowledge, that he is the Son of God; it means pursuing this course after gaining a perfect knowledge, given of the Holy Ghost, that he is Lord of all. The innocent blood thus shed is his blood; those who so sin become murderers by assenting unto his death, an assent that is given with a full and perfect knowledge of his divinity.

"Paul tells us that these rebellious ones who choose to become sons of perdition (or angels of the devil) cannot repent. 'It is impossible for those who were once enlightened,' he says, 'and [who] have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame' (Hebrews 6:4-6). And also: 'If we sin willfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace?' (Hebrews 10:26-29)" (New Witness, 232-33).

Shed innocent blood, and assent unto my death. "The innocent blood is that of Christ; and those who commit blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which is the unpardonable sin (Matt. 12:31-32), thereby 'crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame' (Heb. 6:6). They are, in other words, people who would have crucified Christ, having the while a perfect knowledge that he was the Son of God" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:345). Not being in a position to crucify Christ, those of this spirit seek the blood of those upon whom he has placed his name, that is, his anointed servants.

The Promise of Eternal Increase and Exaltation Had by the Saints of All Ages

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:28-39

132:28 The law of my Holy Priesthood. The law of the priesthood centers in the promise that a man and his wife are to be sealed together for time and eternity and that they have claim upon the promise of eternal increase. From the days of Adam, this has been the order of things among all who possessed the holy priesthood. The question is often asked, Did the prophets and Saints in the Book of Mormon have eternal marriage? To suppose that they had the holy priesthood without eternal marriage would be akin to supposing that someone could have the gospel without faith, repentance, and baptism, or without the knowledge and testimony of Christ. Affirming this conclusion, the heading given to these verses in the chapter summary at the beginning of the revelation reads, "Promises of eternal increase and exaltation made to prophets and saints in all ages." No other explanation can be given to explain the concern of the Book of Mormon prophets for their posterity, generations unborn to whom they wrote and with whom they had undoubtedly made covenants in the premortal councils. So it was that Samuel prophesied that unless the Nephites repented, their descendants some four hundred years later would be smitten with "the sword and with famine and with pestilence" (Helaman 13:9). Unless there was some understanding of the importance of the family unit, it would sound strange to be warned by a prophet that unless they repented their children's children, some four hundred years removed, would be destroyed.

Consider Mormon's lament as he views his people slain by the swords of the Lamanites:

"O ye fair ones, how could ye have departed from the ways of the Lord! O ye fair ones, how could ye have rejected that Jesus, who stood with open arms to receive you!

"Behold, if ye had not done this, ye would not have fallen. But behold, ye are fallen, and I mourn your loss.

"O ye fair sons and daughters, ye fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye fair ones, how is it that ye could have fallen!

"But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your return.

"And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality, and these bodies which are now moldering in corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then ye must stand before the judgment- seat of Christ, to be judged according to your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, then are ye blessed with your fathers who have gone before you" (Mormon 6:17-21).

Mormon also observed that his people "were married, and given in marriage, and were blessed according to the multitude of the promises which the Lord had made unto them" (4 Nephi 1:11).

Ordained . . . before the world was. All gospel ordinances were ordained in the councils of heaven (v. 11), thus marriage and the family were ordained as central to the plan of salvation. This leads to the thought that families were organized and covenants and promises were made among the faithful in the premortal councils.

132:29 Abraham received all things . . . by revelation. One of the evidences that Abraham was indeed a prophet of the Lord is the frequency with which his actions have been criticized by both Bible students and Bible scholars. Here we are told that he has entered into his exaltation and sits upon his throne. Thus, it is his right to rule and reign as a king and a priest (Revelation 5:10) as he lays claim to all the promises spoken of in Doctrine and Covenants 132:19 and 20.

132:30-31 At this point in the revelation, the Lord turns Joseph Smith's attention to the covenant or promises that He made anciently with Abraham. Given that all "covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows," are part of the new and everlasting covenant, it naturally follows that the new and everlasting covenant embraces the covenant made with Abraham. The Abrahamic covenant, or "dispensation of the gospel of Abraham" as it was described when it was restored to the Prophet (D&C 110:12), centers in the principle of eternal marriage and the endless continuation of the family unit. The Lord, in effect, says to Joseph Smith, I appeared to you because you are a descendant of Abraham and as such are a rightful heir of the priesthood and promises given to that ancient patriarch.

The two great witnesses of Christ for this dispensation are Joseph Smith and the Book of Mormon. Christ appeared to Joseph Smith, and he appeared to the peoples in the Book of Mormon. Joseph Smith is the source through which the purity of the gospel of Christ has been restored to us, and so is the Book of Mormon. Joseph Smith received these privileges because he was a descendant of Abraham, and those privileges were accorded the peoples of the Book of Mormon because they were Abraham's seed. When Christ appeared among the Nephites, he said, "Ye are the children of the prophets; and ye are of the house of Israel; and ye are of the covenant which the Father made with your fathers, saying unto Abraham: And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. The Father having raised me up unto you first, and sent me to bless you in turning away every one of you from his iniquities; and this because ye are the children of the covenant" (3 Nephi 20:25-26). Earlier he had explained that they were those of whom he said, "Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice" (John 10:16). In the Old World, he said, they had supposed that he was making reference to the Gentiles, but "The Gentiles," he explained, "should not at any time hear my voice that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost. But behold, ye have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me" (3 Nephi 15:23-24).

As the seed of Abraham, Joseph Smith was a rightful heir to the blessings of the priesthood and the manifestations of heaven. This heirship, is eternal, meaning that it cannot be dissolved by death. Those unable to lay claim to its blessings in this life will have the opportunity to do so in the world to come, for, as the revelation states, these promises continue "both in the world and out of the world."

132:31 By this law is the continuation of the works of my Father, wherein he glorifieth himself. It is the work and labor of God to exalt his children (Moses 1:39). This can only be done in the family unit. Thus, the law of eternal marriage, as given to Abraham, becomes the law by which God glorifies both his children and himself.

132:32-33 The law referred to was referred to earlier as "the law of my Holy Priesthood" (v. 28). It is the new and everlasting covenant of marriage. No reference has been made to this point in the revelation to the plurality of wives. It would be to seriously misunderstand all that has been said in the first thirty-three verses of this revelation to impose on them something they have not said. The purpose of the revelation to this point is to declare as plainly and as emphatically as it possibly can be done that a man and his wife can only receive the promise of eternal life in and through the ordinance of marriage. The cultist idea that such a promise can only be obtained in plural marriage finds no justification in the text.

132:34 Because this was the law. The patriarchal practice of having more than one wife was in keeping with customs that were widespread in Abraham's day. A variety of ancient texts indicate that it was an accepted practice for a man to have a second wife if his first wife could not give him children. Thus, the command of the Lord to Abraham and Sarah was in accordance with the custom or law of the day. For instance, in the Laws of Hammurabi (1792 to 1750 B.C.), king of Old Babylon, we read, "If a man marries a nadÂ¦Â¯tu, and she does not provide him with children, and that man then decides to marry a sÃugÂ¦Â¯tu, that man may marry the sÃugÂ¦Â¯tu and bring her to his house: that sÃugÂ¦Â¯tu should not aspire to equal status with the nadÂ¦Â¯tu" (Roth, Law Collections, 109).

Contrary to the impression given in Genesis 16:2-3 that Sarah instructed her husband of her own accord, the Lord commanded Abraham to take Hagar to wife after instructing Sarah. She consented out of reverence for the law of the Lord and loyalty and obedience to God and his priesthood representative.

132:37 Concubines. See commentary on verse 1.

As Isaac also. The Old Testament, as we presently have it, makes no reference to Isaac having taken any wives but Rebekah (Genesis 25:20). This text seems to suggest that he, like his father Abraham and his son Jacob, also took plural wives.

They have entered into their exaltation, according to the promises. Reference is to the promises accorded to Abraham in the Abrahamic covenant (Abraham 2:9-11) and in Doctrine and Covenants 132:19.

132:38 In nothing did they sin save in those things which they received not of me. There can be no sin in doing that which God has commanded. Thus, David and Solomon committed no sin in taking to themselves those wives the Lord had given them. To do other than that would clearly be sin, which is what both of the men here involved committed. In the book of Kings we read the following:

"But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites;

"Of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.

"And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.

"For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father.

"For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.

"And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father" (1 Kings 11:1-6).

Our text tells us that Solomon had a thousand wives and that the Lord was offended with what he had done. In Deuteronomy we read:

"When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that are about me;

"Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy brother.

"But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the Lord hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.

"Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold" (Deuteronomy 17:14-17).

What Solomon had done was clearly wrong. He had married outside the covenant, or the Church, and he had taken a great host of wives that he should not have taken. What he had done was simply absurd and represented gross apostasy. The book of Jacob describes what David and Solomon had done as "abominable" in the sight of the Lord (Jacob 2:23-24). This, however, has nothing to do with the law of plural marriage as revealed to these men by the Lord.

132:39 Nathan . . . and others of the prophets who had the keys of this power. Here we are told that Nathan and other prophets of the day had the same authority to perform eternal marriages as known to the Church today. This is a marvelous addition to our understanding of the gospel as known to the Saints of the Old Testament. In addition to this, we learn that David's sin centered not in the plurality of wives but in committing adultery and then in allowing Uriah to be killed so that David could take Bathsheba to himself.

He hath fallen from his exaltation. David is perhaps the most loved of all the men in the Old Testament. Nevertheless, the laws of God are as applicable to him as they are to any other man.

"As to the fact that the sealing power cannot seal a man up unto eternal life if he thereafter commits murder and thereby sheds innocent blood (not in this case the blood of Christ, but the blood of any person slain unlawfully and with malice) the Prophet says: 'A murderer, for instance, one that sheds innocent blood, cannot have forgiveness. David sought repentance at the hand of God carefully with tears, for the murder of Uriah; but he could only get it through hell; he got a promise that his soul should not be left in hell.

"'Although David was a king, he never did obtain the spirit and power of Elijah and the fullness of the priesthood; and the priesthood that he received, and the throne and kingdom of David is to be taken from him and given to another by the name of David in the last days, raised up out of his lineage' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 339). Thus, even though a man's calling and election has been made sure, if he then commits murder, all of the promises are of no effect, and he goes to a telestial kingdom (Revelation 21:8; D&C 76:103), because when he was sealed up unto eternal life, it was with a reservation. The sealing was not to apply in the case of murder" (McConkie, New Testament Commentary, 3:347).

Joseph Smith Is Given the Power to Bind and Seal on Earth and in Heaven

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:40-47

132:40 I gave unto thee, my servant Joseph, an appointment. It is with this language that the Lord charges the Prophet Joseph Smith to use the priesthood and keys that he has been given to authorize and perform plural marriages.

And restore all things. The restoration of all things must of necessity include the new and everlasting covenant of marriage as known to all gospel dispensations and the plurality of wives as practiced when the Saints were so directed by the Lord.

It shall be given unto you according to my word. Such was the trust that Christ had in the Twelve in his day, that he promised them that "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it" (John 14:13-14). Similarly, we read that the Lord told Nephi, son of Helaman, that because of his "unwearyingness" in his service he would make him "mighty in word and in deed, in faith and in works; yea, even that all things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will. Behold, thou art Nephi, and I am God. Behold, I declare it unto thee in the presence of mine angels, that ye shall have power over this people, and shall smite the earth with famine, and with pestilence, and destruction, according to the wickedness of this people. Behold, I give unto you power, that whatsoever ye shall seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; and thus shall ye have power among this people" (Helaman 10:5-7). The same promise is given here to the Prophet Joseph Smith, in whom the Lord had the same trust that he had in the noble and great ones of past dispensations. See Doctrine and Covenants 132:59.

132:41-44 In these verses the Lord returns to the question with which the revelation began: the question as to the justification of the early patriarchs in having a plurality of wives. Plural marriage performed by or under the direction of the man standing at the head of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saintswhich authority was rescinded through President Wilford Woodruff in 1890was not adultery. To violate the marriage covenant is to commit that sin, the penalty being destruction (vv. 41, 52), but it is for God himself to execute that judgment (v. 54).

132:45 I have conferred upon you the keys and power of the priesthood. In September 1830 Joseph Smith was told that he held "the keys of the mysteries, and the revelations which are sealed," with the obvious idea that through him and his office they would be revealed (D&C 28:7). In December of that year, the Lord said, "I have sent forth the fulness of my gospel by the hand of my servant Joseph; and in weakness have I blessed him; and I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed, even things which were from the foundation of the world, and the things which shall come from this time until the time of my coming" (D&C 35:17-18). We are also told that "for him to whom these keys are given there is no difficulty in obtaining a knowledge of facts in relation to the salvation of the children of men, both as well for the dead as for the living" (D&C 128:11). Thus, by revelation the "keys of the kingdom" are also designated as the "key of knowledge" (D&C 128:14) or the "keys of access to God" (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 54).

In Nauvoo, when Joseph Smith received revelation and direction relative to the ordinances of the temple, he began to refer to the keys of the kingdom in still a third sense. In a talk to the Relief Society given 28 April 1842, he spoke of their receiving "the keys of the Priesthood" or the "keys of the kingdom" with their husbands and of their learning how to ask the Lord questions and receive answers. The following Sunday, 1 May 1842, speaking to the assembled Saints in the grove, the Prophet referred to the keys of the kingdom as "certain signs and words by which false spirits and personages may be detected." These keys, he said, could not be revealed to the elders until the temple was completed and they had been endowed (Ehat and Cook, Words of Joseph Smith, 119). Perhaps his crowning discourse on this subject was given on 10 March 1844, when he referred to the "power of Elijah and the keys of the kingdom of Jehovah" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 338).

The symbolism associated with the keys of the kingdom is threefold. As it pertains to the government of the Church, the priesthood embraces the power and authority to lock or unlock, to open or close, to bind or loose that is, to grant promises and blessings or to preclude the same. It is the authority that disciplines and marshals the priesthood. As to doctrinal matters, the keys of the mysteries of the kingdom constitute the authority by which the heavens are opened and the channel through which God's revelations flow. Finally, in a combination of the two previous definitions, the keys embrace that authority restored by the prophet Elijah whereby men and women are sealed up to eternal life and receive the fulness of the priesthood.

132:46 Whatsoever you seal on earth shall be sealed in heaven. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:10.

132:47 Whomsoever you curse I will curse. See Doctrine and Covenants 1:9; 24:15; 60:15; 75:20; 84:92-94; 133:71-73.

The Lord Seals upon Joseph His Exaltation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:48-50

132:48 Shall be visited with blessings not cursings. The sealing power used by the Prophet Joseph Smith would prove a marvelous blessing to those sealed, but it has also been a blessing of immeasurable worth to the Church, as the descendants of these marriages have stood in the forefront of the leadership of the Church and have been numbered among those of valor in the defense of the faith.

132:49 I seal upon you your exaltation. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 131:5.

With Abraham your father. We do not speak metaphorically when we say that Abraham is the father of the faithful. The great majority of people who are baptized into the Church are direct descendents of Abraham, as affirmed by their patriarchal blessings. Those not naturally of the blood of the ancient patriarch are adopted into his family, in which process, the Prophet told us, there was an "actual" change in their blood so that they too become his "actual" or "literal" seed (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50; Abraham 2:9-11). We speak advisedly, knowing that such a statement finds no support in the world of science, but neither does the idea that a drop of consecrated oil on the head of the sick has a healing effect or that looking upon a snake raised on a brazen pole could heal.

132:50 I make a way for your escape. An example of one such escape is here recorded. "Early in the spring of 1844, the Prophet was apprised by two young men, Denison L. Harris and Robert Scott, the latter living in the family of William Law, of a secret movement then on foot to take his life, and the lives of several other leading men of the church; among them the Prophet's brother, Hyrum. These young men were invited to the secret meetings by the conspirators, but before going conferred with the Prophet, who told them to go, but to take no part in the proceedings of these wicked men against himself. They carried out his instructions, and at the risk of their lives attended the secret meetings three times, and brought to President Smith a report of what they had witnessed the hatching of plots to take the life of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum" (Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 2:223-24).

Emma Smith Is Counseled to Be Faithful and True

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:51-57

132:54 She shall be destroyed. There is no threat here of physical harm. The intent of the word "destroyed" is the same as that found in the prophecy of Moses relative to those who would reject Christ. "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people" (Acts 3:22-23; emphasis added). This same prophecy as translated in the Book of Mormon was rendered "cut off from among the people" (1 Nephi 22:20), or perhaps most correctly, "cut off from among my people who are of the covenant" (3 Nephi 21:11; see also Alma 30:46).

Laws Governing Marriage Are Set Forth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 132:58-66

132:58 The law of the priesthood. This phrase is used to refer to the Lord's law of marriage. As a man cannot be exalted without priesthood, so he cannot be exalted without his spouse. Thus, in the context of this revelation, "the law of the priesthood" and the "law of marriage" are one and the same.

132:59 The keys of the power of this priesthood. If a man has been called of God and by the voice of his Son and he has been endowed with the powers of heaven"the keys of the power of this priesthood"that which he does in the name of the Lord with the authority so given him will be honored by the Lord.

132:61 The law of the priesthood. For a man to take a second wife doing so under the direction of the keys of the priesthoodis legal and lawful according to the government of heaven. For him to do so without the sanction of those keys or that authority is quite another matter.

132:63 For herein is the work of the Father continued. This verse affirms that marriage as an eternal part of the gospel plan was decreed before the foundations of the earth were laid. It also affirms that the glory of God is extended through his righteous posterity and that it was for this purpose that this earth was created.

132:64 If any man have a wife, who holds the keys of this power. The reference is to Joseph Smith, who held the keys referred to here (vv. 7, 45-47). If a man holding the keys of this power teaches these principles to his wife and she chooses to oppose him, she will lose the Spirit of the Lord. If she remains unrepentant, she will eventually destroy her own soul and lose her own salvation.

132:65 He is exempt from the law of Sarah. In the context of the principles announced in the previous verses, it is lawful, if a wife does not receive this law, for her husband to receive all things that God chooses to give him. In that case his wife would be the transgressor, and thus her husband is exempt from the law of Sarah who gave heed to Abraham when the Lord commanded him to take Hagar to wife. The principle is certain: Those who follow the commandments of the Lord and keep their covenants will be blessed; those who refuse to do so will not share those blessings. A woman can still lay claim to the blessings of the sealing power given to her in the temple even if her husband chooses to pursue a path that leaves him unworthy of them. Similarly, if a man or woman dies without having had the opportunity to enter into a particular covenant in this life but was worthy to do so, that privilege and blessing will be granted to that person in the world to come (Teachings of Lorenzo Snow, 138).

132:66 Let this suffice for the present. This revelation ends with the promise that more instruction will be given on this matter.
