Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE

DATE: 7 APRIL 1844

PLACE: NAUVOO, ILLINOIS

The greatest discourse ever delivered by the Prophet Joseph Smith is known to us as the King Follett Discourse. It was a commemorative oration for Brother King Follett, a faithful elder in Nauvoo, who had been crushed to death when a bucket of rocks fell on him while he was walling up a well. The address was given on Sunday, 7 April 1844, at a general conference of the Church held in a grove near the temple. The congregation was said to have numbered twenty thousand, and the effort expended to be heard by so large a group was so taxing that the Prophet was unable to do more than speak for a few moments the following day, his lungs still being exhausted.

Amasa Potter, who was present when this discourse was delivered, recalled the circumstances thus:

"The subject of baptism for the dead was dwelt upon, and when he had spoken about thirty minutes there came up a heavy wind and storm. The dust was so dense that we could not see each other at any distance, and some of the people were leaving when Joseph called out to them to stop and let their prayers ascend to Almighty God that the winds may cease blowing and the rain stop falling, and it should be so. In a very few minutes the winds and rains ceased and the elements became calm as a summer's morning. The storm divided and went on the north and south of the city, and we could see in the distance the trees and shrubs waving in the wind, while where we were it was quiet for one hour, and during that time one of the greatest sermons that ever fell from the Prophet's lips was preached on the great subject of the dead" (Juvenile Instructor, 29:132).

Our account of the sermon comes from notes written by Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, William Clayton and Thomas Bullock at the time the sermon was given. In 1855, Jonathan Grimshaw, a clerk in the Church historian's office, amalgamated their notes, thus providing us with a more complete and detailed account of the Prophet's discourse.

The greatness of the discourse lies in the spirit and power of the doctrines taught. In it the Prophet declares the character and nature of God and of man, his offspring. We have taken the liberty of dividing into sections and paragraphs the text of the King Follett Discourse, which follows.

Section One

The Character of God

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 1

KFD 1:1 Elder King Follett. King Follett, for whom this commemorative discourse was given, was born July 24, 1877 in Vermont. As a youth he moved to Cuyahoga County, Ohio. It was there that, in the spring of 1831, he met the Mormon missionaries and was baptized. He moved with the Saints from Ohio to Missouri. He was among those imprisoned in Richmond, Missouri, in April of 1839 on a charge of robbery. As Parley P. Pratt, also arrested at that time, explained, they had taken a keg of powder from a gang of ruffians who planned to use it against the Saints (Autobiography, 193). King Follett was acquitted and released six months later. With his wife and family he became one of the early settlers in Nauvoo.

KFD 1:2 Stay the winds. See the quotation from Amasa Potter in the introduction to this discourse, page 1078.

KFD 1:3 I intend to edify you with the simple truths from heaven. How singular it is that the God of Joseph Smith could be understood by a child while the God of historical Christianity is incomprehensible to even the greatest of scholars. The 1844 edition of Buck's Theological Dictionary, a book known to Joseph Smith, under the heading "God" it states: "As the Divine Being possess[es] a nature far beyond the comprehension of any of his creatures, of course that nature is inexplicable." Then by way of clarification and emphasis it adds, "All our knowledge of invisible objects is obtained by analogy; that is, by the resemblance which they bear to visible objects; but as there is in nature no exact resemblance of the nature of God, an attempt to explain the divine nature is absurd and impracticable. All similitudes, therefore, which are used in attempting to explain it must be rejected."

Thomas Aquinas had declared many years before, "We cannot know what God is." By way of explanation, he said, "One reaches the highest point of one's knowledge about God when one knows that one does not know him" (Davies, Thoughts of Thomas Aquinas, 54). Augustine put it thus, "If you can understand it, it's not God" (McGrath, Understanding the Trinity, 111).

KFD 1:4 The Great Elohim. Elohim is a Hebrew word meaning "gods." It is commonly used by the Saints as a title for God the Father.

KFD 1:5 All knowledge of God and the principles of salvation must have revelation as their source. Historical Christianity, having sealed the heavens and thus denied God the right to communicate with his children, bases its theology on philosophical speculations (McConkie, Sons and Daughters of God, 84-118). Joseph Smith had no source for his understanding save it be the revelations of heaven. What he knew of God, he learned from God. This made Joseph Smith the most authoritative and competent witness and teacher about Christ on the face of the earth.

KFD 1:6 If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not comprehend themselves. The God of the sectarian world is described as "a force or power behind the universe" or as "a dynamic, pulsating activity" (McGrath, Understanding the Trinity, 111). "'The true God,'" they tell us, "'has neither sex, age, nor definite corporeal members'" (Scaevola, as quoted in Augustine, City of God, 203). He is a silent mystery, "beyond all inference and imagination," and "is quite indecipherable, incomprehensible, unknow[able]" (Lash, Believing Three Ways in One God, 93). We are left to ask how one is expected to emulate such a God? What inspiration is to be found in the realization that no meaningful description or understanding can be had about him?

Section Two

What Kind of Being Is God?

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 2

KFD 2:1-2 How do we worship a God who is incomprehensible and unknowable? What honor can God bestow upon those who worship him in ignorance or untruth? Can we expect salvation to be found in error and falsehood? Surely there can be salvation in no principles other than truth and righteousness.

KFD 2:3 Should [I] be like the rest of the worlda false teacher, [I would] be hailed as a friend. The world loves its own. Those who seek the truths of God but know not where to find them need only follow the spirit of bitterness and persecution, for that spirit will always be found opposing the truths of heaven. The greater the truth, the greater the opposition to it. No principle in the so- called Christian world has been more darkened by the philosophies of men than those truths dealing with the nature and character of God. The creeds of Christendom have robbed God of his gender, of his fatherhood, of his body, of his speech, and of his passion, or love, for his children. In his stead they have given us an incomprehensible mystery to which they have given the title God.

Section Three

The Privilege of Religious Freedom

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 3

KFD 3:2 I speak as one having authority. It was Joseph Smith's right to speak as one having authority. Let us take the Bible as an illustration. Save Jesus only, no man ever walked the face of the earth that had greater knowledge of the Bible than Joseph Smith had. A library containing every whit the world knows about the book would not rival his understanding. It is one thing to read a book and quite another to be instructed by its authors. Who among the world's theologians and scholars can boast of having stood face to face with Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, John the Baptist, Peter, James, and John? While the religious leaders of the day testified that the heavens were sealed, Joseph Smith was personally tutored by ancient prophets who laid their hands upon his head and conferred upon him the power, keys, and authority they held.

Joseph Smith knew the God of whom he spoke. As with the ancients, he had stood with him face to face and been instructed by him. Joseph did not testify of that which he had learned in books, but of that which he had learned directly. His testimony was not of hearsay but of that which he had seen and that which had been revealed to him. He never suggested that our understanding should be limited to that which we learned from him. He saw himself as a guide. That which he had seen, all were entitled to see. He would point the way (D&C 84:19-24; 88:68; 93:1).

Section Four

God Is an Exalted Man

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 4

KFD 4:1 I am going to prove it to you by the Bible. The crowning revelation of the New Testament, that is the principle most distinctive and unique to the ministry of Christ, is the fatherhood of God. All of the nearly 240 references in which Christ addresses the God of heaven use the title "Father," while each instance in which the God of heaven addressed himself to Jesus of Nazareth, he calls him "Son."

KFD 4:2 God . . . is an exalted man. Latter-day Saints are the only people in the Bible- believing world who truly understand why the New Testament refers to God as our "Father in Heaven." Outside of Mormonism this nomenclature is universally held to be nothing more than a metaphor, while for the Latter- day Saint its literalness becomes the very foundation of our faith. For us the announcement that Adam and Eve were created in the image and likeness of God is understood to be literally so. By contrast, Buck's Theological Dictionary defines "Anthropomorphites" as "A sect of ancient heretics, who, taking everything spoken of God in the scripture in a literal sense, particularly that passage of Genesis in which it is said, 'God made man after his own image,' maintained that God had a human shape." To sectarian Christianity the idea that we are the literal offspring of Deityeven if only as spiritsis blasphemy. To the Latter-day Saint, the idea could hardly be otherwise. Could a God do anything unworthy of his own nature, we would ask? Could his childrenthose of his own family be made of lesser stuff than he? Thus we might ask if true blasphemy would not be the failure to recognize so simple a truth?

God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man. On 5 January 1841 the Prophet said, "That which is without body, parts and passions is nothing. There is no other God in heaven but that God who has flesh and bones. John 5:26: 'As the Father hath life in himself; even so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself.' God the Father took life unto himself precisely as Jesus did" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181). To say that God of necessity must have a body of "flesh and bones," and that he "took life . . . precisely as Jesus did" is in effect to say that he was once a man as we are and continues to be a personage of flesh and bones in his exalted state. That which appears obvious to us, however, was not obvious to those of Joseph Smith's day. The implication of such a statement simply had not dawned on them. The experience of Lorenzo Snow illustrates the point. Four years earlier, while en route to his assigned mission in England, this principle was revealed to him. He captured what he had learned in the now-often-quoted couplet, "As man now is, our God once was; / As now God is, so man may be" (Snow, "Devotion to a Divine Inspiration," 22:660). At that time he shared his experience with only two people, his sister, Eliza R. Snow, and Brigham Young, who was his mission president. President Young advised him to keep the matter to himself until he had heard it taught by the Prophet (Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 1:27-28).

KFD 4:4 It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty the Character of God. There is no gospel truth that is not rooted in the doctrine of the fatherhood of God or that can be properly understood without an understanding of his nature. We cite but one illustration: the sonship of Christ. Surely it cannot be the same thing to say that Christ is the son of a spirit essence that fills the immensity of space, being at the same time everywhere and nowhere present, and saying that he is the literal son of a divine father and a mortal woman whose name was Mary. In the first instance, his resurrection simply means that he, like water poured into the ocean, becomes of the same essence with that ever existent body. In the second instance, he continues his existence as a man living in a material but exalted state. In that glorified state he, like his father, could, with a spouse at his side, continue in an eternal family relationship, and his children could become like him, just as he had become as his father was.

We may converse with him as one man converses with another. How simple the truth. God is our father, and thus we can converse with him as a son or daughter converses with a father. By contrast Origen, who did much to design the theology of historical Christianity, observed that having no body, God could have no speech. Since speech is defined as vibrated air or a percussion of air cause by the voice box of one person, which in turn acts upon the eardrum of another, God having neither voice box or eardrum would neither speak nor hear in ways known to man.

Section Five

Power of the Father and the Son

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 5

KFD 5:1 Jesus, what are you going to do? To lay down my life as my Father did. Joseph Smith's purpose is to show that the Bible teaches that our Father in Heaven was once mortal, as we are. To do so he takes John 5:19 as a text. Here the Savior said, "The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." The Prophet then reasons that it is Christ's purpose to lay down his life and take it up again. Thus, if Christ can do only that which his father did, his father must also have been subject to death, he must have died and then taken up his life again as a resurrected being. From this statement of the Prophet, many have attempted to reason that he was saying that his father was also a savior for those of another world and thus that all worlds require their own saviors. The Prophet never taught such a thing and was not alluding to it here. His remarks centered on the doctrine of resurrection, not the salvation of God's endless creations. The Prophet had already clearly taught that the atonement of Christwhich was infiniteembraced all that he had created under the direction of the Father (see commentary on D&C 76:23-24). Responding to those who wanted to argue that there is a special strain of savior gods, Elder Bruce R. McConkie often asked, "What earthly good could possibly come from teaching such a thing?"

KFD 5:2 You have got to learn how to be Gods yourselves. At this point in this discourse, the Prophet introduces the doctrine of plurality of Gods. The fact that we worship but one God does not negate the verity that there are in reality many Gods. The Godhead consists of three separate Gods, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which in itself affirms the idea of a plurality of Gods. It also leaves us to ask, If two of God's sons can obtain the station of a God, why in justice is that privilege not accorded to all of his children? The answer found in the plan of salvation is that this is the very purpose for which we were created. Now, if there have been worlds without number, there must from among their populations be Gods without number also (Deuteronomy 10:17; Joshua 22:22; Psalm 82:1; Acts 17:24-29; 1 Corinthians 8:5; D&C 121:28).

The whole purpose of the plan of salvation is to make us equal with God in power, might, and dominion (D&C 76:95). Thus, when John says that it is life eternal to know God (John 17:3), we understand him to be saying that we know God to the extent that we are like him or are one with him.

To be kings and priests to God. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:56.

From exaltation to exaltation. From the book of Moses we learn that it is the work and glory of God to save his children (Moses 1:39). God advances from one exaltation (or glory) to another through the exaltation of his posterity (D&C 132:63).

Dwell in everlasting burnings. See King Follett Discourse, 20:1, page 1104.

Section Six

The Righteous to Dwell in Immortal Glory

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 6

KFD 6:1 He may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him. Latter-day Saints use the phrase "eternal progression." If by that we mean that Gods are everlastingly ignorant and thus of necessity everlastingly learning, we are at odds with both reason and scripture. If, however, we have in mind that the work and glory of God are in the exaltation of his children and theirs, in turn, in the exaltation of their children in a never-ending cycle, we are in accord with the doctrine being taught here by the Prophet (Moses 1:39).

KDF 6:2 It will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. It would be foolish to suppose that we can learn all that is necessary to stand equal with God in our short sojourn in mortality. An earlier revelation states that "in due time" we will receive the fulness of the Father (D&C 93:19). Here the Prophet tells us that it will be a long timeas men measure itafter we leave this life until we will obtain our exaltation.

Section Seven

Meaning of the Hebrew Scriptures

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 7

KFD 7:1 If you do not believe it. As the faith of those in the days of Christ limited what he was able to give them, so the faith of the Saints in Nauvoo many of whom were still bound to one degree or another by the traditions of their fathersprevented them from accepting pure reve lation if it reached beyond the Bible. What, we are left to wonder, would the Prophet have been able to teach if the faith of those there assembled had not been limited by such an artificial boundary?

KFD 7:2 Oh, ye lawyers, ye doctors, and ye priests . . . the Holy Ghost knows something as well as you. With tongue in cheek, it could be observed that Latter-day Saints have no serious difficulties with the way the Bible has been translated before the first verse of Genesis. Joseph Smith's translation in this instance is arguably correct, though it goes beyond traditional usage and is more a product of revelation than linguistics. It accords perfectly with what he learned from the translation of the Abraham manuscript (Abraham 4-5).

KFD 7:3 The most nearly correct translation. No book in earth's history has been subject to as much tampering and mischief as has the Bible. Further, in no age has it been free from the blatant reworking of its text. "The English Bible in America" during the nineteenth century "was never a simple, uniform entity. When scholars have noted the presence of the Bible in American culture, they have treated it as a volume containing a kind of mythic core text, entirely overlooking the reality that the different English translations, commentaries, illustrations, and bindings significantly complicate any understanding of the Bible's influence in American society. Once it began to be printed in the United States, it soon underwent a great many textual revisions and changes in format, as different editors and publishers appropriated it to meet a wide range of changing ideologic and economic demands. By 1880, nearly two thousand different editions of the Bible were available to Americans" (Gutjahr, American Bible, 3).

Jacob . . . is translated James. James is an English form of the Hebrew name Jacob. The name James was preferred to that of Jacob because the translators courted the favor of King James to obtain the necessary support to see their labors printed.

KFD 7:4 I also have the oldest book in my heart, even the gift of the Holy Ghost. For those who enjoy the spirit of revelation, having their understanding of the things of God confined to what can be found in the Bible would be the same as being bound in chains. "The best way to obtain truth and wisdom," the Prophet said, "is not to ask it from books, but to go to God in prayer, and obtain divine teaching" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 191). Of his youthful experience in search of truth he said, "The teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible" (Joseph Smith-History 1:12).

Section Eight

A Council of the Gods

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 8

KFD 8:1 When we are ready to come to him, he is ready to come to us. See Doctrine and Covenants 88:63.

KFD 8:2 Why learned men . . . say God created the heaven and the earth out of nothing. Scholars of the history of Christian doctrine tell us that the idea of creation ex nihilo is a product of the hellenistic Christian era. Gerhard May in his work Creatio ex Nihilo: The Doctrine of 'Creation out of Nothing' in Early Christian Thought concludes that "in the second half of the second century the theological development begins which leads directly to the formulation of the church doctrine of creatio ex nihilo"; by "the beginning of the third century [it was] regarded as a fundamental tenet of Christian theology" (Creatio ex Nihilo, 148, 179). Of necessity the doctrine traces itself to Greek philosophy, having originated after traditional Christianity claims revelation to have ceased.

Section Nine

Meaning of the Word Create

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 9

KFD 9:1 Baurau. The Hebrew word baurau rendered "created" in the Genesis account of the story of creation means "to form or to fashion." There is no thought in the word of the creation of something from nothing.

The principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed. By revelation the Prophet stated: "There is no such thing as immaterial matter. All spirit is matter, but it is more fine or pure, and can only be discerned by purer eyes; We cannot see it; but when our bodies are purified we shall see that it is all matter" (D&C 131:7-8).

Section Ten

The Immortal Spirit

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 10

KFD 10:1-6 Again, by revelation the Prophet stated that "intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be" (D&C 93:29); he also taught that "the elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 93:33).

Section Eleven

The Power to Advance in Knowledge

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 11

KFD 11:1 Institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself. God is omnipotent. He is not the servant of law nor does he maintain his place in the heavens because of his ability to live in harmony with laws that are independent of him. He is the creator of all law. He is "above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever" (D&C 88:41). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:36.

KFD 11:2 I can taste the principles of eternal life. Similarly, the psalmist wrote, "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb" (Psalm 19:7-10).

Section Twelve

The Relation of Man to God

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 12

KFD 12:1 Awful responsibility, that rests upon us in relation to our dead. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 137:7-9.

Section Thirteen

Our Greatest Responsibility

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 13

KFD 13:1-3 The Prophet teaches the Saints about the redemption of the dead.

Section Fourteen

A Salvation for Men

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 14

KFD 14:1 There is a salvation for all men . . . who have not committed the unpardonable sin. In scripture "salvation" is generally a synonym for exaltation. In a few instances, however, it simply means that someone has been redeemed from death and hell and has inherited a degree of glory. The Prophet uses the term in that manner in this text.

The unpardonable sin. The unpardonable sin, which the Prophet discusses in that which immediately follows, is that sin which is so grievous that there is no forgiveness for it in this world or in the world to come. It falls outside the veil of Christ's mercy and his atonement. Those who have committed this sin will be perdition, which means hopelessly or irredeemably lost.

Section Fifteen

The Unpardonable Sin

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 15

KFD 15:1 A man cannot commit the unpardonable sin after the dissolution of the body. Why, it is asked, if one could become perdition as a spirit in the premortal life, could one not also become perdition in the spirit world after death? The answer rests in the fact that before someone could become perdition in this life, he or she must have received the fulness of all temple blessings (D&C 132:19-28). All who have arrived at that station would in death find themselves in paradise, and no one can apostatize from paradise. Satan has no power in paradise; all who are there have kept their second estate and have obtained the promise that they will have glory added upon them forever and ever (Abraham 3:26).

KFD 15:3 All will suffer until they obey Christ himself. In the vision on the degrees of glory, the Prophet learned that even the inhabitants of the telestial kingdom must bow the knee and confess Christ. See Doctrine and Covenants 76:109-10.

Section Sixteen

The Forgiveness of Sins

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 16

KFD 16:1-2 Here we are told that one cannot become perdition unless he or she has received the Holy Ghost (which comes only after baptism), has received revelations, and more particularly has experienced the manifestation of God, meaning, we learn from Doctrine and Covenants 76:43 and 130:3, both the Father and the Son. Then with full knowledge and full accountability for what they are doing, such persons deny what they have seen and heard and come out in open rebellion against God, thirsting after the blood of his anointed.

KFD 16:1 This is the case with many apostates of the Church. It has been said that those who will become sons of perdition can be numbered on the fingers on your hand. This could hardly be the case if Joseph Smith could say at that time that there were "many" who would become such.

Section Seventeen

"In My Father's House"

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 17

KFD 17:2 Those who have died in the faith are now in the celestial kingdom. The glory promised the faithful being assured, the Prophet speaks of it as if they had already obtained it. He then notes that they will have to "await until the resurrection of the dead," which we know will not take place until Christ returns. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:97-98.

Section Eighteen

Righteous Mourners Rejoice

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 18

KFD 18:1-4 The Prophet teaches that we will come forth in the resurrection as men and women, husband and wife, father and mother, son or daughter, with all the proper and wholesome feelings innate to us here.

Following the example of Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, we have omitted the paragraph dealing with the resurrection of little children. It is evident that this part of the Prophet's discourse was not recorded properly. See History of the Church, 4:556-57 and notes.

Section Nineteen

Baptism

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 19

KFD 19:2 Alexander Campbell. Mr. Campbell was a leader in the Disciples of Christ movement, which started in the late 1820s. He held that the "Kingdom of God" was not set up on the earth until the day of Pentecost. Thus, he argued that the Book of Mormon and the Book of Moses could not be true because of their reference to the ordinance of baptism before that time. He denounced Joseph Smith as an impostor. Some of the converts from Campbell's movement found it difficult to surrender such views.

Section Twenty

A Call to Repentance

THE KING FOLLETT DISCOURSE 20

KFD 20:1 Gnolom. In his translation of the book of Abraham the Prophet added the word gnolaum (Abraham 3:18), which means "eternal," to the vocabulary of the Latter-day Saints. Here he adds the word "gnolom," which appears to come from the same root and to mean essentially the same thing.

KFD 20:3 No man knows my history. Heber C. Kimball reports that Joseph Smith said, "Would to God, brethren, I could tell you who I am! Would to God I could tell you what I know! But you would call it blasphemy, and there are men upon this stand who would want to take my life" (Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball, 322). We assume this to be an allusion to the same principle revealed in Doctrine and Covenants 113. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 113:3-6.
