Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133

DATE: 3 NOVEMBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 133 is the companion revelation to section 1, the preface to the compilation of revelations that were to be published in the Book of Commandments, and it was given at the same conference. Though the press for the Book of Commandments was destroyed before Doctrine and Covenants 133 was printed, it was included in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants as the Appendix.

This revelation deals with the return of Christ and those events that will precede that great and glorious day. It weaves together scores of Bible prophecies, either announcing their fulfillment or shining greater light on them. It was given, Joseph Smith said, because the Elders "desired to know relative to preaching the Gospel to the inhabitants of the earth, and concerning the gathering; and in order to walk by the true light, and be instructed from on high" (History of the Church, 1:229).

This revelation was published for the first time in the The Evening and Morning Star, introduced as follows: "It affords us joy to lay before the saints, an article fraught with so much heavenly intelligence. . . .

"We hope that while they read it, they will remember, that it is a voice from him who spake as never man spake. We hope that while they are blessed with revelation upon revelation, with commandment upon commandment, and with precept upon precept, they will remember to do them. We hope that while they are thus blessed with the precious word of their Lord from heaven, in these last days, to fulfill that which was spoken in days of old, they will hearken to his counsels and lend an ear to all his precepts.

"Indeed it is a source of joy to us, to know, that all the prophecies and promises which are contained in them, which have not been fulfilled, will come to pass. The saints may lift up their heads and rejoice, for their redemption will soon be perfected. Soon the curtain of heaven will be unfolded, as a scroll is unfolded after it is rolled up, and they will see their Lord face to face. In view of these coming scenes, they may lift up their heads and rejoice, and praise his holy name, that they are permitted to live in the days when he returns to his people his everlasting covenant, to prepare them for his presence" (The Evening and Morning Star, 1:89).

The Saints Are Commanded to Prepare for the Second Coming

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:1-6

133:1 The word of the Lord concerning you. The glory of Mormonism is that we have a God who speaks! Surely the events that will attend his second coming are of greater concern to us than they were to the ancient Saints. Yet, the historical Christian world is dependent upon the record of revelationsto the extent that accounts of them have been preserved that were spoken to people thousands of years ago and were suited to their circumstances. To be entirely reliant upon these revelations, as marvelous as they are, could be likened to taking as one's guide for life a patriarchal blessing given to one's ancient progenitors. Certainly it would contain inspired counsel, yet it is not ours and will not contain direction that will be specific to us. Such is the instruction and blessing that we receive in the verses that follow.

133:2 The Lord who shall suddenly come to his temple. This language, which comes from the prophecy of Malachi (3:1-3), affirms that in the last days the temple will still be the focal point of worship among the Lord's people. This prophecy seems to embrace the idea that the Savior will make appearances in many of his temples before the great and dreadful day comes.

133:3 He shall make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations. Explaining this prophecy, which comes from the writings of Isaiah (Isaiah 52:10), Nephi said, "All the kindreds of the earth cannot be blessed unless he shall make bare his arm in the eyes of the nations. Wherefore, the Lord God will proceed to make bare his arm in the eyes of all the nations, in bringing about his covenants and his gospel unto those who are of the house of Israel. Wherefore, he will bring them again out of captivity, and they shall be gathered together to the lands of their inheritance; and they shall be brought out of obscurity and out of darkness; and they shall know that the Lord is their Savior and their Redeemer, the Mighty One of Israel" (1 Nephi 22:10-12).

And all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of their God. Again the words are those of Isaiah (52:10). The word salvation is used to render the Hebrew yshuw'ah, which means deliverance or victory. Thus, the point of the text is that in the teaching of the gospel to the nations of the earth and in the gathering and redemption of Israel, the victory will rest with the Lord. Despite all darkness and evil in the world, his purposes will be accomplished and his promises fulfilled.

133:4 Sanctify yourselves; gather ye together. Reference is to the endowment that is received in the house of the Lord. The endowment is a ritual cleansing and is requisite to being sanctified. It is for this purpose that the Saints had at that time been commanded to gather in Kirtland, Ohio, where they would build the first temple in this dispensation. "And that ye might escape the power of the enemy, and be gathered unto me a righteous people, without spot and blameless Wherefore, for this cause I gave unto you the commandment that ye should go to the Ohio; and there I will give unto you my law; and there you shall be endowed with power from on high; And from thence, whosoever I will shall go forth among all nations, and it shall be told them what they shall do; for I have a great work laid up in store, for Israel shall be saved, and I will lead them whithersoever I will, and no power shall stay my hand" (D&C 38:31-33).

The land of Zion. The immediate reference is to Missouri, where the Saints were then preparing to go. Later, the Prophet defined Zion as all of north and south America (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 362).

Commanded to tarry. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 101:21; 105:23-26.

Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 38:42.

133:6 Call your solemn assemblies. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:70.

Let every man call upon the name of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:20.

All Men Are Commanded to Flee Babylon and Come to Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:7-16

133:7-16 The second coming of Christ will not take place until the message of the Restoration has been declared to all the nations of the earth. The best measure of how close we are to the day of the Savior's return is the extent to which the gospel has been declared among the nations of the earth. When this revelation was given, the direction of the Lord was that people leave Babylon (the world) and flee to the place of Zion in Jackson County, Missouri. Initially it was necessary for those of faith regardless of the sacrifice requiredto leave their homelands and immigrate to Zion where they could join with those of like faith.

As they gathered together, the Saints could build the temples where the keys and power of the priesthood could be restored. First came the Kirtland Temple, where Moses, an Elias from Abraham's day, and Elijah each restored keys and left blessings upon the Lord's people. Here the Saints were washed and anointed preparatory to receiving the full endowment in Nauvoo. In the Nauvoo Temple, the full endowment was administered for the first time, and couples were sealed together for time and eternity.

All of this was accomplished despite the greatest of opposition. It was well known to Satan and his legions that once temples had been built and the Saints endowed with power from on high, the work of the Lord could not be rooted up but would go forth to fill the whole earth as the waters do the sea. So it was that the nations of the earth made their offerings to the Lord, sending the best of their faith men and women of courage to aid in laying the foundations of Zion. Many hands were needed for this work: hands that were strong and callused, hands of skilled artisans, and hands into which the revelations of the Restoration could be placed to carry them to wherever the honest in heart might be found. From these early members would come, in future generations, a great army of missionaries in whom the spirit of their forebears would brood. These missionaries, following the trails blazed by their progenitors, would take the gospel to the scattered remnants of Israel that they might be returned to the covenants God had made with their fathers.

133:13 Mountains of the Lord's house. Mountains are nature's temples. They served so frequently as the meeting place between God and man that in ancient times they were thought of as temples. Here two temples are spoken of, both in a prophetic sense: the temple yet to be built in the Jerusalem of old and the temple to be built in the New Jerusalem.

In our day the call is no longer to flee Babylon for Zion but rather to establish Zion among all the nations of the earth. Ours is a day in which those of the house of faith are charged to enlarge the tent of Israel and stretch the curtains of the Lord's habitations (meaning the number of his temples) among all peoples so that they too can gather to the covenant and receive in full measure the blessings of salvation.

Christ Shall Stand on Mount Zion, the Continents Shall Become One Land, and the Lost Tribes Shall Return

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:17-35

133:17 Prepare ye the way of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 65:1, 3.

133:18 Having his Father's name written on their foreheads. The text quotes Revelation 14:1. The Mount Zion to which reference is made is the New Jerusalem (D&C 84:2). The one hundred and forty-four thousand who have their father's name written on their foreheads are high priests who through the holy anointing have received the promise that they will become as God is. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:11.

133:19 The coming of the Bridegroom. Again the text draws upon New Testament imagery. The wedding customs of Jesus' day called for the bridegroom and his friends, in processional array, to call for the bride and to take her to the home of the bridegroom where the wedding feast was to be held. As the procession returned to the home of the groom, friends of the bride, in groups, joined the party to go to the wedding feast. As weddings were celebrated at night, those awaiting the bridegroom and his festal party needed to carry lamps.

In the parable of the ten virgins, Jesus is the bridegroom. The marriage feast is to be celebrated when he returns to take the Church as his bride (Revelation 21:2; 21:9; 22:17). The ten virgins represent those Church members who are looking for the bridegroom to come, and the oil-filled lamps are symbolic of the Holy Spirit which lights the way before the Saints.

133:20 For behold, he shall stand. The second coming of Christ to the world will be preceded by a host of other comings. These preparatory comings will be to his servants charged to make his paths straight; these will be those worthy to stand in his presence and bear his name. The number of these comings and the places where he will appear suggest the numerical strength the Church will enjoy in that day. This text lists the Mount of Olives, the mighty ocean, the islands of the sea, and the land of Zion. To these we can add visits to his temples which will dot the earth and the great meeting yet to be held in Adam-ondi-Ahman. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:5-14.

133:21 He shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem. This verse is rooted in the words of Isaiah, "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:2-3). Bible commentators assume that the Zion spoken of here is one and the same with the Jerusalem of old. From the context of the Restoration, it is clear that Isaiah saw two great capitalsthe Old and New Jerusalems administering the affairs of the Lord. The events here described are millennial, for only then will Christ rule and give direction to the whole earth. At that time church and state will be one, nevertheless laws, order, and government will be necessary; the Lord will establish both a political and an ecclesiastical kingdom. "But even then, as we suppose, administrative affairs will be departmentalized, for the law will go forth from Zion (in Jackson County), and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem (in Palestine). But, nonetheless, once again the government of the earth will be theocratic. God will govern. This time he will do it personally as he reigns over all the earth. And all of this presupposes the fall of Babylon, and the death of false religions, and the fall of all earthly governments and nations. And these things, as we are aware, shall surely come to pass" (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 596).

133:22-24 Commenting on these verses, Elder Bruce R. McConkie said: "Knowing as we do from latter-day revelation that the islands and continents were once joined in one landmass and will yet again be joined, we find new meaning in allusions and comments found in the ancient scriptures. As part of a description of the Second Coming, John tells us: 'And the heaven departed as a scroll when it is rolled together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places.' (Rev. 6:14). In connection with the greatest earthquake of the ages, John says: 'And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.' (Rev. 16:20). Also in a Second Coming setting John speaks of the voice of the Lord 'as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder.' (Rev. 14:2). This is the identical language used by the Lord in telling Joseph Smith that the mountains and valleys shall not be found, that the great deep (apparently the Atlantic Ocean) will be driven back into the north countries, 'and the islands shall become one land.' (D&C 133:22-23). The voice of many waters and of a great thunder could well be the thunderous surging of a whole ocean moving half an earth's distance from where it now is. And all of this gives deep meaning to John's account, which says: 'And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.' (Rev. 21:1). The apparent meaning of this is that the sea, or ocean, that separates the continents will cease to be, for their great landmasses will be joined together again" (Millennial Messiah, 623-24).

133:26 Their prophets shall hear his voice. The Lord's people always have been and always will be led by prophets. Confusion has been associated with this passage because of the idea that somehow the lost tribes are together as a group with their prophets at their head waiting for the call to return. This notion is fraught with serious difficulties, including the following:

First, a host of scriptural passages attest that the tribes of Israel have been scattered among all the nations of the earth. We cite but one classic illustration from 3 Nephi:

"As surely as the Lord liveth, will he gather in from the four quarters of the earth all the remnant of the seed of Jacob, who are scattered abroad upon all the face of the earth. And as he hath covenanted with all the house of Jacob, even so shall the covenant wherewith he hath covenanted with the house of Jacob be fulfilled in his own due time, unto the restoring all the house of Jacob unto the knowledge of the covenant that he hath covenanted with them. And then shall they know their Redeemer, who is Jesus Christ, the Son of God; and then shall they be gathered in from the four quarters of the earth unto their own lands, from whence they have been dispersed; yea, as the Lord liveth so shall it be. Amen" (5:24-26).

No other statement in all of holy writ begins and ends with the announcement that if what is being written is not so, then God no longer lives! More emphatic language is simply not possible. The text then assures us that the tribes of Israel have been scattered to the four quarters of the earth and that they will remain in their scattered condition until they come to the knowledge of the covenant that God made with their fathers and the knowledge that Jesus is the Christ and the Son of God. Now, we would ask, How is it possible for a people to have prophets at their head and yet not have heard of the covenant of salvation or that Jesus is the Christ and the Son of God?

Second, Why would God send Moses to Joseph Smith to give him the keys by which Israel was to be gathered if some other prophets had already accomplished the task?

Third, Why would John the Baptist, and then Peter, James and John restore priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery if that priesthood and its keys were already on the earth?

Fourth, What of the statements the Lord made to Joseph Smith stating that he stood at the head of "the only true and living church upon the face of the whole earth" (D&C 1:30). If priesthood, prophets, and covenants were already to be found upon the earth what truth can be found in such a statement?

Fifth, If we are to accept the standard established in the revelations of the Restoration, we must maintain that none have the right to act in the name of the Lord (and surely that would include leading the tribes of Israel) save they have been "ordained by some one who has authority, and it is known to the church that he has authority and has been regularly ordained by the heads of the church" (D&C 42:11). The Doctrine and Covenants accepts none as prophets save those who have been called, ordained, and received the sustaining vote of the Church. The Lord's house is and always has been a house of order.

Is it not wholly harmonious with the revelations and all we know about the Lord's system of governing his people to suppose that the prophets called to lead the tribes of Israel back to the lands of their inheri tance will be elders of Israel who trace their priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and through them to Peter, James, and John?

133:27 An highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep. In his prophetic description of the return of Israel in the last days, Isaiah said, "An highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk there: and the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away" (Isaiah 35:8-10).

133:30 Rich treasures. When Abraham and Sarah returned after their trial in Egypt to that sacred land promised them, they were "rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold." They went first to Beth-el"the house of God" (Genesis 28:19a)and its altar that they might call upon the name of the Lord (Genesis 13:2-4). Similarly, before the children of Israel left Egypt to return to the promised land to rebuild their temple and call upon God, they were directed to "borrow" (meaning ask) from the Egyptians their "jewels of silver, and jewels of gold" (Exodus 11:2; 2a). When the Jews were freed from their captivity in Babylon to return to Palestine to rebuild the Holy City and its temple, the treasure houses of that great nation were opened to them and they returned laden with silver and gold (Ezra 7:15-21). Thus, when Israel returns in the last days to claim the blessings of the temple, we look to them to follow the pattern of their progenitors and bring with them their rich treasures. We would suppose that such treasures would be used in the building of temples and the spreading of the gospel to all the nations of the earth.

We have frequently heard it said that the rich treasures spoken of in this verse were scriptural records. There are a number of serious difficulties associated with such an interpretation. The priesthood is the ordained channel through which the revelations of heaven are to come. The very reason the scattered remnants of Israel are being gathered is to return them to the priesthood and its blessings. We do not expect to receive our scripture or revelations from those who have been lost and have not known where the truths of salvation are to be found. The time will come when we will have scriptural records from the various tribes of Israel, but they must come to us through the channels the Lord has ordained. The Lamanites did not bring the Book of Mormon with them, rather, we took it to them. Indeed, the Book of Mormon was ordained in the councils of heaven for the very purpose of gathering the lost tribes of Israel. If the prophecies are to be fulfilled, the stick of Judah and the stick of Joseph will be the books that actuate the gathering (Ezekiel 37:15-21). Then, at the appropriate time, other scripture will be given to those of the house of faith. Such scripture will come to us from he whom we sustain as prophet, seer, and revelator.

Parley P. Pratt provides a wonderful commentary on the reference to "rich treasures" as used in this text in his hymn "An Angel from on High."

Lo, Israel filled with joy Shall now be gathered home, Their wealth and means employ To build Jerusalem, While Zion shall arise and shine And fill the earth with truth divine, While Zion shall arise and shine And fill the earth with truth divine. (Hymns, no. 328)

133:31 Boundaries of the everlasting hills. This refers to the Rocky Mountain range. When Jacob blessed his son Joseph, he said, "The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren" (Genesis 49:26). Moses, in like manner, placed a blessing upon the tribe of Joseph, saying: "And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills . . . let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren" (Deuteronomy 33:15-16). Again, Jacob referred to Joseph as "a fruitful bough, . . . by a well, whose branches run over the wall" (Genesis 49:22). It was affirmed to Joseph Smith in his own patriarchal blessing that these references were directed to the Americas. As Joseph of old was separated from his brethren by their choice, so by the will of the Lord he received a greater blessing and, besides his inheritance in Palestine, he also received as an inheritance the land of ZionAmerica separated from the inheritance of the other tribes. His blessing which his father gave him "prevailed above the blessings of his [Jacob's] progenitors" in that the Lord gave to him the choicest of all lands to possess with his seed forever.

133:32 Crowned with glory . . . by the hands of . . . the children of Ephraim. It is for the blessings of the temple that the tribes of Israel return to Zion. It is there that they will be crowned with glory by the children of Ephraim.

The Gospel Restored through Joseph Smith Is to Be Preached in All the World

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:36-39

133:36-39 These verses pick up the language of Revelation 14:6-7 relative to the angel that John promised would return to the earth in the last days to restore the everlasting gospel. They announce that the Revelator's prophecy has been fulfilled. Thus, these verses confirm that it was Moroni and the Book of Mormon of which John wrote. Having done so, they then affirm that it is the very gospel restored by Moroni in the Book of Mormon that must go to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Sending the Bible to the nations of the earth will not do, nor will sending the testimony of Christ as it comes from that record. As marvelous as the New Testament Gospels are, many people have professed to accept the Gospels' testimony of Christ while rejecting baptism, the need for revelation, the place of living prophets, the need for priesthood authority, the ordinances of the house of the Lord, and the fulfillment of the Revelator's promise. The simple truth is that without such principles there is no salvation.

The Lord Will Come in Vengeance upon the Wicked

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:40-51

133:40-45 These verses are rooted in Isaiah 64:1-5, which constitute the prayer of Israel for the Second Coming and the salvation that will be enjoyed by the faithful at that time. The oft-asked question is, Would one, knowing the calamities that are to befall the world at the time of Christ's return long to be a part of such events or should one pray to be spared such an experience? The answer to such a question is entirely dependant upon who asks it. The universal plea of the righteous is, "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven" (Matthew 6:10). While among the wicked the promise is, "Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for you? The day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it?" (Amos 5:18-20).

In these verses the voice of Isaiah and Joseph Smith become one in painting a dramatic word picture of the vengeance and the love that the Lord will manifest at the time of his return. Both must stand together, for he cannot save the righteous without damning the wicked; he cannot reward the obedient without condemning the rebellious; he cannot be a God of mercy save he is also a God of justice. So it is that we find in the revelations of the Restoration a second witness of all that the Lord said to the ancient prophets about the day of his wrath. These revelations speak of "the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out upon the wicked without measure" (D&C 1:9). In them he says: "Hear the word of him whose anger is kindled against the wicked and rebellious. . . . Let the wicked take heed, and let the rebellious fear and tremble; and let the unbelieving hold their lips, for the day of wrath shall come upon them as a whirlwind, and all flesh shall know that I am God" (D&C 63:2, 6). "Behold, the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full," saith the Lord (D&C 43:26). "For behold, mine anger is kindled against the rebellious, and they shall know mine arm and mine indignation, in the day of visitation and of wrath upon the nations" (D&C 56:1).

For those who have walked in carnal paths, it will be a most dreadful day. "The time is soon at hand that I shall come in a cloud with power and great glory," saith the Lord. "And it shall be a great day at the time of my coming, for all nations shall tremble" (D&C 34:7-8). "For when the Lord shall appear he shall be terrible unto them, that fear may seize upon them, and they shall stand afar off and tremble. And all nations shall be afraid because of the terror of the Lord, and the power of his might" (D&C 45:74-75).

And so we ask, Will there be no hope for those called upon to abide that day? Our answer, There is for those who are true and faithful. As Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated, "For them, whether in life or in death, it will be a time of glory and renown. Will they escape the outpouring of divine wrath and avoid the vengeance with which the wicked will be smitten? They will. They are the true Israel who yearn for the restoration to them of the ancient kingdom. They are the ones who shall abide the day and who shall live and reign on earth with their Lord for the space of a thousand years. And blessed are they, for they shall inherit the earth" (Millennial Messiah, 505).

133:40 Rend the heavens. To "rend the heavens" is to tear the veil so that God can be seen.

Mountains might flow down. At the return of Christ, "Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain" (Isaiah 40:4).

133:41 Melting fire. This is a fire of such heat that it melts the very elements of the earth. All that is telestial on this earth at the time of Christ's return must be destroyed. "Every corruptible thing, . . . that dwells upon all the face of the earth, shall be consumed; and also that of element shall melt with fervent heat" (D&C 101:24-25).

133:43 Terrible things. The power of God will be so manifest that it will show itself to be greater than that of either man or nature.

133:46-48 These verses parallel Isaiah 63:1-2, which read as follows: "Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?" Edom was a land in the ancient Near East; Bozrah was its capital. It was also referred to as Idumea, which, like Babylon or Egypt, is a scriptural symbol for that which is unclean, or the world (D&C 1:36).

"This picture is a familiar one in Israel. The wine is trampled from the grapes in great vats, staining the garments of the laborers as though with blood. But in this case the second coming of Christ is involved, the one harvesting the crop is the Lord himself, and the winepress is full of the wrath of God. Thus John heard a command given to one of the angels of God in heaven. It was: 'Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.' It is the day of harvest. 'And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God. And the winepress was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the winepress' (Rev. 14:18-20)" (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 503).

133:49 So great shall be the glory of his presence. This text comes from Isaiah 13:10. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:42.

It Shall Be the Year of His Redeemed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:52-56

133:52 The year of my redeemed. The phrase "year of my redeemed" is used to describe the time of Christ's return and the ushering in of his millennial kingdom.

133:53 The angel of his presence saved them. This verse is rooted in Isaiah 63:9. Israel has but one Savior and that is the Lord himself (Deuteronomy 4:35), he is "the angel of his presence" (Abraham 1:15-16). Moses proclaimed the same blessing in Exodus 33:12-17.

133:54-55 This text affirms that Enoch (and those of his city), Moses, and Elijah, all of whom as translated beings were taken into heaven without tasting death, nonetheless died that they might be resurrected with Christ. Their death and resurrection must have been a change that occurred in the twinkling of an eye (D&C 63:51).

133:56 The graves of the saints shall be opened. As all who were in the graves who were worthy of a celestial resurrection were called forth to meet Christ following his resurrection, so once again at the time of his return those worthy of a celestial resurrection will be called forth to join him (D&C 88:97-98). It appears from this text that those in Mount Zion, or the Jerusalem of old, will be called forth first and then those in the New Jerusalem, each when he makes his appearance to them (verses 20-21).

They shall sing the song of the Lamb. In honor of the Lamb, a great choir of 100,000,000 voices of the redeemed shall sing this new song (Revelation 5:9-13; D&C 84:99-102):

Thou wast slain, And hast redeemed us to God by thy blood Out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: And we shall reign on the earth. . . . Worthy is the Lamb that was slain To receive power, and riches, and wisdom, And strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. . . . Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, Be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, And unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

The Gospel Is to Be Sent Forth to Save the Saints and to Condemn the Wicked

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 133:57-74

133:57 The fulness of the gospel, his everlasting covenant. The fulness of the gospel and the everlasting covenant are one and the same (D&C 45:9). There is no gospel without covenants and there are no covenants (with the Lord) without the gospel. Thus, in the proper sense of the word, a covenant people are and must always be a people who have and live the gospel of Jesus Christ.

133:58 The little one become a strong nation. The "little one" is the Church. Early in the Kirtland period of Church history, Wilford Woodruff attended a meeting in a log cabin above the Morley farm. Of that occasion he recalled the following: "On Sunday night the Prophet called on all who held the Priesthood to gather into the little log school house they had there. It was a small house, perhaps 14 feet square. But it held the whole of the Priesthood of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who were then in the town of Kirtland. . . . When we got together . . . the Prophet said, 'Brethren I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight. But I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destines of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it.' I was rather surprised. He said, 'It is only a little handfull of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South Americait will fill the world'" (Conference Report, April 1898, 57).

Two shall put their tens of thousands to flight. "Out of Armageddon will come great blessings, in the eternal sense, to those Jews and others who abide the day. 'In that day'when all nations are gathered together against Jerusalem and she has become a cup of trembling unto all the people'shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.' This is the day when two shall put their tens of thousands to flight, when divine intervention will scatter the hosts of the wicked, when in weakness and by faith the Lord's people will wax valiant and put to flight the armies of the aliens" (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 467).

133:59 The weak things of the earth shall thrash the nations. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 35:13-14; see also Doctrine and Covenants 1:19; 124:1.

133:60 Now are to go forth unto all flesh. Reference is to the Book of Commandments. It was determined to publish this book of revelations at the conference where this revelation was received.

Should any question exist in the mind of anyone relative to the place the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants (the successor to the Book of Commandments) are to play in our declaring the message of the Restoration to the world it is answered herethey are to "go forth unto all flesh." See Doctrine and Covenants 1 and 67.

133:63 Cut off from among the people. This statement traces to an often repeated Messianic prophecy first given to Moses (Deuteronomy 18:15-18). It was quoted by Peter as he spoke of the day of restoration (Acts 3:22-23), by Nephi in his interpretation of Isaiah 48 and 49 (1 Nephi 22:21), and by Moroni to Joseph Smith (Joseph SmithHistory 1:40). Christ also quoted it to the Nephites, telling them that in the last days those who would not accept his words as they would be found in the Book of Mormon would "be cut off from among my people who are of the covenant" (3 Nephi 21:11).

133:64 It shall leave them neither root nor branch. Those who are cut off from the people of the covenant as spoken of in the preceding verse will be left with neither "root nor branch" according to the words of Malachi, meaning they will have no family ties in the world to come (Malachi 4:1-6).

133:73 Outer darkness. "So complete is the darkness prevailing in the minds of these spirits [those rejecting the gospel message], so wholly has gospel light been shut out of their consciences, that they know little or nothing of the plan of salvation, and have little hope within themselves of advancement and progression through the saving grace of Christ. Hell is literally a place of outer darkness, darkness that hates light, buries truth, and revels in iniquity" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 551-52).
