Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 134

DATE: 17 AUGUST 1835

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

On 17 August 1835, a conference of the Church was held in Kirtland, Ohio, to examine and approve the compilation of revelations that had been prepared for publication in the Doctrine and Covenants of the Church.

After the priesthood quorums and the congregation had voted unani mously to accept these revelations for publication, W. W. Phelps arose and read an article on marriage. This was voted on and ordered to be published with the revelations. Then Oliver Cowdery arose and read the article on laws and governments that constitutes this section. It too was accepted for publication in the Doctrine and Covenants. Neither article was accepted as a revelation or thought to be other than a general expression of belief. Oliver Cowdery was the author of both articles.

Joseph Smith was not present at this conference. He and Frederick G. Williams were on a short mission to Michigan. He did not learn about the inclusion of these two articles until his return. He did not approve of either action but chose to respect the vote of the conference (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 3:195). The article "Marriage," which was written before the revelation known to us as Doctrine and Covenants 132 was committed to writing, was dropped from the Doctrine and Covenants in the 1876 edition. Section 132, which contains the Lord's law of eternal marriage, was added at that time.

Governments Should Preserve Freedom of Conscience and Worship

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 134:1-4

134:1 We believe that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man. The supposition that all governmentsas this statement implies"were instituted of God for the benefit of man" is simply not defensible. Certainly we believe that the government known to Adam was given of God, as was that given on Sinai to Moses. We believe that the Founding Fathers of the government of the United States of America were inspired in what they did, but in the context of world history, such governments constitute precious few among countless governments formed by uninspired and conspiring men. Although the principles of righteous government were instituted of God, those principles are not often found in the many forms of government instituted by mankind.

134:4 We believe that religion is instituted of God. If this statement is taken at face value there would have been no need for Joseph Smith and the Restoration. We could simply join the great chorus of voices that tell us that as all roads in the ancient world led to Rome, so all faiths are capable of leading us to salvation. Again, true religion and true worship were instituted by God in the beginning, while man-made philosophies masquerading as religion are not the work of God.

All Men Owe Respect and Deference to Law

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 134:5-8

134:5-8 As Latter- day Saints, we believe ourselves to be accountable to God in all our actions. We also believe ourselves to be accountable to our fellow men insomuch that we honor and obey the laws of the society of which we are a part, nor is it our thought that we will isolate ourselves from society. Our role is to be a light to all, that we might take the message of the gospel to them.

The Saints Did Not Believe It Prudent to Meddle with Slaves

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 134:9-12

134:12 We do not believe it right to interfere with bond servants. This verse was intended to appease slaveholders and avoid placing the Saints in the crossfire between the Southern and Northern states over the issue of slavery, though there was very little sympathy in the Church for the same. The Church had enjoyed some missionary success in the Southern states, particularly, Virginia, Tennessee, and Kentucky, and it was feared that if they came out against slavery it would invoke persecution similar to that which they had experienced in Jackson County. "For you will see," wrote one Mormon, "that if madam rumor, with her thousand poisoned tongues, was once to set afloat the story that this society had come out in favor of the doctrines of Abolitionism, there would be no safety for one of us in the South" (Messenger and Advocate, 2:313). The Prophet Joseph Smith sensed the precariousness of the situation and took measures to avoid trouble; he and other Church leaders during the spring of 1836 used the Messenger and Advocate to voice disapproval of the abolition movement. "I do not believe that the people of the North have any more right to say that the South shall not hold slaves, than the South have to say the North shall," he wrote (Messenger and Advocate, 2:289), though he taught that the slave master must treat his slaves "with kindness before God."

In the spring of 1844, in order to give the Saints a candidate for whom they could vote in good conscience, the Prophet announced his candidacy for the presidency of the United States. In so doing he also announced a most enlightened platform with included a provision for Congress to pay slaveholders a reasonable price for their slaves with money obtained from the sale of public lands, and from deduction of pay from the members of Congress. The idea, which was ignored, received wide public acclaim eleven years later when it was proposed by Ralph Waldo Emerson. The Prophet continued, "The southern people are hospitable and noble. They will help to rid so free a country of every vestige of slavery whenever they are assured of an equivalent for their property" (Smith, History of the Church, 6:207).
