Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 136

DATE: 14 JANUARY 1847

PLACE: OMAHA NATION, WEST BANK OF THE MISSOURI RIVER, NEAR COUNCIL BLUFFS, IOWA

The autumn of 1846 found fifteen thousand exiled Latter- day Saints making temporary homes at what was known as Winter Quarters of the Camp of Israel, on the banks of the Missouri River in the Omaha Nation, near where the cities of Omaha and Council Bluffs now stand. They had been driven from Nauvoo, the city they had built, their Prophet and his beloved brother Hyrum had been killed by a mob while held captive in Carthage Jail, and their temple had been burned. They sought a place of peace and refuge. Before his death, Joseph Smith had told them that they would only find peace in the Rocky Mountains, where they were destined to become a mighty people.

This revelation was given to Brigham Young who, as the president of the Quorum of the Twelve at the death of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, was the man responsible to lead the Lord's people. The revelation was received at a meeting held at Heber C. Kimball's home. At this meeting the manner of the westward migration was considered, and President Young received this revelation, known as the "Word and Will of God concerning the Camp of Israel."

How the Camp of Israel Was to Be Organized for Its Westward Journey

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 136:1-16

136:1-11 Salvation is a covenant affair. We can no more be saved alone than the Saints could have journeyed west and conquered the wilderness acting singly. Their strength came in a unity of faith and purpose, their covenant was not only with their God but also with each other. Such has ever been the system of salvation among the Lord's people. Thus, the spirit of the instruction given here contains the reminder of the importance of caring for "the widows, the fatherless, and the families of those who have gone into the army," that none will have cause to feel neglected or forgotten by their God. That concern for each other brought with it a strength and spiritual power unknown to other companies and groups that went west.

136:1 The Camp of Israel. With little more to clothe themselves in than the faith known to their ancient father Abraham, his children assembled from the nations of the earth and readied themselves for their march into the wilderness. They sought a modern Sinai, the mountain of the Lord's house, where they too could hear the voice of the God of Israel and be endowed with power. As the body of Joseph, son of Jacob, was carried before their ancient counterparts as they left Egypt, so they were lead by the spirit of the man to whom Moses had committed the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the lands of the north. To him the Lord had said, "I will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israel. For ye are the children of Israel, and of the seed of Abraham, and ye must needs be led out of bondage by power, and with a stretched-out arm." So it was that Brigham would become their leader, the modern Moses, and to those who followed him the Lord said, "And as your fathers were led at the first, even so shall the redemption of Zion be. Therefore, let not your hearts faint, for I say not unto you as I said unto your fathers: Mine angel shall go up before you, but not my presence. But I say unto you: Mine angels shall go up before you, and also my presence, and in time ye shall possess the goodly land" (D&C 103:16-20).

All that here took place had been known to the ancient counterparts of modern Israel who gave prophetic description of it. We cite the words of Jeremiah:

"For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the Lord our God.

"For thus saith the Lord; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

"Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither.

"They shall come with weeping, and with supplications, will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.

"Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.

"For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.

"Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all.

"Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.

"And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the Lord (Jeremiah 31:6-14).

136:2 With a covenant and promise. Of the Lord's promise that latter-day Israel would "walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way," Elder LeGrand Richards said, "In their trek from Nauvoo across the great American desert to the Great Salt Lake Valley, the Saints traveled about six hundred miles (1,000 kilometers) along the North Platte River, as Jeremiah had seen" (Marvelous Work and a Wonder, 225-26). To this Bruce R. McConkie added a spiritual interpretation, saying, "The way is straight and the course is narrow, but the Lord shall be a father to all who heed the call of Ephraim and walk therein" (Millennial Messiah, 195). It was not a series of emigrant wagon trains going west to find and cultivate new lands of which Jeremiah spoke. Rather it was the gathering remnant of Israel coming together from the various nations of the earth in fulfillment of the promises made to their ancient fathers. It was a people seeking a place of refuge where they could build a temple to their God.

136:3 Let the companies be organized. To Moses the Lord had said, "Thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens" (Exodus 18:21; see also D&C 136:12-14).

136:4 The ordinances of the Lord. Reference is not only to rites but rather to all the commandments and revelations the Lord has given.

136:8 The poor, the widows, the fatherless. These have the same claim on the blessings of heaven as the physically strong and financially able. The strength of each company was to be found in its concern for those less able. They would go together or they would not go.

Into the army. Twelve days after the arrival of President Brigham Young on the banks of the Missouri River, Captain James Allen of the United States Army arrived at Mount Pisgah with a call from the government for four or five companies of volunteers to serve in the Mexican War. He was advised to go to Council Bluffs to see President Young, with whom he met on 30 June 1846.

President Young assured him that the volunteers would be furnished. A battalion of five hundred men was raised. Though not called upon to fight, the Mormon Battalion acquitted themselves honorably, and the pay for their service, which went to their families going west was as manna from heaven.

136:10 Every man use all his influence. This was the true principle of consecration. All "influence," that is all property, all talents, all strength, all that a soul had were to be enlisted in the cause of Zion.

136:12 Ezra T. Benson and Erastus Snow. Six months before this reve lation was received, Ezra T. Benson had been called by Brigham Young to fill a vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve. Thirty-six years of age at this time, he was a Massachusetts native who had followed impressions to move west. He and his wife learned of the Church while in Quincy, Illinois, and were baptized in 1840. Six months later he was called to serve in the presidency of the Quincy Stake.

Erastus Snow, then twenty-eight years of age, would, with Orson Pratt, who had baptized him at the age of fourteen, become the first of the vanguard company of pioneers to enter the Great Salt Lake Valley. He was called to the Quorum of the Twelve a month after this revelation was received.

136:13 Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff. Orson Pratt, thirty-five years of age, had been ordained to the Quorum of the Twelve at the age of twenty-three. He is revered as one of the great intellects of the Church and as one of its greatest missionaries.

Wilford Woodruff, destined to become the fourth president of the Church, was ordained an apostle in April 1839. He stands uncontested as the greatest missionary of our dispensation.

136:14 Amasa Lyman and George A. Smith. Amasa Lyman, baptized at nineteen years of age, traveled seven hundred miles to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was called as an apostle in August 1842 and served as a counselor to the Prophet the year prior to Joseph's death. He was thirty-four years of age at this time.

Called as an apostle at the age of twenty-two, George A. Smith was a first cousin of the Prophet's. He would later serve as a counselor to Brigham Young. He was thirty years of age when this revelation was given.

The Saints Are Commanded to Live Gospel Standards

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 136:17-27

136:18 Zion shall be redeemed in my own due time. Reference is to the New Jerusalem and the temple to be built there. As certainly as we have now gone back to Nauvoo to rebuild our temple there, so the Saints will return to Jackson County, Missouri, to build a temple to their God and to fulfill all the associated promises. As Joseph Fielding Smith said, "When the Lord gets ready for it to be accomplished, he will command his people, and the work will be done" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:79).

136:24 Cease drunkenness. Though the Word of Wisdom was given in February of 1833, it was given as wise counsel and not as a commandment. It was only after the Saints had come west that it was accepted as a commandment binding upon them.

The Saints Are to Sing, Dance, Pray, and Learn Wisdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 136:28-33

136:30 Fear not thine enemies for they are in mine hands. Counseling the Saints in their grief at the death of their beloved Prophet, Brigham Young said on behalf of the Twelve, "We are sensible that the account of the death of the Prophet and Patriarch of the church will be painful to your hearts: it is to ours. We feel and mourn their loss, but they have sealed their testimony with their blood; they have not counted their lives as dear unto themselves as the lives of the church; they have died in the Lord and their works will follow them.

"The eyes of the Lord are upon those who have shed the blood of the Lord's anointed, and he will judge them with a righteous judgment" (Smith, History of the Church, 7:199).

Prophets Are Slain That They Might Be Honored and the Wicked Condemned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 136:34-42

136:34 Thy brethren have rejected you . . . even the nation that has driven you out. As Christ was rejected by his own, so Joseph Smith and the Latter- day Saint people were rejected by those who should have been their brothers in Christ. They would now be forced outside the territory of the United States in the hopes that they would perish in a desert wasteland.

136:35 Now cometh the day of their calamity. This prophecy finds at least partial fulfillment in the Civil War, which began fifteen years later.

136:39 It was needful that he should seal his testimony with his blood. The chorus of the hymn "Praise to the Man," written by William W. Phelps, responds in part to the question as to why it was necessary for the Prophet to die:

Hail to the Prophet, ascended to heaven! Traitors and tyrants now fight him in vain. Mingling with Gods, he can plan for his brethren; Death cannot conquer the hero again. (Hymns, no. 27)

Having established a dispensation of the gospel here and having conferred all of the keys, powers, and authorities that he held upon the Twelve, the Prophet in his death then took those same powers with him into the world of the spirits where he commenced a dispensation of the gospel there (D&C 90:2-3). Teaching this principle, Charles W. Penrose said, "When the Prophet Joseph and his brother Hyrum were slain for the testimony of Jesus it was in the providence of God; it was with His permission. They went to open the door of the kingdom in the spirit world, and thus a marvelous work and a wonder has begun there also. When we get there we will find out the magnitude of it; for we will see that the Elders of Zion who have tabernacled in the flesh are laboring there, under the direction of him who holds the keys of the last dispensation, and the Gospel is being preached to millions upon millions of spirits, and a far greater work is to be accomplished there than among men in the flesh" (Conference Report, April 1902, 52-53).
