Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 137

DATE: 21 JANUARY 1836

PLACE: KIRTLAND TEMPLE, KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation was received in the west school room on the third floor of the Kirtland Temple. Church leaders from Kirtland and Missouri had assembled to be anointed as part of the endowment of power to be bestowed upon the "first elders" in connection with the dedication of the temple. Two separate meetings were held the evening of 21 January, the latter continuing into the morning hours. During the first meeting, Joseph Smith, his father, and his brother Hyrum, along with members of the First Presidency (Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams and Oliver Cowdery, associate president of the Church), the presidency of the Church in Missouri (David Whitmer, William W. Phelps, and John Whitmer), the bishoprics in Kirtland and Missouri, and the Prophet's scribe (Warren Parrish), anointed each other with "holy oil" and offered prayers that the anointing blessings would be accepted. "The second meeting was not unlike the first, except that those being anointed were members of the Church high councils in Kirtland and Missouri. Although visions and spiritual manifestations were witnessed during both ceremonies, section 137 was received during the first anointing session" (Cook, Revelations, 303).

Oliver Cowdery made the following entry in his diary for the day: "Thursday, the 21st, this morning, at 15 minutes past nine, my little daughter is 5 months old. O Lord, I thank thee that thou hast thus been merciful and spared my only child. At about three o'clock P.M. I assembled in our office garret, having all things prepared for the occasion, with presidents Joseph Smith, jr. F. G. Williams, Sidney Rigdon Hyrum Smith, David Whitmer, John Whitmer and elder John Corrill, and washed our bodies with pure water before the Lord, preparatory to the annointing with the holy oil. After we were washed, our bodies were perfumed with a sweet smelling oderous wash. At evening the presidents of the Church, with the two bishops and their counsellors, and elder Warren Parrish, met in the presidents' room, the high cou[n]cils of Kirtland and Zion in their rooms. Those named in the first room were annointed with the same kind of oil and in the man[ner] that were Moses and Aaron, and those who stood before the Lord in ancient days, and those in the other rooms with annointing oil prepared for them. The glorious scene is too great to be described in this book, therefore, I only say, that the heavens were opened to many, and great and marvelous things were shown" (Arrington, "Oliver Cowdery's Kirtland," 418-19).

Though consisting of but ten verses this is one of the most significant revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants. It lays the doctrinal foundation upon which rests the whole concept of our labors in behalf of our kindred dead. It clearly separates this doctrine from any notion that the living can neglect their responsibilities in this life, believing that they can attend to them or have someone else attend to them when they have died.

The Prophet Sees His Brother Alvin in the Celestial Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 137:1-6

137:1 The heavens were opened upon us. Virtually every revelation received by Joseph Smith and recorded in the Doctrine and Covenants was received in the presence of others. In this instance those present included the Prophet's father, Joseph Smith Sr., who was the Church patriarch; the counselors in the First Presidency; the presidency of the stake in Missouri; the bishoprics from Kirtland and Missouri; and Warren Parrish, the Prophet's scribe.

Whether in the body or out I cannot tell. This was the language used by the apostle Paul to describe a vision in which he also was permitted to see the celestial kingdom (2 Corinthians 12:2-3). For Joseph Smith it was not an out of body experience and we would suppose it was not for Paul either. Apparently what is being described transcends normal mortal experience. For instance, Moses described his experience on the high mountain, saying, "Now mine own eyes have beheld God; but not my natural, but my spiritual eyes, for my natural eyes could not have beheld; for I should have withered and died in his presence; but his glory was upon me; and I beheld his face, for I was transfigured before him" (Moses 1:11).

137:5 I saw . . . my Father and my mother: my brother Alvin. In this most remarkable vision, the Prophet was not shown things as they were in the celestial kingdom but rather as they yet would be. This would have been immediately evident to him as he saw in that vision his own father and mother. As already noted, his father was present in the room with him when the vision was received, and his father and mother lived for some years after this event. Each of the persons shown in the vision appears to have been deliberately chosen to emphasize that salvation is a family affair and that it centers in the promises made to our ancient fathers. In addition to seeing the Father and the Son, the Prophet saw Adam, the father of all humankind; Father Abraham, the father of the faithful; and his own father and mother reunited with his brother Alvin, who had died twelve years earlier at age twenty-five.

137:6 And marveled how it was that he had obtained an inheritance in that kingdom. To this point, 21 January 1836, so far as we have record, Joseph Smith had been taught nothing about the doctrine of salvation for the dead. The thought that his brother Alvin, who died without baptism, could be in the celestial kingdom caused him to "marvel."

A proper understanding of gospel principles requires that they be learned in their proper order. It is for the living to save themselves before they attempt to save the dead. The idea that the living can somehow defer obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel to some future world has no place in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

So that no such notion could be a part of his thinking, Joseph Smith was carefully taught while translating the Book of Mormon that mortality is the time appointed by God for people to accept the gospel. Only those who do not have the opportunity to receive its fullness will be granted that opportunity in the world of spirits.

Joseph Smith had been carefully tutored by the prophets of the Book of Mormon. He understood that "this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God," the time for them "to perform their labors," and that we can "not procrastinate the day" of our repentance until death, "for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed" (Alma 34:32-33).

In the book of Helaman, we learn that Samuel the Lamanite testified against the Nephites, saying, "But behold, your days of probation are past; ye have procrastinated the day of your salvation until it is everlastingly too late, and your destruction is made sure; yea, for ye have sought all the days of your lives for that which ye could not obtain; and ye have sought for happiness in doing iniquity, which thing is contrary to the nature of that righteousness which is in our great and Eternal Head" (Helaman 13:38). The Savior is recorded as saying, "Come unto me and be ye saved; for verily I say unto you, that except ye shall keep my commandments, which I have commanded you at this time, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven" (3 Nephi 12:20; emphasis added).

To gather Israel the second time. This text teaches that to be "gathered" is to be baptized, or to become a member of the restored Church. By quoting his father, Nephi taught the same principle: "After the house of Israel should be scattered they should be gathered together again; or, in fine, after the Gentiles had received the fulness of the Gospel, the natural branches of the olive-tree, or the remnants of the house of Israel, should be grafted in, or come to the knowledge of the true Messiah, their Lord and their Redeemer"(1 Nephi 10:14). "They shall be restored to the true church and fold of God" (2 Nephi 9:2).

The Doctrine of Salvation for the Dead Revealed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 137:7-9

137:7-9 In these verses the principles upon which the doctrine of salvation for the dead rests are announced for the first time in this dispensation. They are: first, that the doctrine applies only to those who "died without a knowledge" of the gospel; second, that God must read the hearts of those concerned and affirm that had the gospel come to them in mortality they would have accepted it; and third, that God must judge that not only would they have accepted the gospel but that they would have done so "with all their hearts," meaning that they would have endured valiantly and faithfully to the end. These principles accord perfectly with the promise of Peter that those who receive the gospel in the spirit world must do so in such a manner that they "might be judged according to men in the flesh" (1 Peter 4:6), which is to say that the price in faith and works to receive the gospel in the spirit world is the same as the price appended to receiving it in mortality.

The question could well be asked as to why it was that Alvin would be chosen to represent these truths? The answer is that he is the perfect example of the kind of person to whom these principles apply. Alvin died in November of 1823. His passing had been a matter of considerable sorrow to the Smith family and to the young woman to whom he was engaged. Their wounded souls had been cut to the core at his funeral by the unfeeling remarks of the Presbyterian minister who had consigned Alvin to hell because he had not been baptized or involved in that church.

Despite his relative youth, Alvin was a man of unusual spiritual propensity. Before his death, he called each of his brothers and sisters in turn to his bedside and gave them a parting admonition. To his eighteen-year- old brother, Joseph, he said: "Be a good boy, and do everything that lies in your power to obtain the record [the Book of Mormon]. Be faithful in receiving instruction and in keeping every commandment that is given you" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 116). Mother Smith stated that "Alvin had ever manifested a greater zeal and anxiety, if it were possible, than any of the rest with regard to the record which had been shown to Joseph, and he always showed the most intense interest concerning the matter. With this before our minds, we could not endure to hear or say one word upon that subject, for the moment that Joseph spoke of the record it would immediately bring Alvin to our minds with all his kindness, his affection, his zeal, and piety. And when we looked to his place and realized that he was gone from it, to return no more in this life, we all wept with one accord over our irretrievable loss, and we could 'not be comforted, because he was not'" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 119).

Nearly twenty years later, Joseph Smith recounted his feelings at the time of Alvin's death, saying: "I remember well the pangs of sorrow that swelled my youthful bosom and almost burst my tender heart when he died. He was the oldest and noblest of my father's family. . . . He lived without spot from the time he was a child. . . . He was one of the soberest of men, and when he died the angel of the Lord visited him in his last moments" (History of the Church, 5:126-27). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 10:67; 18:4.

137:9 I, the Lord, will judge all men according to their works, according to the desires of their hearts. The scales of justice used in the realms of heaven can be depended upon to render that perfect equity and judgment known only to an all-wise God. Our works will be placed in one of the pans of balance and the desires of our heart in the other. Where our works are lacking because of circumstances beyond our control, the desires of our hearts can compensate. For instance, if someone did not marry in the temple because the opportunity to do so was not afforded but in the judgment of God that person would have taken that opportunity with all his or her heart, then the scales are balanced. That individual is rewarded as if he or she had complied with the commandment. On the other hand, impressive works may hide evil desires left unfulfilled only because the opportunity to act on them did not come. Again, the reward will accord with the desires of the heart. Though men may deceive each other, none will deceive God. Nor will there be so much as a single soul from one end of eternity to the other who will be denied the blessings of heaven because of circumstances beyond his or her control.

Little Children Who Die Before the Years of Accountability Are Saved in the Kingdom of Heaven

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 137:10

137:10 All children who die . . . are saved in the celestial kingdom. Little children shall live! What more perfect evidence of an omniscient and loving God than the doctrine which proclaims that little children who die are heirs of celestial glory! From these no blessing shall be withheld and to such no opportunities will be denied. The testimony of the Book of Mormon and the latter- day oracles is certain and clear: children who die before the age of accountability shall come forth in the resurrection of the just and go on to enjoy all of the privileges associated with eternal life and the family unit.

As a result of his vision of the celestial kingdom, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded, "I also beheld that all children who die before they arrive at the years of accountability are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10). This idea was not entirely new to the Prophet, for he had learned from the Book of Mormon and previous revelations of the Lord's disposition in regard to the status of children. An angel explained to King Benjamin that "the infant perisheth not that dieth in his infancy" (Mosiah 3:18). After having described the nature of those who come forth in the first resurrection, Abinadi said simply, "And little children also have eternal life" (Mosiah 15:25). A revelation given in September of 1830 specified that "little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten" (D&C 29:46).
