Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 138

DATE: 3 OCTOBER 1918

PLACE: SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

This revelation, generally known as the vision of the redemption of the dead, was given to Joseph F. Smith, sixth president of the Church, the day before the October conference of 1918. It was received in the Beehive House, where the president of the Church and his family lived. After the conference he dictated it to his son and namesake, Joseph Fielding Smith Jr., then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, who in turn became the tenth president of the Church. On 31 October it was submitted to President Smith's counselors, the Quorum of the Twelve, and the patriarch, and was unanimously accepted by them. It was not, however, added to the canon of scripture until 1978. Before that time it had been available to the Saints for many years in the book Gospel Doctrine, a compilation taken from President Smith's sermons.

President Smith had been ill for the five months before the October 1918 general conference and undoubtedly had pondered his own passing (which took place the following month) and wondered about the nature of the ministry that would be his in the spirit world. In January of that year he had witnessed what seemed the untimely death of his son Hyrum Mack Smith, then only forty-five years of age and also a member of the Quorum of the Twelve. This was a source of grief to President Smith, who also sought understanding about why Hyrum had been taken and the nature of his labors in the world of spirits.

In the opening session of that conference, President Joseph F. Smith said, "I will not, I dare not, attempt to enter upon many things that are resting upon my mind this morning, and I shall postpone until some future time, the Lord being willing, my attempt to tell you some of the things that are in my mind, and that dwell in my heart. I have not lived alone these five months. I have dwelt in the spirit of prayer, of supplication, of faith and of determination; and I have had my communication with the Spirit of the Lord continuously" (Conference Report, October 1918, 2).

Peter's References to Christ's Visit to the Spirits in Prison

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 138:1-10

138:3 Love made manifest by the Father and the Son. In all things the restored gospel outreaches the gospel known to historical Christianity. Where they speak of being saved by the grace of Christ, a more perfect understanding embraces the knowledge that we are saved by the grace of both the Father and Son. By the grace of the Father we were born as his spirit offspring, given the gift of agency, and provided with a plan whereby we might obtain the fulness of all that he has. By the grace of Christ, we can obtain a remission of sins, be resurrected, and return to the presence of our Father.

138:5 The writings of Peter. One of the most difficult theological questions facing the historical Christian world is what becomes of those who died without the opportunity to accept Christ while they lived. What has to be of particular interest to Latter-day Saints is the historical Christians' near universal refusal to give credence to the references made by Peter to the visit of Christ to the world of the spirits and his statement that those in the spirit world are to be judged according to men in the flesh. They also refuse a place in their thought to the many historical references to the faith of the meridian Saints that the faithful in this life would be involved in teaching the gospel to those who died without hearing it.

Early commentary on the statement in Hebrews that "they without us should not be made perfect" (Hebrews 11:40) holds that the passage referred to the Old Testament Saints who were trapped in Hades awaiting the help of their New Testament counterparts and that Christ held the keys that would "open the doors of the Underworld to the faithful souls there" (MacCulloch, Harrowing of Hell, 48-49). Significantly, Justin Martyr in his work Dialogue with Trypho cites an apocryphon which he claims was deleted from Jeremiah but is still found in some synagogue copies. It read: "The Lord God remembered His dead people of Israel who lay in the graves; and He descended to preach to them His own salvation" (MacCulloch, Harrowing of Hell, 84-85.) Irenaeus is also recorded as saying, "The Lord descended to the parts under the earth, announcing to them also the good news of his coming, there being remission of sins for such as believe on him" (Irenaeus, Against Heresies, 499).

Another of the early Christian documents that linked the writings of Peter on the teaching of the gospel in the spirit world with those of Paul on baptism for the dead (1 Corinthians 15:29) is the "Shepherd of Hermas" which states that "these, the apostles and the teachers who preached the name of the Son of God, after they had fallen asleep in the power and faith of the Son of God, preached also to them that had fallen asleep before them, and themselves gave unto them the seal of the preaching. Therefore they went down with them into the water, and came up again. But these went down alive [and again came up alive]; whereas the others that had fallen asleep before them, went down dead and came up alive. So by their means they were quickened into life, and came to the full knowledge of the name of the Son of God" (Lightfoot, Apostolic Fathers, 232).

Christ's Ministry among the Spirits in Paradise

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 138:12-24

138:12-14 These three verses, which constitute two sentences, provide greater understanding of the faith of those who lived before the coming of Christ than can be found in the voluminous writings of the world's best Old Testament scholars. By revelation we learn that, when gathered together, the faithful Saints in Old Testament times constituted an "innumerable company," which in turn suggests that the message of salvation was much more extensively known among the nations of the earth than has been thought. We also have it affirmed for us that they knew of Christ and were faithful to their testimony of him, for which testimony they suffered tribulation. Further, we are told that they knew Christ to be "the Son of God" and the source of their redemption from the effects of Adam's fall. We learn that they fully understood the symbolism and purpose of the law of sacrifice. Further still, we learn that they understood that salvation came to them through the grace of God, whom they knew to be their Father and through the grace of his Son, Jesus Christ, who was the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh. None of these truths can be understood from the Old Testament as it has come to us, none of them are a part of the understanding of the scholarly world, yet all of them are fundamental to an understanding of the fulness of the gospel that we as Latter-day Saints know these ancient Saints to have had.

138:12 Gathered together in one place. The place referred to is paradise. The meeting could be likened to a general conference of the Church, one to which only those who died in the faith are admitted.

An innumerable company. All faithful and righteous souls who had lived from the days of Adam to the time of Christ's death were assembled. Speaking more than a hundred years earlier, Alma said, "There were many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 13:12). They are spoken of in verse 18 as a "vast multitude."

138:15 Joy and gladness . . . rejoicing. The message of salvation, or gospel of Jesus Christ, often referred to as "glad tidings," has ever been attended by a spirit of joy and gladness. It was greeted by us and our kindred spirits in the councils of heaven with songs of praise and shouts of joy (Job 38:7). Jacob, as spokesman for all who have carefully pondered the goodness of the gospel, expressed such praise as, "O the wisdom of God, his mercy and grace!" "O how great the goodness of our God," and "O how great the plan of our God!" (2 Nephi 9:8, 10, 13).

138:16 Awaiting the advent of the Son of God . . . to declare their redemption. Redemption from the bands of death. See Doctrine and Covenants 138:18.

138:17 Its perfect frame. Only Alma 11:45 can rival this text as a definition of resurrection. Alma explains, "Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, And also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption."

138:18 The chains of death. All who descend from Adam, no matter how many generations removed, must die. All are subject to the effects of his fall, and in death the righteous as well as the wicked are said to go to "spirit prison" because they are yet to be redeemed from their fallen state. Thus, scripture refers to the righteous dead as being subject to the "bands of death" (v. 16) or "the chains of death," and as being "captives" waiting the day of their "liberty."

Declaring liberty to the captives. As Jesus began his mortal ministry, he quoted the great prophet Isaiah who states that Christ would "bind up the brokenhearted," "proclaim liberty to the captives," and open "the prison to them that are bound" (Isaiah 61:1). It is significant that Jesus proclaimed his mission as one that extended beyond death. He was called not only to heal and comfort the living but "to comfort all that mourn" (Isaiah 61:2), including the captives of the spirit world.

138:19 He preached unto them the everlasting gospel. Having just completed a week of unmatched drama with which he could have held his listeners spellbound, Christ chose simply to teach the "everlasting gospel." To the likes of Adam, Enoch, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Nephi, Jacob, and Alma, he taught the doctrine of "resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall."

138:20-21 Among the disembodied spirits, only those who had proven themselves true and faithful, only those who had complied with the laws and ordinances of the gospel while in the flesh, were among those assembled to greet Christ and to be taught by him. Such is the pattern. The resurrected Christ did not appear to Caiaphas and the Sanhedrin or to the Jews who jeered and rejected him or to the soldiers who mocked and ridiculed him. Rather, he appeared to his humble followers in the upper room and later, Paul tells us, to above 500 of the faithful in Galilee (1 Corinthians 15:6). His appearance to those in the New World was only to the faithful, for the wicked were destroyed before his visitations there. Such we understand will be the case until that great and dreadful day when, clothed in red, he comes to take vengeance upon the wicked (D&C 133:48; 138:37).

138:24 Sang praises unto his holy name. From premortal councils to the splendor of the eternal worlds, the song of the righteous will be one of praise for their God.

The Beginning of Missionary Work in the Spirit World

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 138:25-37

138:27 The brief time intervening between the crucifixion and his resurrection. From the time Christ "gave up the ghost" on Friday afternoon (Mark 15:37) to the time of his resurrection on Sunday morningthree days as the Jews measure timewould have spanned thirty-eight to forty hours.

138:30 He organized his forces and appointed messengers. It is a sacred privilege to teach the gospel. It is a right that one does not arrogate to oneself. To those of our dispensation, the Lord said, "Again I say unto you, that it shall not be given to any one to go forth to preach my gospel, or to build up my church, except he be ordained by some one who has authority" (D&C 42:11). This principle is as eternal as the gospel itself. Similarly, none could lay claim to the gospel without a legal administrator. This too is as eternal as the gospel. Thus, though there was a great host, including prophets and righteous men in the world of spirits, men who had preached the gospel while in the flesh with great power and force, before the arrival of the Savior none had been commissioned to take the gospel to those who did not have it.

138:31 To declare the acceptable day of the Lord. This is a phrase from Isaiah (Isaiah 61:2), which could be rendered "the time of the Lord's favor," which we would understand to mean the day in which his promise is to be fulfilled.

Unto all who would repent of their sins. Repentance is as much a part of the gospel in the spirit world as it is in mortality.

138:32 Thus the gospel was preached to those who had died. Both those who died without hearing the gospel in mortality and those who rejected the words of the prophets while in the flesh are to hear the gospel in the spirit world. That is to say the gospel will be taught to all who will listen. Those who had the opportunity to receive the gospel in this life (God being their judge) and who rejected it, may accept it in the spirit world to their blessing but not to their exaltation (see commentary on D&C 76:73-74; 137:7-9). This is not to suggest that there is no repentance in the spirit world. This revelation states that "the dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances of the house of God. And after they have paid the penalty of their transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according to their works, for they are heirs of salvation" (D&C138:58-59).

138:33-34 Death makes no change in gospel principles. The plan of salvation is the same for the living as it is for the dead. To know the gospel in our second estate is to know the gospel in the spirit world and in the resurrection. Our revelations promise that "whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection" (D&C 130:18).

The question is often asked as to whether it is harder or easier to accept the gospel in the spirit world. If those in that sphere are to be "judged according to men in the flesh," it must of necessity require the same degree of faith and courage to accept and live the gospel there as here. For those who have accorded their lives with gospel principles, accepting the gospel will be a natural step in their progression. Those whose lives were devoted to debauchery, wickedness, and warring against light and truth will have the greatest of difficulty in changing their course.

138:37 That they might carry the message of redemption unto all the dead. Relative to the manner in which the gospel will be taught in the spirit world, President Joseph F. Smith explained, "Now, among all these millions of spirits that have lived on the earth and have passed away, from generation to generation, since the beginning of the world, without the knowledge of the gospelamong them you may count that at least one- half are women. Who is going to preach the gospel to the women? Who is going to carry the testimony of Jesus Christ to the hearts of the women who have passed away without a knowledge of the gospel? Well, to my mind, it is a simple thing. These good sisters who have been set apart, ordained to the work, called to it, authorized by the authority of the Holy Priesthood to minister for their sex, in the House of God for the living and for the dead, will be fully authorized and empowered to preach the gospel and minister to the women while the elders and prophets are preaching it to the men. The things we experience here are typical of the things of God and the life beyond us. There is a great similarity between God's purposes as manifested here and his purposes as carried out in his presence and kingdom. Those who are authorized to preach the gospel here and are appointed here to do that work will not be idle after they have passed away, but will continue to exercise the rights that they obtained here under the Priesthood of the Son of God to minister for the salvation of those who have died without a knowledge of the truth" (Gospel Doctrine, 461).

Even Paradise Is a Bondage to the Righteous Dead

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 138:38-52

138:50 A bondage. "The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy" (D&C 93:33-34).

A Second Vision of the Spirit World, Including Great Leaders from Our Dispensation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 138:53-60

138:53-60 Having witnessed the visit of the Savior to the world of spirits while his body lay in the borrowed tomb of Joseph of Arimathaea, the scene now changes so that President Joseph F. Smith is invited to view things in the spirit world as they were at the time he received this vision in October of 1918. There is no justification in the supposition that premortal spirits (Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, and Wilford Woodruff) mingled with the disembodied spirits during the visit of Christ to them in the meridian of time. Those described as being present included the faithful from Adam to Malachi (vv. 38-46) and the Book of Mormon prophets (v. 49), all of whom had complied with the law of sacrifice as practiced in the Old Testament (vv. 12-14) and had received the power of resurrection (v. 51).

It is common for a vision of this sort to change scenes, including time and place. The vision of John the Revelator in the book of Revelation, that of Nephi in 1 Nephi 11-14, and that of the Prophet Joseph Smith in Doctrine and Covenants 76 are classic examples. What President Smith now sees is a vision of those who had been "reserved to come forth in the fulness of times" to lay the foundation of the "great latter-day work." Having completed their labors in the flesh, they now continued them in the spirit world. Verses 55 and 56 may well be a flashback to our first estate.

138:57 I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation. President Wilford Woodruff explained that in the spirit world "every Apostle, every Seventy, every Elder, etc., who has died in the faith as soon as he passes to the other side of the vail, enters into the work of the ministry, and there is a thousand times more to preach [to] there than there is here" (Journal of Discourses, 22:334).

138:59 After they have paid the penalty of their transgressions. In the previous verse we are assured that the dead can repent. We know that there is no true repentance without suffering (Alma 42:16-18). It naturally follows that those in the spirit world who repent will be involved in the same process that they would have been involved in had they lived to do their repenting in this life. If they are to be judged according to men in the flesh, they too must pay "the penalty of their transgressions." One illustration of this principle could include those who, in a state of despondency, commit suicide. While not negating the seriousness of this transgression, it would be our hope that there will be those who, in the course of time, having "paid the penalty" will be able to right their lives (Ballard, Suicide, 52-54).
