Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10

DATE: SUMMER 1828

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

Doctrine and Covenants 3 and 10 are companion revelations. In Doctrine and Covenants 3, the Prophet learned of the provisions the Lord had made many generations earlier, even while the Book of Mormon was being written, to provide for the loss of the 116 pages which he had translated from the book of Lehi. Perhaps more is involved in this story than a dramatic lesson on obedience by the youthful prophet. It could well be that the experience obtained while translating this portion of the ancient record was also foreseen as a necessary part of his schooling as he prepared himself for the sacred task of translating.

Doctrine and Covenants 3 was obtained by the use of the Urim and Thummim, after which it and the plates were again taken from the Prophet. In a few days they were returned. Again, through the Urim and Thummim, the Prophet inquired of the Lord and received the revelation recorded in section 10.

There has been considerable discussion concerning the date this revelation was given. Current editions of the Doctrine and Covenants place the date as the summer of 1828; editions prior to 1921 give the date as 1829. It appears that the revelation was given in 1828 and that some additions were made in 1829. For instance, early in the revelation, the Lord stated that the power to translate "is now restored" to the Prophet Joseph Smith. Later, the Lord referred to the translation of the books of Mosiah through Moroni in the past tense (D&C 10:3, 41).

The Gift of Translation Is Restored to the Prophet

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:1-4

10:1 By the means of the Urim and Thummim. The reference to the "Urim and Thummim" in this text was added in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. Prior to that, the word interpreters was used (see commentary on D&C 8:6). It appears that while Joseph Smith was laboring on the translation of the Old Testament, he became acquainted with the revelatory device known to the ancients as the Urim and Thummim. Recognizing this term to be the same as the instrument that he had been given to translate the Book of Mormon and use in the receipt of revelation, he adopted the Bible term and added clarification by inserting "Urim and Thummim" in the approprate texts.

The Book of Mormon spoke of "two stones" fastened into the "two rims of a bow" as the "interpreters" (Mosiah 28:13, 20; Ether 3:23). Thus it was natural for the earliest members of the Church to speak of the "interpreters" (later to be called Urim and Thummim) as seer stones.

The description of the Urim and Thummim being fastened to the breastplate of the high priest of Israel, as recorded in Exodus 28, most likely opened the Prophet's mind to association between the two. The translation of the material in this chapter of Exodus was recorded sometime between 2 February and 2 July 1833 (Matthews, Plainer Translation, 79). Earlier references to the interpreters as the Urim and Thummim are tentative. For example, in January 1833 William W. Phelps, editor of the Church newspaper, The Evening and the Morning Star, wrote regarding the Book of Mormon: "It was translated by the gift and power of God, by an unlearned man, through the aid of a pair of interpreters, or spectacles- (known perhaps, in ancient days as Teraphim, or Urim and Thummim)" (1:58).

After the Prophet's experience with translating the Old Testament, references to the Nephite interpreters as the Urim and Thummim were more definite. For instance, in October 1834, Oliver Cowdery testified: "Day after day I continued, uninterrupted, to write from his [Joseph's] mouth, as he translated, with the Urim and Thummim, or, as the Nephites would have said, 'Interpreters,' the history, or record, called 'The book of Mormon'" (Messenger and Advocate, 1:14). See also the note following the end of Joseph Smith-History, 58.

At the time of the publication of the Doctrine and Covenants in 1835, wording of the revelations was reviewed by the publication committee, which included the Prophet Joseph Smith. Three years later, when the Prophet dictated his history, he made clear the association between the interpreters, or seer stones, and the Urim and Thummim. He explained that "these stones, fastened to a breastplate, constituted what is called the Urim and Thummim" (Joseph Smith-History 1:35).

The night that Moroni first appeared to Joseph, he explained to him "that there were two stones in silver bows . . . deposited with the plates; and the possession and use of these stones were what constituted 'seers' in ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the purpose of translating the book" (Joseph Smith-History 1:35). Previously, these stones were given to the brother of Jared to be included with his writings. At that time, the Lord told the brother of Jared, "The language which ye shall write I have confounded; wherefore I will cause in my own due time that these stones shall magnify to the eyes of men these things which ye shall write" (Ether 3:24). In Doctrine and Covenants 17 the connection between the stones given to the brother of Jared and the Urim and Thummim is confirmed. That revelation stated that the Three Witnesses would view "the Urim and Thummim, which were given to the brother of Jared upon the mount, when he talked with the Lord face to face" (D&C 17:1).

The Book of Mormon tells us that Limhi's people discovered the plates of Ether, which contained the brother of Jared's writings. Subsequently, the plates were given to King Mosiah who "translated them by the means of those two stones which were fastened into the two rims of a bow" (Mosiah 28:13). How Mosiah received the stones is not known. Neither is it evident who placed them in the rims of a bow. Mormon wrote that over the centuries the stones had "been kept and preserved by the hand of the Lord" (Mosiah 28:15). The interpreters were passed from one record keeper to the next until Mormon gave them to Moroni. Moroni then placed them in the Hill Cumorah with the plates and the breastplate in the stone box specially prepared to contain these items.

The Prophet Joseph Smith described the Urim and Thummim as "two transparent stones set in the rim of a bow fastened to a breastplate" (History of the Church, 4:537). Lucy Mack Smith was able to inspect the Urim and Thummim the morning after Joseph had obtained them from the Hill Cumorah. She stated that she "took the article in [her] hands and, examining it with no covering but a silk handkerchief, found that it consisted of two smooth three-cornered diamonds set in glass, and the glasses were set in silver bows connected with each other in much the same way that old-fashioned spectacles are made" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 139). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:35, page 21; Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-10.

10:2 Your mind became darkened. The mental faculties of the Prophet Joseph Smith were affected by his disobedience in allowing the 116-page manuscript to leave his possession. "That wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth, through disobedience, from the children of men" (D&C 93:39). Once the Spirit, or light, had been taken away, Joseph could no longer translate.

10:3 It is now restored unto you again. Both the Urim and Thummim and the plates were taken from Joseph as a consequence of losing the 116-page manuscript. Later, both were returned to him, and the Lord granted the gift of translation once again. "I continued my supplications to God, without cessation," Joseph explained, "and on the twenty-second of September [1828], I had the joy and satisfaction of again receiving the Urim and Thummim, with which I have again commenced translating, and Emma writes for me, but the angel said that the Lord would send me a scribe, and I trust that it will be so. The angel was rejoiced when he gave me back the Urim and Thummim, and he told me that the Lord was pleased with my faithfulness and humility, and loved me for my penitence and diligence in prayer, in the which I had performed my duty so well as to receive the Urim and Thummim and was able to enter upon the work of translation again" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 176).

Continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of translation. Joseph Smith was not to retranslate the engravings from the plates of Lehi. He commenced translating where he left off. He had already translated the abridgment made by Mormon up to the book of Mosiah. This means that he had translated the accounts from the time of Lehi leaving Jerusalem through the time of King Benjamin. The renewed efforts of translation began with Mosiah chapter one. After finishing the trans lation of the plates through the book of Moroni, Joseph then continued as instructed in this revelation to translate the small plates of Nephi, or what we know as First and Second Nephi, Jacob, Enos, Jarom, Omni, and the Words of Mormon. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 10:35-43.

10:4 Means provided to enable you to translate. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:30-34; introduction to commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6-9.

Satan Seeks Joseph's Destruction

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:5-9

10:5 The hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work. All who work evil are servants of the adversary. "That which is evil cometh of the devil," taught Mormon, "for the devil is an enemy unto God, and fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and to do that which is evil continually" (Moroni 7:12).

10:6 They have sought to destroy you. When Martin Harris violated the covenant he made with the Prophet, his actions became those of a servant of the devil. "The moment we revolt at anything which comes from God, the devil takes power," the Prophet said (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181).

10:8-9 You have delivered them up. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 3:5, "You have been entrusted with these things."

Satan's Plan to Destroy the Work of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:10-34

10:10-13 Satan hath put it into their hearts to alter the words. The practice of distorting the words of God and tampering with scripture is as old as the written word. Those who will deceive with the spoken word will also deceive with the written word. Such has ever been the case. In the 1980s, Mark Hoffman, through the use of forged documents, convinced some people not to believe the account of the Prophet Joseph Smith concerning the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. He cunningly insinua ted that Joseph Smith had altered his story concerning the details of the manner in which he received the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. He forged documents that had superstitious references to the occult and claimed them to be written by those close to the Prophet. His ploy centered in the infamous "salamander letter," in which Martin Harris was purported to have written that a white salamander appeared to Joseph to inform him about the plates in the Hill Cumorah. Moreover, Hoffman planned to produce a forgery of the lost 116 pages with "references to money- digging and folk magic that were consistent with the letters" (Lindsey, Gathering of Saints, 381). In like manner, historical Christianity has been deluged with pseudepigraphic (writings falsely attributed to biblical characters, and alleged to have been written in biblical times) and apocryphal works that, during periods of debate, sustain their writers' views. Thus it is as the Prophet told us: things would be both taken from and added to the holy book (1 Nephi 13:23-30; D&C 91).

10:14 I will not suffer that Satan shall accomplish his evil design. By revealing Satan's designs, the Lord thwarted those designs. The following was published in the first edition of the Book of Mormon: "To the readerAs many false reports have been circulated respecting the following work, and also many unlawful measures taken by evil designing persons to destroy me, and also the work, I would inform you that I translated, by the gift and power of God, and caused to be written, one hundred and sixteen pages, the which I took from the book of Lehi, which was an account abridged from the plates of Lehi, by the hand of Mormon; which said account, some person or persons have stolen and kept from me, notwithstanding my utmost exertions to recover it again and being commanded of the Lord that I should not translate the same over again, for Satan had put it into their hearts to tempt the Lord their God, by altering the words, that they did read contrary from that which I translated and caused to be written; and if I should bring forth the same words again, or, in other words, if I should translate the same over again, they would publish that which they had stolen, and Satan would stir up the hearts of this generation, that they might not receive this work; but behold, the Lord said unto me, I will not suffer that Satan shall accomplish his evil design in this thing; therefore thou shalt translate from the plates of Nephi, until ye come to that which ye have translated, which ye have retained; and behold ye shall publish it as the record of Nephi; and thus I will confound those who have altered my words. I will not suffer that they shall destroy my work; yea, I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:56-57).

By publishing this information, it became futile for the men who had the pages of translation and had altered them to carry out their plans. Indeed, if the men revealed that they had the pages, they would also reveal that not only were they thieves but also that they were the designing men identified in the preface of the Book of Mormon.

10:20-26 He draggeth their souls down to hell. In Satan's attempt to destroy Joseph and the work of the Restoration, he was able to take a few souls captive. Through his "great hold upon their hearts" (D&C 10:20) he was able to make them like unto himself, liars that oppose the work of God. This was possible because these individuals "love[d] darkness rather than light" (D&C 10:21). These hapless souls were caught in the traps they had dug for another (1 Nephi 22:14).

10:28 Wo be unto him that lieth to deceive because he supposeth that another lieth to deceive. The idea that lying is justified if its purpose is to catch someone in a lie is a revelation as dark as the kingdom from which it came. It is a common experience for missionaries to be confronted by efforts born of such darkness on the part of priests and ministers whose purpose is to keep their parishioners from reading the Book or Mormon, listening to the message of the Restoration, or from being baptized. The servant of light cannot advance his cause with darkness. We cannot fight the adversary with his own spirit or his methods; to do so is to give him the victory.

10:32 Satan will harden the hearts of the people to stir them up to anger against you. "The devil has great power to deceive," taught the Prophet Joseph Smith; "he will so transform things as to make one gape at those who are doing the will of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 227). "Woe unto them," wrote Isaiah, "that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!" (Isaiah 5:20; 2 Nephi 16-20).

The Lord's Plan Regarding the 116-Page Manuscript

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:35-45

10:35-43 More than two thousand three hundred years before the loss of that which Joseph Smith had translated from the plates of Lehi, the Lord inspired his prophet to make a provision for that event. Nephi was commanded to make two sets of records concerning the Lord's dealings with his family. The first set of records was "an account of the reign of the kings, and the wars and contentions of [the] people" (1 Nephi 9:4). Nephi wrote that the second set was made "for [a] special purpose" not understood by him (1 Nephi 9:3). "But the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men" (1 Nephi 9:6).

Both sets of plates, known as the large and the small plates of Nephi, were handed down from generation to generation for nearly one thousand years until they were committed into the hands of the prophet Mormon. While Mormon labored on his abridgment of the ancient records, he felt impressed to include Nephi's second set of plates, the small plates of Nephi, in their entirety. This is all the more remarkable because Mormon had already finished an abridgment of the same time period covered on this second set of plates as it was contained on the large plates of Nephi and had indicated that he could not include nearly as much as he would have liked to.

"After I had made an abridgment from the plates of Nephi," Moroni said, "down to the reign of this king Benjamin, of whom Amaleki spake, I searched among the records which had been delivered into my hands, and I found these plates, which contained this small account of the prophets, from Jacob down to the reign of this king Benjamin, and also many of the words of Nephi. And the things which are upon these plates pleasing me, because of the prophecies of the coming of Christ; . . . wherefore, I chose these things, to finish my record upon them. . . . And I do this for a wise purpose; for thus it whispereth me, according to the workings of the Spirit of the Lord which is in me. And now, I do not know all things; but the Lord knoweth all things which are to come; wherefore, he worketh in me to do according to his will" (Words of Mormon 1:3-5, 7).

Thus, the Lord instructed his servants, Nephi and Mormon, to prepare a similar account of the same time period covered in the 116-page manuscript that was lost. These preparations allowed the Prophet Joseph Smith to translate from a separate record than the one whose translation had been altered by the wicked men who had the manuscript. It appears that the Savior was referring to these events in his instructions to the Nephites during his visit to the Americas following his resurrection. "But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand; therefore they shall not hurt him, although he shall be marred because of them. Yet I will heal him, for I will show unto them that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil" (3 Nephi 21:10).

Significantly, the entire plan of salvation, as announced in the councils of heaven, rests on similar foreknowledge. The atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ was foreordained to come in answer to the fall of Adam. Knowing that Adam would fall and that all would sin, the Lord made provisions for us to be redeemed through the atonement of Christ.

10:37 You cannot always tell the wicked from the righteous. The wisdom of God far surpasses that of mortal man. Even prophets and apostles do not always discern the intents of those who would betray them. The Lord warned the early Saints, "Behold, verily I say unto you, there are hypo crites among you, who have deceived some, which has given the adversary power; but behold such shall be reclaimed; But the hypocrites shall be detected and shall be cut off, either in life or in death, even as I will; and wo unto them who are cut off from my church, for the same are overcome of the world. Wherefore, let every man beware lest he do that which is not in truth and righteousness before me" (D&C 50:7-9).

10:41 See commentary on verse 3, "Continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of translation."

10:44 An abridgment of the account of Nephi. In the introductory material published with the first edition of the Book of Mormon, the Prophet Joseph Smith indicated that the account lost in the 116-page manuscript was taken "from the book of Lehi, which was an account abridged from the plates of Lehi, by the hand of Mormon." Nephi made an abridgment of his father Lehi's record before he wrote an account of his own life on the small plates of Nephi. Today, the Book of Mormon contains a translation of Nephi's abridgment (1 Nephi 1:16-17).

10:45 The plates of Nephi which do throw greater views upon my gospel. The books of First and Second Nephi along with the writings of Jacob are in doctrinal content virtually without peer in scripture.

Book of Mormon Prophets Wrote to Their Descendants

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:46-55

10:46 All the remainder of this work. This phrase refers to Mormon's abridgment of the large plates of Nephi, Moroni's abridgment of the plates of Ether, and Moroni's writings. These include the books of Mosiah through Moroni in the Book of Mormon.

My disciples, desired in their prayers should come forth unto this people. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 3:19.

10:48 All that had become Lamanites because of their dissensions. During the time of the Zion society that followed the visit of the Savior to the Americas, there were no divisions among the people, "neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ" (4 Nephi 1:17). The previous designations of Nephites and Lamanites lost their meaning and importance. Sometime before one hundred and ninety-four years had passed since the signs were given in the Americas of the Savior's birth, "a small part of the people who had revolted from the church and taken upon them the name of Lamanites; therefore there began to be Lamanites again in the land" (4 Nephi 1:20). It was not until two hundred and thirty-one years after Christ's birth that "there was a great division among the people. Therefore the true believers in Christ, and the true worshipers of Christ, . . . were called Nephites, and Jacobites, and Josephites, and Zoramites. And it came to pass that they who rejected the gospel were called Lamanites, and Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites" (4 Nephi 1:35, 37-38). During the great last battles of his people, Mormon indicated that among the Nephites there were "a few who had deserted over unto the Lamanites" (Mormon 6:15).

Because of dissensions, some of those who were descendants of Nephi had become Lamanites. The Book of Mormon prophets prayed that their words might come to their descendants in the latter days. Those who are known today as Lamanites may very well have the blood of Nephi in their veins but are considered Lamanites because of the dissension practiced by their forefathers.

The Lord Establishes His Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:53-63

10:54-62 In response to his critics, who were threatened by the presence of a living prophet and new revelation, the Lord declared, "Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil" (Matthew 5:17). Similarly, those threatened for the same reasons in our day have attacked the Book of Mormon as their ancient counterparts did the Christ, saying it destroys the Bible. When indeed, one of its chief purposes is to fulfill Bible prophecy. In addition, it stands as an independent witness of Bible truths. In similar fashion, the Restoration did not destroy the community of believers in Christ but built up the true and living church to which the honest in heart gather.

Those who harden their hearts against the Lord and his work declare, "A Bible! A Bible! We have got a Bible, and there cannot be any more Bible" (2 Nephi 29:3). On the other hand, those who truly receive Christ's words will receive the Book of Mormon with thankful hearts and willing minds. Writing of the Book of Mormon, Nephi taught, "And if ye shall believe in Christ ye will believe in these words, for they are the words of Christ, and he hath given them unto me" (2 Nephi 33:10).

10:63 They do wrest the scriptures and do not understand them. It is the ploy of devils to use the scriptures to stir up the hearts of people to contend against the Restoration. As the religious leaders in the days of Christ used scripture to reject him, so the words of Christ and his ancient apostles are used to reject their modern counterparts. The true intent of the words of the Lord and his servants is twisted and misconstrued to create a counterfeit gospel. Like Paul, before his conversion, these cynics "kick against the pricks," meaning that they find in their religious traditions justification to reject and persecute the Saints, while their hearts are pricked with the knowledge that that which they war against is the truth.

Those Whose Hearts Are Right

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 10:64-70

10:67 The same is my church. This phrase refers to those whose hearts are right and ready to receive the fulness of the gospel. Though the Church had not yet been organized, there were those whose love of truth was such that they are spoken of as if they were members of that church, for indeed they yet will be. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 18:4, "Concerning the foundation of my church;" 137:7-9.

10:69 My rock. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 18:4, "My gospel, and my rock;" 128:10, "Upon this rock."

The gates of hell shall not prevail against them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 21:6, "The gates of hell shall not prevail against you;" 128:10, "The gates of hell shall not prevail."
