Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

OFFICIAL DECLARATION 1

DATE: 24 SEPTEMBER 1889

PLACE: SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

On 16 May 1843, in Ramus, Illinois, the Prophet Joseph Smith, said: "Except a man and his wife enter into an everlasting covenant and be married for eternity, while in this probation, by the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood, they will cease to increase when they die; that is, they will not have any children after the resurrection. But those who are married by the power and authority of the priesthood in this life, and continue without committing the sin against the Holy Ghost, will continue to increase and have children in the celestial glory. . . . In the celestial glory there are three heavens or degrees; and in order to obtain the highest, a man must enter into this order of the priesthood [meaning the new and everlasting covenant of marriage]; and if he does not, he cannot obtain it. He may enter into the other, but that is the end of his kingdom; he cannot have an increase" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 300-301; D&C 131:1-4).

On 12 July 1843, the Prophet dictated the revelation on the eternity of the marriage covenant, including plurality of wives, to his scribe William Clayton in Nauvoo. In addition to teaching the necessity of marriage for time and eternity as performed by the proper priesthood authority, this revelation announced the conditions under which the Lord permitted his servants to take plural wives.

The keys to perform both eternal marriages and to authorize a plurality of wives had been given to Joseph Smith: "I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred" (D&C 132:7). Any ceremony to bind man and woman together beyond the period of mortal life or to give the right to take plural wives which is not done under the direction of this authority will be of no efficacy or force when people are out of the world.

"There is but one person on the earth at a time upon whom the keys of this sealing ordinance are conferred. That man is the Presiding High Priest, the President of the Church. He is the bearer of this authority, which he may exercise personally or he may commission others to exercise it under his jurisdiction, for such time, long or short, up to the end of his life, as he may desire.

"It was after the revelation of July, 1843, which provided that under certain conditions, which are clearly defined, a man may receive more than one woman to be his wife, that plural marriage became a recognized doctrine of the Church. Under this system family ties were established and relationships entered into which were held sacred and binding, not alone by those who accepted and entered into the order of plural marriage, but by all who had become members of the Church" (Clark, Messages, 5:319).

The years that followed witnessed ceaseless criticism of the Church and relentless persecution of those who had entered into the relationship of plural marriage. Legislation regarding plural marriage was enacted by the Congress of the United States during the years 1862 to 1887 in three successive acts known as the Morrill Act, the Edmunds Act, and the Edmunds-Tucker Act.

"Under the provisions of the Edmunds-Tucker law the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was disincorporated, the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company was dissolved, and all property belonging to the Church, with the exception of buildings used exclusively for religious worship, was escheated to the government.

"Hundreds of men who had contracted plural marriages were heavily fined, and imprisoned. All persons who could not subscribe to a test oath which was provided especially for those who practiced or believed in the practice of plural marriage, were disfranchised.

"It became obvious that no human power could prevent the disintegration of the Church, except upon a pledge by its members to obey the laws which had been enacted prohibiting the practice of polygamy" (Clark, Messages, 5:320).

It was under these circumstances that Wilford Woodruff, then the president of the Church, announced the Official Declaration to the Church and to the People of the United States, commonly referred to as the Manifesto. President Woodruff wrote in his journal: "I have arrived at a point in the history of my life as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints where I am under the necessity of acting for the temporal salvation of the Church. . . . and after praying to the Lord and feeling inspired, I have issued the following proclamation which is sustained by my counselors and the Twelve Apostles" (Clark, Messages, 3:192).

After reviewing the enactment of the law prohibiting the practice of plural marriage and the effects of its enforcement, President Woodruff, in this declaration, said: "Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by Congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the Court of last resort, I do hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use all my influence with the members of the church over which I preside to have them do likewise. . . . And I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the laws of the land" (Clark, Messages, 3:193).

The Manifesto was signed by President Woodruff as president of the Church. A motion in the October conference of that year called for the members of the Church to sustain what President Woodruff had done:

"I move that, recognizing Wilford Woodruff as the President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the only man on the earth at the present time who holds the keys of the sealing ordinances, we consider him fully authorized by virtue of his position to issue the manifesto which has been read in our hearing, and which is dated September 24th, 1890, and that as a Church in General Conference assembled, we accept his declaration concerning plural marriages as authoritative and binding" (Clark, Messages, 3:195).

The vote to sustain the motion was unanimous.

Soon afterward, on 1 November 1891, President Woodruff provided additional understanding relative to the Manifesto:

"I saw exactly what would come to pass if there was not something done. I have had this spirit upon me for a long time. But I want to say this: I should have let all the temples go out of our hands; I should have gone to prison myself, and let every other man go there, had not the God of heaven commanded me to do what I did do; and when the hour came that I was commanded to do that, it was all clear to me. I went before the Lord, and I wrote what the Lord told me to write. I laid it before my brethren such strong men as Brother George Q. Cannon, Brother Joseph F. Smith, and the Twelve Apostles. I might as well undertake to turn an army with banners out of its course as to turn them out of a course that they considered to be right. These men agreed with me, and ten thousand Latter-day Saints also agreed with me. Why? Because they were moved upon by the Spirit of God and by the revelations of Jesus Christ to do it" (Discourses of Wilford Woodruff, 217).
