Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

OFFICIAL DECLARATION 2

DATE: 1 JUNE 1978

PLACE: SALT LAKE TEMPLE

On Thursday, 1 June 1978, President Spencer W. Kimball, while meeting with his counselors in the First Presidency and the Twelve in the Salt Lake Temple, indicated that for months he had been giving prayerful consideration to the matter of conferring the priesthood upon those of all races and that he felt the need for divine guidance. He explained that he had spent many hours in the upper room in the temple pleading with the Lord for counsel and direction. He indicated his hope that the Lord would give a revelation and resolve the matter. He further stated that if it was the mind and will of the Lord that the Church continue in the present course, he was willing to sustain and support that decision and defend it to the death. He said he hoped for a clear affirmation so there would be no question in anyone's mind.

All present were invited to express their views on the matter, which they did. A strong spirit of unity existed. At the conclusion of this discussion, President Kimball asked his counselors in the presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve to join with him in prayer. President Kimball then importuned the Lord with great fervor and faith. The prayer offered by President Kimball was dictated by the Holy Ghost.

"On this occasion," recalled one of those who was present, "because of the importuning and the faith, and because the hour and the time had arrived the Lord in his providences poured out the Holy Ghost upon the First Presidency and the Twelve in a miraculous and marvelous manner, beyond anything that any then present had ever experienced. The revelation came to the President of the Church; it also came to each indi vidual present. There were ten members of the Council of the Twelve and three of the First Presidency there assembled. The result was that President Kimball knew, and each one of us knew, independent of any other person, by direct and personal revelation to us, that the time had now come to extend the gospel and all its blessings and all its obligations, including the priesthood and the blessings of the house of the Lord, to those of every nation, culture, and race, including the black race. There was no question whatsoever as to what happened or as to the word and message that came" (McConkie, Sermons and Writings, 166-67).

In what is perhaps the most perfect illustration of the law of witnesses in this dispensation, the marvelous outpouring of the Holy Ghostdescribed by some present as "cloven tongues of fire"fell upon the prophet who stood at the head of the Church and twelve other prophets, seers, and revelators. When he ceased to pray, there was a great Pentecostal outpouring of the Spirit such as none of those present had ever before experienced. The experience cannot be confined to words. It was something that could only be felt in the hearts of the recipients and which can only be understood by the power of the Spirit. The announcement was carried in the Deseret News of Friday, 9 June 1978, without editorial comment.

Following is the letter that appeared over the signature of the First Presidency:

"June 8, 1978

"To all general and local priesthood officers of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints throughout the world:

"Dear Brethren:

"As we have witnessed the expansion of the work of the Lord over the earth, we have been grateful that people of many nations have responded to the message of the restored gospel, and have joined the Church in ever- increasing numbers. This, in turn, has inspired us with a desire to extend to every worthy member of the Church all of the privileges and blessings which the gospel affords.

"Aware of the promises made by the prophets and presidents of the Church who have preceded us that at some time, in God's eternal plan, all of our brethren who are worthy may receive the priesthood, and witnessing the faithfulness of those from whom the priesthood has been withheld, we have pleaded long and earnestly in behalf of these, our faithful brethren, spending many hours in the Upper Room of the Temple supplicating the Lord for divine guidance.

"He has heard our prayers, and by revelation has confirmed that the long-promised day has come when every faithful, worthy man in the Church may receive the holy priesthood, with power to exercise its divine authority, and enjoy with his loved ones every blessing that flows there from, including the blessings of the temple. Accordingly, all worthy male members of the Church may be ordained to the priesthood without regard for race or color. Priesthood leaders are instructed to follow the policy of carefully interviewing all candidates for ordination to either the Aaronic or the Melchizedek Priesthood to insure that they meet the established standards for worthiness.

"We declare with soberness that the Lord has now made known his will for the blessing of all his children throughout the earth who will hearken to the voice of his authorized servants, and prepare themselves to receive every blessing of the gospel.

"Sincerely Yours, "Spencer W. Kimball "N. Eldon Tanner "Marion G. Romney "The First Presidency" ("LDS Church Extends Priesthood to All Worthy Members," 1A; Tanner, "Revelation on the Priesthood," 16).

This letter was read in the October general conference of that year, and the vote to "accept this revelation as the word and will of the Lord" was unanimous in the affirmative.
