Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

IN CONCLUSION

The Lord has never had a people he acknowledged as his own to whom he would not speak. Revelation is the sure sign of the true Church; it is the foundation upon which the kingdom of God must rest. God stands revealed, or he remains forever unknown. "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Revelation 19:10). Revelation must be the root of every principle of salvation. Jesus of Nazareth stated the principle thus: "Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up" (Matthew 15:13).

The revelation of which we speak must be our own. Our hope of salvation cannot rest on the divine promises given to another people in ages long past. As their baptism will not remit our sins, so their sins will not bar us from a place in the kingdom of God. We stand independent. If it was required of them to know of Christ by the spirit of revelation, then it must be required of us to know of him in like manner.

The revelation of which we speak must be both institutional and personal. Universal truths, those principles that apply alike to all of God's children, must be revealed through him whom the Lord has chosen to be his covenant spokesman. It then becomes the burden of the children of the covenant to herald those truths to the ends of the earth. And, as the Church that houses those truths must be directed by the spirit of revelation, so must the individual homes of each of its members. As baptism is the covenant of membership, so the receipt of the Holy Ghost is the seal placed upon each member. No one, Joseph Smith explained, can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328). Thus, as the body of the Church is to be directed by the spirit of revelation, so must the lives of each of its members be directed. "What power shall stay the heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33).

This volume constitutes a brief commentary on revelations received by Joseph Smith and some of his successors in the presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints. Within each revelation is found the evidence of its authenticity, and all honest truth seekers may be endowed with a sufficient portion of the Spirit of the Lord to find it. Thus, within the Doctrine and Covenants is to be found a veritable avalanche of evidence that Joseph Smith is the great prophet of the Restoration and that in and through him the Church and kingdom of God have again been established upon the earth.

The revelations contained herein span the length and breadth of the eternities. They embrace the great and the small, the timely and the timeless; they open the heavens to things both past, present, and future. They speak of worlds without number that have been blessed with the saving principles of the gospel; they speak of our pre mortal existence, of the world of departed spirits, and of the various glories that await us in the worlds to come. They also record counsel and direction as it was given to people who would be long forgotten were it not for the devotion and faith of those who preserved these records for us. It is then for us in that same spirit of faith and devotion to come to know and understand the voice of the Lord as he has spoken to those of our day. In so doing we prepare ourselves to hear that same voice as it speaks to us.

We conclude this volume with the testimony that ours is not a mute God. His voice is quite audible to all who will listen. He has spoken, he does speak, and "he will yet reveal many great and important thing pertaining to the Kingdom of God" (Article of Faith 9). We further attest that he will yet reveal many great and important things to each father, mother, son, and daughter of the household of faith as they seek to obtain his word and live by it.
