Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 11

DATE: MAY 1829 (AFTER 25 MAY)

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

This revelation appears to have been given after the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood, which took place 15 May 1829. Joseph Smith recounted, "We were forced to keep secret the circumstances of having received the Priesthood and our having been baptized, owing to a spirit of persecution which had already manifested itself in the neighborhood. We had been threatened with being mobbed from time to time, and this, too, by professors of religion. And their intentions of mobbing us were only counteracted by the influence of my wife's father's family (under Divine providence), who had become very friendly to me, and who were opposed to mobs, and were willing that I should be allowed to continue the work of translation without interruption; and therefore offered and promised us protection from all unlawful proceedings as far as in them lay.

"After a few days, however, feeling it to be our duty, we commenced to reason out of the Scriptures with our acquaintances and friends, as we happened to meet with them. About this time my brother Samuel H. Smith came to visit us. We informed him of what the Lord was about to do for the children of men, and began to reason with him out of the Bible. We also showed him that part of the work which we had translated, and labored to persuade him concerning the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which was now about to be revealed in its fulness. He was not, however, very easily persuaded of these things, but after much inquiry and explanation he retired to the woods, in order that by secret and fervent prayer he might obtain of a merciful God, wisdom to enable him to judge for himself. The result was that he obtained revelation for himself sufficient to convince him of the truth of our assertions to him; and on the twenty- fifth day of that same month in which we had been baptized and ordained, Oliver Cowdery baptized him; and he returned to his father's house, greatly glorifying and praising God, being filled with the Holy Spirit.

"Not many days afterwards, my brother Hyrum Smith came to us to inquire concerning these things, when at his earnest request, I inquired of the Lord through the Urim and Thummim, and received for him the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:43-45).

The Lord Extends Similar Callings to His Servants

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 11:1-9

11:1-9 Verses 1 through 9 in Doctrine and Covenants 11 are identical to verses 1 through 9 in section 6. Verses 1 through 5 are also repeated in sections 12 and 14. Such repetition is no more unusual than a teacher saying the same thing to different classes or a missionary responding to different people in the same way when they have asked the same question. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 4:1-4; 6:1-9.

The Pattern by Which All Spiritual Truths Are Discerned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 11:10-14

11:10 Thou shalt have a gift. The gift referred to here is the gift of the Holy Ghost. This, surely one of the greatest of all the gifts of God, comes by the laying on of hands after the ordinance of baptism. Hyrum was baptized 29 June 1829 in Seneca Lake by Joseph Smith. He received the gift of the Holy Ghost at the meeting at which the Church was organized on 6 April 1830. Thereafter, other gifts followed, including the gifts of prophecy and revelation, which would attend his ministry (vv. 21-22).

11:12-14 These verses give us the standard by which we discern spirits. That which comes from God will always lead us to do good, to do justly, to walk humbly, and to judge with a righteous judgment. Any spirit or influence that fails to do this does not come from the God of heaven. A minister of another faith caught doing something very dishonest to dissuade a member of his congregation from joining with the Latter-day Saints defiantly responded, "God approves of any tactics we use to fight Mormonism." One is left to wonder just what kind of god it is who uses lies and deception to accomplish his work.

The Spirit of the Lord will always bring light, not darkness; understanding, not confusion; joy, not sorrow; peace and assurance, not uncertainty. It is by this Spirit, Hyrum is told, that he can know all things pertaining to righteousness.

Keep the Commandments and Study the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 11:15-22

11:15 You need not suppose that you are called to preach until you are called. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:11.

11:16 This verse was written in May 1829 before the publication of the Book of Mormon, the organization of the Church, or before Hyrum had been baptized or had the gift of the Holy Ghost confirmed upon him.

11:19 We do not understand the text to be saying that Hyrum would play a role in translating the Book of Mormon but rather that he would assume a prominent role in proclaiming the book and its truths. It appears to be this assistance in bringing forth the Book of Mormon that qualified Hyrum Smith to become one of the Eight Witnesses (Ether 5:2; Testimony of the Eight Witnesses).

11:21-22 The special gift given Hyrum would center in his ability to declare with great power the message of the Restoration. Given that we cannot teach that which we do not know, it was required that he prepare himself that he might be a suitable companion of the Holy Spirit. The scriptures were to constitute the foundation of his understanding. Hyrum was to become a student of the Bible ("my word which hath gone forth among the children of men") and the Book of Mormon ("my word which shall come forth among the children of men"). Building upon the foundation of these books, he would enjoy the Spirit of revelation and much would be added to his understanding that reached beyond the written word.

Explaining the principle here involved, Elder Bruce R. McConkie has said, "Those who preach by the power of the Holy Ghost use the scriptures as their basic source of knowledge and doctrine. They begin with what the Lord has before revealed to other inspired men. But it is the practice of the Lord to give added knowledge to those upon whose hearts the true meanings and intents of the scriptures have been impressed. Many great doctrinal revelations come to those who preach from the scriptures. When they are in tune with the Infinite, the Lord lets them know, first, the full and complete meaning of the scriptures they are expounding, and then he ofttimes expands their views so that new truths flood in upon them, and they learn added things that those who do not follow such a course can never know. Hence, as to 'preaching the word,' the Lord commands his servants to go forth 'saying none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith' (D&C 52:9). In a living, growing, divine church, new truths will come from time to time and old truths will be applied with new vigor to new situations, all under the guidance of the Holy Spirit of God" (Promised Messiah, 515-16).

Do not Deny the Spirit of Revelation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 11:23-30

11:25 Deny not the spirit of revelation. To deny the Spirit of revelation is not only to close the windows of heaven to further light and knowledge but also to lose the understanding of the divine word already given. "I will give unto the children of men line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30).

11:30 Hyrum's position was much like that of the meridian twelve of whom the Savior said that they would "receive power" after that the Holy Ghost had come upon them (Acts 1:8). He is promised that he will be given power to become a son of God. That is, he will be spiritually adopted by covenant into the family of God, thus he becomes an heir of God and joint- heir with Christ (Romans 8:17), having rightful claim upon all that the Father has (D&C 76:95; 84:38; 93:19).

Believe on my name. To believe on the name of Christ is to accept those who come in his name, those who hold his priesthood and have been authorized to act in his name. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 18:29.
