Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 14-16

DATE: JUNE 1829

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

These revelations were given through Joseph Smith to David, John, and Peter Whitmer Jr., in June 1829. Joseph and his scribe Oliver had recently relocated from Harmony, Pennsylvania, to reside with the Whitmer family in Fayette, New York, where the revelations were received.

During the translation of the Book of Mormon, Oliver Cowdery corresponded with the Peter Whitmer Sr. family about the work in which he was engaged. In her history, Joseph's mother wrote that the Lord instructed Joseph and Oliver by means of the Urim and Thummim to request to live with the Whitmers. "One morning as he applied it to his eyes to look upon the record, instead of the words of the book being given to him, he was commanded to write a letter to one David Whitmer, who lived in Waterloo. This man Joseph had never seen, but he was instructed to say to him that he must come with his team immediately, in order to convey Joseph and Oliver back to his house, that they might remain with him there until the translation should be completed, as an evil-designing people were seeking to take away Joseph's life in order to prevent the work of God from going forth among the world" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 192).

David arrived with a wagon in early June to transport Joseph and Oliver to his family's home in Fayette. During this move, Joseph entrusted the plates to Moroni for safekeeping. David Whitmer recorded an interesting event that occurred en route. "When I was returning to Fayette, with Joseph and Oliver, all of us riding in the wagon, Oliver and I on an old fashioned wooden spring seat and Joseph behind us; while traveling along in a clear open place, a very pleasant, nice- looking old man suddenly appeared by the side of our wagon and saluted us with, 'good morning, it is very warm,' at the same time wiping his face or forehead with his hand. We returned the salutation, and by a sign from Joseph, I invited him to ride if he was going our way. But he said very pleasantly, 'No, I am going to Cumorah.' This name was something new to me, I did not know what Cumorah meant. We all gazed at him and at each other, and as I looked enquiringly of Joseph, the old man instantly disappeared, so that I did not see him again" (Millennial Star, 49:772).

Shortly after the three men arrived in Fayette, Moroni delivered the plates to Joseph in the Whitmer garden. Describing the circumstances at the Whitmer farm, Joseph said, "It was arranged that we should have our board free of charge, and the assistance of one of his brothers to write for me, and also his own assistance when convenient. Having much need of such timely aid in an undertaking so arduous, and being informed that the people in the neighborhood of the Whitmers were anxiously awaiting the opportunity to inquire into these things, we accepted the invitation, and accompanied Mr. Whitmer to his father's house, and there resided until the translation was finished and the copyright secured. Upon our arrival, we found Mr. Whitmer's family very anxious concerning the work, and very friendly toward ourselves. They continued so, boarded and lodged us according to arrangements; and John Whitmer, in particular, assisted us very much in writing during the remainder of the work.

"In the meantime, David, John and Peter Whitmer, Jun., became our zealous friends and assistants in the work; and being anxious to know their respective duties, and having desired with much earnestness that I should inquire of the Lord concerning them, I did so, through the means of the Urim and Thummim, and obtained for them in succession the following revelations . . ." (Smith, History of the Church, 1:49).
