Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 14

Spiritual and Temporal Blessings Promised

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 14:1-11

14:1-6 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6:1-5; 11:1-9.

14:7 If you keep my commandments and endure to the end. Many of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants, such as this one, were first given as personal instructions, warnings, and encouragement to early investigators and members of the Church. They can be likened to patriarchal blessings, which often give similar counsel and warning. This admonition was of special importance to David Whitmer. Even though he was one of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, he lost the Spirit and was excommunicated from the Church in 1838. Although he never denied his testimony of the Book of Mormon, he was a constant critic of Joseph Smith and died outside the Church. We note with particu lar interest that when Moroni showed the Three Witnesses the plates, he turned directly to David Whitmer and said, "David, blessed is he that endureth to the end" (Roberts, Conference Report, October 1926, 126).

14:8 That you may stand as a witness of the things of which you shall both hear and see. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6:28; 17; 135:1-3.

14:11 Ye shall be blessed both spiritually and temporally. David Whitmer had already received a witness to the Lord's promise. In the preparation to move the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to his father's farm, there were several manifestations of divine intervention, which brought both spiritual and temporal blessings. When Oliver Cowdery's letter arrived at the Whitmer home requesting that David travel to Harmony, Pennsylvania, to transport him and Joseph to Fayette, the family was not certain how to respond. David Whitmer explained, "I did not know what to do, I was pressed with my work. I had some 20 acres to plow, so I concluded I would finish plowing and then go. I got up one morning to go to work as usual, and on going to the field, found between five and seven acres of my ground had been plowed during the night.

"I don't know who did it; but it was done just as I would have done it myself, and the plow was left standing in the furrow" (Millennial Star, 49:772).

Describing this event, Lucy Mack Smith recalled: "When he [David] informed his father of the fact, his father could not believe it till he examined for himself and ascertained that it was actually true. 'Well,' said his father, 'there must be some overruling power in this thing, and I think you had better go as soon as you get your plaster of paris sown [a common fertilizer of the day] and bring up the man with his scribe.'

"To this also David agreed. The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, he took the half-bushel measure under his arm and went out to the place where he supposed the plaster to be, as he knew exactly where he had left it twenty- four hours earlier. But when he came to look for it, behold, it had entirely disappeared! Every vestige of it was gone from the spot where he left it. He ran to his sister's house a few yards distant and inquired if she knew what had become of it.

"'Why?' she said, in surprise. 'Was it not all spread yesterday?'

"'Not to my knowledge,' answered David.

"'I am astonished at that,' replied his sister, 'for the children came to me in the forenoon and begged of me to go out and see the men sow plaster in the field, saying that they never saw anybody sow plaster so fast in their lives. I accordingly went and saw three men at work in the field, as the children said, but, supposing that you had hired some help on account of your hurry, I went immediately into the house and gave the subject no further attention.'

"David made considerable inquiry in regard to the matter, both among his relatives and neighbors, but was not able to learn who had done it. However, the family were convinced that there was an exertion of supernatural power connected with this strange occurrence" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 193-94).

As if this was not enough to convince the Whitmers that the Lord had chosen Joseph Smith to be his servant, David related: "When I arrived at Harmony, Joseph and Oliver were coming toward me, and met me some distance from the house. Oliver told me that Joseph had told him when I started from home, where I had stopped the first night, how I read the sign at the tavern, where I stopped the next night, etc., and that I would be there that day before dinner, and this was why they had come out to meet me; all of which was exactly as Joseph had told Oliver, at which I was greatly astonished" (Millennial Star, 49:772).
