Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 16

Revelations Held in High Esteem

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 16:1-6

16:1-6 Doctrine and Covenants 15 and 16 are identical save the names John and Peter in verse one and the word "unto" in verse 5 of section 16, which was inserted after 1843. They are the only known revelations to have been given in exactly the same wording. Similar to the first six verses of sections 6, 11, 12, and 14, the parallel wording indicates that the messages were directed intimately to the recipients but also to "all those who have desires to bring forth and establish this work" (D&C 12:7). Like mission calls that are extended today, the wording of each call is identical. Nonetheless, the recipients esteemed the call as an intimate revelation giving direction to their service in the kingdom of God.

The publication of these three sections (D&C 14-16) illustrates the importance that Joseph Smith and those who assisted in the Restoration attached to the Lord's words. Elder John A. Widtsoe explained: "The Doctrine and Covenants is a compilation of the revelations received by Joseph Smith to individuals and for the guidance of the Church. From the first years of the work the Prophet kept every scrap of paper pertaining to the progress of the work. In fact this care of things that must have seemed trivial is one of the evidences of the sincerity of the man. For example, when John and Peter Whitmer asked for help, he received for each of them a revelation, substantially the same. . . .

"This simple revelation is directed to the individual and at first sight has no permanent value for the Church. Yet as a revelation from God it was preserved and published. An insincere man could have eliminated this and other similar revelations as of little consequence. Not so with Joseph. The Lord had spoken. The words were part of the building of the kingdom of God, and the same advice would be useful to many men then and now" (Joseph Smith, 251-52).
