Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 17

DATE: JUNE 1829

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

"In the course of the work of translation," wrote the Prophet Joseph Smith, "we ascertained that three special witnesses were to be provided by the Lord, to whom He would grant that they should see the plates from which this work (the Book of Mormon) should be translated; and that these witnesses should bear record of the same, as will be found recorded [Ether 5:2-4; 2 Nephi 11:3]. Almost immediately after we had made this discovery, it occurred to Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and the aforementioned Martin Harris (who had come to inquire after our progress in the work) that they would have me inquire of the Lord to know if they might not obtain of him the privilege to be these three special witnesses; and finally they became so very solicitous, and urged me so much to inquire at length I complied; and through the Urim and Thummim, I obtained of the Lord for them the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:52-53).

Three Witnesses to See Sacred Relics

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 17:1

17:1 Why did the Lord insure that the plates and the other sacred objects were passed down from generation to generation? Further, why were they preserved to be seen by the Three Witnesses? One reason is that they serve as evidence that the events of the Book of Mormon are true. Each of the sacred objects that were seen by the Three Witnesses stands as proof to the world that the Book of Mormon people and events are real. There are those who have argued that the events recounted in the Book of Mormon are simply a story told to illustrate various points or doctrines. Such a view would discount the reality of the appearance of Moroni to the youthful Joseph Smith. Similarly, the brass plates and the sword of Laban as seen by the witnesses evidenced the existence of Nephi and the account he wrote concerning his obtaining the brass plates by beheading Laban with Laban's own sword. Lehi's journey through the wilderness and his travels to the Americas are evidenced by the witnesses viewing the Liahona. The many records, along with the Urim and Thummim and the breastplate witnessed that the translation of the Book of Mormon occurred just as the Prophet Joseph Smith declared.

These physical objects and the presence of Moroni also indicate the importance of records and angels in the perpetuation of spiritual knowledge and the development of faith on the earth. Throughout the Book of Mormon, emphasis is given to the importance of keeping records and bestowing sacred objects from one generation to the next. While entrusting his son Helaman with the plates, the interpreters, and the Liahona, Alma taught, "By small and simple things are great things brought to pass; and small means in many instances doth confound the wise . . . and bringeth about the salvation of many souls" (Alma 37:6-7). The testimonies of Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses that they saw an angel and these sacred objects "prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts" (Moroni 7:32).

You shall have a view of the plates. David Whitmer described, "We not only saw the plates of the Book of Mormon, but also the brass plates, the plates of the Book of Ether, the plates containing the record of the wickedness and secret combinations of the people of the world down to the time of their being engraved, and many other plates. The fact is, it was just as though Joseph, Oliver and I were sitting just here on a log, when we were overshadowed by a light. It was not like the light of the sun nor like that of a fire, but more glorious and beautiful. It extended away round us, I cannot tell how far, but in the midst of this light about as far off as he sits (pointing to John C. Whitmer, sitting a few feet from him), there appeared, as it were, a table with many records or plates upon it, besides the plates of the Book of Mormon" (Millennial Star, 49:772).

The plates of Mormon, which were delivered by Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith, received particular attention. Joseph wrote, "we beheld a light above us in the air, of exceeding brightness; and behold, an angel stood before us. In his hands he held the plates which we had been praying for these to have a view of. He turned over the leaves one by one, so that we could see them, and discern the engravings thereon distinctly" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:54). David Whitmer indicated that the angel did not turn over all of the leaves because part of the plates were sealed. He described the plates as being "about eight inches wide and six or seven inches long, as they appeared a little wider than long, and three rings kept the plates together; one above, one in the middle and one below, so that the angel could turn every leaf entirely over. The thickness was about of a common sheet of tin used by tinsmiths" (Cook, David Whitmer Interviews, 21).

Relative to the things that the Lord promised the Three Witnesses that they were entitled to see, we have this interesting account preserved for us by Brigham Young: "When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver says that when Joseph and Oliver went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says he did not think, at the time, whether they had the light of the sun or artificial light; but that it was just as light as day. They laid the plates on a table; it was a large table that stood in the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than probably many wagon loads; they were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there the sword of Laban hung upon the wall; but when they went again it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the gold plates; it was unsheathed, and on it was written these words: 'This sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our God and his Christ'" (Journal of Discourses, 19:38).

The breastplate. The breastplate was contained in the stone box that held the plates. Lucy Mack Smith had the privilege of handling the breastplate soon after Joseph received it from the Hill Cumorah. She said that Joseph "handed me the breastplate spoken of in his history.

"It was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could see the glistening metal and ascertain its proportions without any difficulty.

"It was concave on one side, and convex on the other, and extended from the neck downwards, as far as the center of the stomach of a man of extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material for the purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go over the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the hips. They were just the width of two of my fingers (for I measured them), and they had holes in the end of them to be convenient in fastening" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 148-49).

The Urim and Thummim were attached to the breastplate by means of a rod. William Smith, the Prophet's brother, explained that "a pocket was prepared in the breastplate on the left side, immediately over the heart. When not in use the Urim and Thummim was placed in this pocket, the rod being of just the right length to allow it to be so deposited. This instrument could, however, be detached from the breastplate . . . when away from home, but [Joseph] always used it in connection with the breastplate when receiving official communications, and usually so when translating, as it permitted him to have both hands free to hold the plates" (Smith, in Rod of Iron 1, 3 [February 1924]: 7).

Anciently, Aaron, the brother of Moses, was given a breastplate. Considering William's description of the breastplate, it is instructive to note the similarity, both in appearance as well as purpose regarding the Urim and Thummim, with the ancient breastplate. "And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work. . . . And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends . . . and . . . two rings on the two ends" (Exodus 28:15, 22-23) to fasten the breastplate to the shoulder pieces of the priestly ephod. Further, Moses was instructed, "And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart" (Exodus 28:30).

The sword of Laban. Nephi described the sword thus: "The hilt thereof was of pure gold, and the workmanship thereof was exceedingly fine, and I saw that the blade thereof was of the most precious steel" (1 Nephi 4:9). As this was the sword that Nephi used to slay Laban in order to obtain the brass plates, it is a symbol that "the Lord slayeth the wicked to bring forth his righteous purposes" (1 Nephi 4:13). It served as evidence to the Three Witnesses of the truthfulness of the account concerning Laban and the obtaining of the brass plates as recorded in the Book of Mormon.

The Urim and Thummim. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:35, page 21; Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-10; 10:1.

Miraculous directors. Alma stated that these directors were identified by his fathers as the "Liahona, which is, being interpreted, a compass" (Alma 37:38). As the description suggests, this sacred object gave instructions to the family of Lehi as to the direction they were to travel in the wilderness and across the waters. Nephi recorded that "as my father arose in the morning, and went forth to the tent door, to his great astonishment he beheld upon the ground a round ball of curious workmanship; and it was of fine brass. And within the ball were two spindles; and the one pointed the way whither we should go into the wilderness" (1 Nephi 16:10). Further, the Lord chose to reveal his will to Lehi and his family by means of writings that appeared upon the ball. The pointers and the writings "did work according to the faith and diligence and heed" (1 Nephi 16:28) which were given to the commandments of the Lord. This sacred relic was handed down with the plates kept by the prophetic writers of the Nephite records. There is no other account of anyone else seeing the Liahona in the latter days except for the vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith and the Three Witnesses on this occasion.

Three Witnesses to Testify by the Power of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 17:2-9

17:2 It is by your faith that you shall obtain a view of them. Sacred experiences do not come but by faith. The election to be one of the three special witness was simply a calling until it was made sure by the individual and collective faith of those who sought the witness. Joseph Smith explained that "not many days after the above commandment was given, we four, viz., Martin Harris, David Whitmer, Oliver Cowdery and myself, agreed to retire into the woods, and try to obtain, by fervent and humble prayer, the fulfilment of the promises given in the above revelation that they should have a view of the plates. We accordingly made choice of a piece of woods convenient to Mr. Whitmer's house, to which we retired, and having knelt down, we began to pray in much faith to Almighty God to bestow upon us a realization of these promises.

"According to previous arrangement, I commenced vocal prayer to our Heavenly Father, and was followed by each of the others in succession. We did not at the first trial, however, obtain any answer or manifestation of divine favor in our behalf. We again observed the same order of prayer, each calling on and praying fervently to God in rotation, but with the same result as before.

"Upon this, our second failure, Martin Harris proposed that he should withdraw himself from us, believing, as he expressed himself, that his presence was the cause of our not obtaining what we wished for. He accordingly withdrew from us" (History of the Church, 1:54).

Earlier that morning Joseph exhorted Martin, "You have got to humble yourself before your God this day and obtain, if possible, a forgiveness of your sins. If you will do this, it is God's will that you and Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer should look upon the plates" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 199; emphasis in original).

It was after Martin Harris had separated himself from the others that Moroni appeared and showed to them the things mentioned in this revelation. Thereafter, Joseph went in search of Martin. He found him some distance away engaged in prayer. "I found [Martin] at a considerable distance, fervently engaged in prayer. He soon told me, however, that he had not yet prevailed with the Lord, and earnestly requested me to join him in prayer, that he also might realize the same blessings which we had just received. We accordingly joined in prayer, and ultimately obtained our desires, for before we had yet finished, the same vision was opened to our view, at least it was again opened to me, and I once more beheld and heard the same things; whilst at the same moment, Martin Harris cried out, apparently in an ecstasy of joy, ''Tis enough; 'tis enough; mine eyes have beheld; mine eyes have beheld;' and jumping up, he shouted, 'Hosanna,' blessing God, and otherwise rejoiced exceedingly" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:55). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:24.

17:3 You shall testify of them, by the power of God. Nephi wrote that "when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men" (2 Nephi 33:1). As these men lived worthy of that companionship, there was a great power that attended their testimony. Those who were privileged to hear one or more of the Three Witnesses bear testimony also had opportunity to have that testimony confirmed by the power of the Holy Ghost. William H. Homer visited with Martin Harris in the Kirtland Temple about the last of December 1869. He asked Martin, "'What about your testimony to the Book of Mormon? Do you still believe that the Book of Mormon is true and that Joseph Smith was a Prophet?' Again, the effect was electric. A changed old man stood before me. It was no longer a man with an imagined grievance. It was a man with a message, a man with a noble conviction in his heart, a man inspired of God and endowed with divine knowledge. Through the broken window of the Temple shone the winter sun, clear and radiant.

"'Young man,' answered Martin Harris with impressiveness, 'Do I believe it! Do I see the sun shining! Just as surely as the sun is shining on us and gives us light, and the . . . [moon] and stars give us light by night, just as surely as the breath of life sustains us, so surely do I know that Joseph Smith was a true prophet of God, chosen of God to open the last dispensation of the fulness of times; so surely do I know that the Book of Mormon was divinely translated. I saw the plates; I saw the Angel; I heard the voice of God. I know that the Book of Mormon is true and that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God. I might as well doubt my own existence as to doubt the divine authenticity of the Book of Mormon or the divine calling of Joseph Smith.' It was a sublime moment. It was a wonderful testimony. We were thrilled to the very roots of our hair. The shabby, emaciated little man before us was transformed as he stood with hand outstretched toward the sun of heaven. A halo seemed to encircle him. A divine fire glowed in his eyes. His voice throbbed with the sincerity and the conviction of his message. It was the real Martin Harris whose burning testimony no power on earth could quench. It was the most thrilling moment of my life" (Homer, "Passing of Martin Harris," 469-70; emphasis added).

Following this experience, William Homer said that James A. Crockett, his nonmember cousin, placed his hands on William's shoulders and said, "'Wait a minute.' Looking me squarely in the eyes he said, 'I can testify that the Book of Mormon is true. There is something within me that tells me that the old man told the truth. I know the Book of Mormon is true'" (Homer, "Passing of Martin Harris," 471).

David Henry Cannon met with both Martin Harris and David Whitmer in 1861. Concerning the testimony he heard Martin Harris bear, he stated, "There was a feeling accompanied his testimony, when he bore it, that I have never experienced either before or since in any man that I ever heard bear testimony" (Evans, Cannon Family Historical Treasury, 250). Regarding the experience with David Whitmer, he explained, "There was a feeling accompanied this testimony which was similar to the one I experienced with Martin Harris" (Evans, Cannon Family Historical Treasury, 251).

Similarly, George A. Smith expressed, "We loved to hear brother Oliver testify, we were blessed with his witness" (Journal of Discourses, 17:200). Wilford Woodruff concurred, "I have seen Oliver Cowdery when it seemed as though the earth trembled under his feet. I never heard a man bear a stronger testimony than he did when under the influence of the Spirit" (Collected Discourses, 1:220).

17:4 That my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., may not be destroyed. Joseph was overwhelmed with joy that others now had the responsibility to bear witness that he had told the truth concerning the angel and the plates. His mother explained, "When they returned to the house, it was between three and four o'clock. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Smith, and myself were sitting in a bedroom, myself on a bedside. When Joseph came in, he threw himself down beside me and exclaimed, 'Father! Mother! You do not know how happy I am. The Lord has caused the plates to be shown to three more besides me. They have also seen an angel and will have to testify to the truth of what I have said, for they know for themselves that I do not go about to deceive the people. I do feel as though I was relieved of a dreadful burden which was almost too much for me to endure. But they will now have to bear a part, and it does rejoice my soul that I am not any longer to be entirely alone in the world.'

"Martin Harris then came in. He seemed almost overcome with an excess of joy. He then testified to what he had seen and heard, as did also the others, Oliver and David, who added that no tongue could express the joy of their hearts and the greatness of the things which they had both seen and heard" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith,1996, 199).

The strength and importance of the testimony of the Three Witnesses of the Restoration is immeasurable. It is significant that not only did the Prophet Joseph Smith testify truthfully of his sacred revelatory experiences but others shared these experiences with him. Many articles and books have been written to explain away or refute the testimony of Joseph Smith. Indeed, the authors of these articles have sought to destroy the Prophet by destroying the credibility of his testimony. However, these critics curiously leave the testimony of the Three Witnesses alone. It has been the common practice for detractors of the Restoration to stick their heads in the sand and ignore the special witness of these three men. One cannot get around their testimony nor undermine it. Notwithstanding their struggles and trials, each of these men remained true to their testimony of these events to their deaths. Their testimony gives great credibility to the testimony of Joseph Smith.

17:5 Ye shall testify that you have seen them. See The Testimony of Three Witnesses, introductory pages to the Book of Mormon.

17:6 As your Lord and your God liveth it is true. Bruce R. McConkie said, "This is God's testimony of the Book of Mormon. In it Deity himself has laid his godhood on the line. Either the book is true or God ceases to be God" (Conference Report, April 1982, 50). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6:17; 18:2.

17:8 "And we know," testified the Three Witnesses, "that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment- seat of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens" (Testimony of Three Witnesses).
