Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18

DATE: JUNE 1829

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

As promised by John the Baptist, the Melchizedek Priesthood was restored to the earth by the ancient apostles Peter, James, and John. This occurred sometime after the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood on 15 May 1829, and the first part of June 1829, when this revelation was given. Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were with the Prophet when the revelation was received. When the higher priesthood was restored, Joseph and Oliver were given "the keys of the kingdom," meaning the authority to preside over the Church, and the keys of "the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 27:13; 128:20). In preparation for the organization of the Church, the Prophet had directed Oliver Cowdery to prepare a foundational document for that purpose. Frustrated in his efforts to do so, Oliver asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord for direction on that matter. This section came in response to that request.

Describing these events, Joseph Smith said, "We had for some time made this matter a subject of humble prayer, and at length we got together in the chamber of Mr. Whitmer's house, in order more particularly to seek of the Lord what we now so earnestly desired; and here, to our unspeakable satisfaction, did we realize the truth of the Savior's promise'Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you'for we had not long been engaged in solemn and fervent prayer, when the word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber, commanding us that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not; when also we were commanded to bless bread and break it with them, and to take wine, bless it, and drink it with them; afterward proceed to ordain each other according to commandment; then call out such men as the Spirit should dictate, and ordain them; and then attend to the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, upon all those whom we had previously baptized, doing all things in the name of the Lord" (History of the Church, 1:60-61). As a consequence of the instructions given in this revelation, the document known as the "Articles and Covenants of the Church" (D&C 20), which led to the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was written.

Instructions on Building Up the Church of Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18:1-9

18:2 The things which you have written are true. These words constitute a testimony by the God of heaven that the Book of Mormon is true. To say that the book is true means that it is a reliable representation of the truths of salvation. No equivalent statement from the God of heaven exists relative to either the Old or New Testaments or any of the books within them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 6:17; 17:6.

18:3 Rely upon the things which are written. Oliver is instructed to rely upon the truths concerning the building up of the Church of Christ as they are written in the Book of Mormon. The inspired document that resulted is now recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 20. It is apparent that the Lord inspired Oliver's mind as he searched the Book of Mormon manuscript for information regarding the foundational document of the Church and that the Prophet Joseph Smith received revelation in refining that document. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20.

18:4 Concerning the foundation of my church. Of necessity the Church was to be founded on correct principles, principles distinctive to the restoration, not principles borrowed from some other source. That source is here identified as the Book of Mormon. It is of particular importance to note that the Book of Mormon had to come forth before the organization of the Church, for it was to constitute the foundation of the same. So it was that the first copies of the Book of Mormon five thousand in number, a rather remarkable expression of confidencewere completed in March 1830, and the Church was organized the next month on 6 April.

My gospel, and my rock. Reference is to the first principles and ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which are faith, repentance, baptism, and the gift of the Holy Ghost (3 Nephi 11:31-39). The rock upon which the Church is to be built is the revealed testimony that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God (Helaman 5:12; D&C 33:12-13). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:10, "Upon this rock."

18:8 And his name is Joseph. Thousands of years ago, Joseph of Egypt had prophesied that the choice seer of the last days destined to restore the gospel and gather Israel would bear his name (JST Genesis 50:33; 2 Nephi 3:15). The etymology of the name Joseph is usually given as "the Lord addeth," "may [God] add," or "increaser." Though appropriate, such renderings have veiled a richer meaning associated with the name. In Genesis 30:23 at the birth of her son Joseph, Rachel proclaims, "God hath taken away my reproach." It has been suggested that Joseph is derived from the Hebrew word for reproach, Asaph, which carries the meaning of "he who gathers," or "he who causes to return." Thus the great prophet of the Restoration was given the name that most appropriately describes his divine calling.

18:9 As unto Paul mine apostle, for you are called even with that same calling. An apostle, as understood today, is an office of the priesthood within the Church of Jesus Christ. There was no Quorum of the Twelve at the time of this revelation. Indeed, there was not even an elder since none had been or would be ordained to offices in the priesthood until the members of the soon-to-be-organized Church could vote on or sustain such action. This reference to Oliver and David as apostles could only mean that they were special witnesses of events associated with the Restoration but not to an office in the priesthood. Emphasizing this distinction, the Lord referred to Joseph, as well as Oliver, as "an apostle of Jesus Christ" and as "an elder of the church" (D&C 20:2, 3; 21:1). Both Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were called as special witnesses. This witness was given them when the voice of God declared to them that the Book of Mormon was translated by his power as they gazed upon the plates and the Lord's messenger (D&C 17). However, neither of these men ever served as members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. In like manner, to a group of faithful high priests, the Lord said, "And as I said unto mine apostles, even so I say unto you, for you are mine apostles, even God's high priests; ye are they whom my Father hath given me; ye are my friends" (D&C 84:63).

The Worth of Souls Is Great

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18:10-16

18:10 The worth of souls is great. There is no means of measurement that can adequately place a value on a human soul. As created by God they are immortal; as redeemed by the blood of Christ they can become as God is. That which is eternal denies measurement.

Save life itself, nothing in all eternity is of greater worth than the atonement of Christ. Thus it follows that the greatest work in which anyone could be involved is that labor that brings souls to Christ, that they might receive in full measure the blessings that come only because of his sacrifice and only to those who are obedient to the laws and ordinances of his gospel. The Lord had already emphasized this principle to John and Peter Whitmer Jr. by way of revelation (D&C 15, 16). Joseph Smith explained that this revelation illustrated the nature of their calling to the priesthood (History of the Church, 1:62). In the same spirit, Alma taught that it was the responsibility of those who are "ordained unto the high priesthood of the holy order of God, to teach his commandments unto the children of men, that they also might enter into his rest" (Alma 13:6).

18:12 On conditions of repentance. There is nothing in all the eternitiesboth the love and grace of Christ includedto which conditions are not attached. That which is without conditions is without existence. So it is that we understand that Christ came to save us from our sins not in them (Helaman 5:11). Through his atonement, Christ brings "salvation to all those who shall believe on his name; this being the intent of this last sacrifice, to bring about the bowels of mercy, which overpowereth justice, and bringeth about means unto men that they may have faith unto repentance. And thus mercy can satisfy the demands of justice, and encircles them in the arms of safety, while he that exercises no faith unto repentance is exposed to the whole law of the demands of justice; therefore only unto him that has faith unto repentance is brought about the great and eternal plan of redemption" (Alma 34:15-16). Repentance is the condition on which the receipt of all blessings is predicated (D&C 138:19).

18:15 How great shall be your joy. The Book of Mormon recounts the experiences of the sons of Mosiah and their companions who taught the Lamanites the gospel. After toiling for fourteen years (Alma 17:4), they rejoiced in the success which they had in teaching repentance among them (Alma 26). Ammon said, "Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in his strength I can do all things; yea, behold, many mighty miracles we have wrought in this land, for which we will praise his name forever" (Alma 26:12). Such is the joy known to those who labor to bring souls into the kingdom of God.

TheChurch and the Saints Bear the Name of Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18:17-25

18:18 Holy Ghost, which manifesteth all things which are expedient. Christ promised the Nephites that they would receive whatever they asked of the Father "which is right" (3 Nephi 18:20). In like manner, we have the promise that the Comforter will teach us "all things that are expedient" (D&C 75:10), and we have been cautioned that if we ask for that which "is not expedient" that it will turn unto our "condemnation" (D&C 88:65).

18:20 Contend against no church, save it be the church of the devil. Elder Joseph Fielding Smith explained, "When we are commanded to 'contend against no church save it be the church of the devil,' we must understand that this is instruction to us to contend against all evil, that which is opposed to righteousness and truth. James declares, that 'every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning,' and the scriptures also teach, 'for there is nothing which is good save it comes from the Lord; and that which is evil cometh from the devil.' (Omni 25.) All who go forth to teach should do so in wisdom and not contend with the churches or engage in profitless debates, but teach in the spirit of kindness and try to persuade people to receive the truth" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:83).

The word contend as used here has reference to our making earnest efforts to teaching and persuading as opposed to quarrelling.

18:21 Take upon you the name of Christ. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:77.

18:24 For in that name shall they be called at the last day. If it is Christ's church, it must of necessity bear his name. Teaching this principle to the Nephites, Christ said, "And whoso taketh upon him my name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the last day. Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in my name; therefore ye shall call the church in my name; and ye shall call upon the Father in my name that he will bless the church for my sake. And how be it my church save it be called in my name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in my name then it is my church, if it so be that they are built upon my gospel. Verily I say unto you, that ye are built upon my gospel; therefore ye shall call whatsoever things ye do call, in my name; therefore if ye call upon the Father, for the church, if it be in my name the Father will hear you; And if it so be that the church is built upon my gospel then will the Father show forth his own works in it" (3 Nephi 27:6-10).

The Mission of the Twelve

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18:26-33

18:26 Called to declare my gospel, both unto Gentile and unto Jew. Later the Quorum of the Twelve would be given "the keys, to open the door by the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and first unto the Gentiles and then unto the Jews" (D&C 107:35).

18:27 Take upon them my name with full purpose of heart. All who enter the waters of baptism take upon themselves the name of Christ and thus the obligation to live worthy of that name.

18:29 They are they who are ordained of me to baptize in my name. In all dispensations the Lord has commanded his disciples to baptize in his name. Beginning with Adam, the Lord said, "If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you" (Moses 6:52). This instruction takes on added meaning when it is remembered that it was quoted by Enoch to his people, that it was preserved by Moses, and given anew to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith. From Adam to Enoch and from Enoch to Moses and from Moses to Joseph Smith, who restored the text to us, the principle has been the same.

To baptize in the Lord's name, or to perform any ordinance in his name, is to do that work by his authority or priesthood. After Peter and John healed a lame man, the Pharisees, in an attempt to ascertain the source of the miracle, questioned Peter, "By what power, or by what name, have ye done this?" (Acts 4:7). Peter declared, "By the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth . . . doth this man stand here before you whole. . . . Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts 4:10, 12). Thus, the name of Jesus Christ is equated with the priesthood authority to perform ordinances for the salvation of men (Abraham 1:18). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 11:30.

18:30 According to the words which are written. See commentary on verse 3.

18:31 My grace is sufficient for you. The Twelve are able to fulfill their calling as they rely on the Savior. Under the direction of the Twelve, the gospel has gone forth and the Church of Christ has been built up, attended by the divine help of the Lord Jesus Christ among "every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, working mighty miracles, signs, and wonders, among the children of men according to their faith" (2 Nephi 26:13). Iron curtains have crumbled, despots and tyrants have fled their seats of government, and in it all the hand of the Lord has not been shortened. As Nephi testified, the Lord will "prepare a way for them that they [the Twelve] may accomplish the thing which he commandeth them" (1 Nephi 3:7).

Reading the Scriptures by the Spirit

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18:34-36

18:35 It is my voice . . . for they are given by my Spirit. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:66.

18:36 You can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words. This revelation was given in June 1829; the Twelve were not called until February 1835. Nevertheless, the Twelve are told that if they will read this revelation (and for that matter any revelation) under the direction or influence of the Holy Ghost, they will be able to testify that they have heard the voice of the Lord. The principle applies to all who read the word of the Lord under the direction of the Spirit. To read under the direction of the Spirit is to hear that voice. This principle is repeated in Doctrine and Covenants 84, in which the Lord says, "Verily, verily, I say unto you who now hear my words, which are my voice, blessed are ye inasmuch as you receive these things" (v. 60; emphasis added).

Searching Out the Twelve

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 18:37-47

18:37 You shall search out the Twelve. Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer were given the charge to "search out" or find those worthy and capable of holding the office of an apostle. As one of the Three Witnesses, Martin Harris would share in this responsibility. Following the experiences of ZionCamp, the time for choosing arrived. In Kirtland on 14 February 1835, Joseph paid tribute to those who had marched with Zion's Camp and then proposed that the time had come to ordain twelve men to the office of an apostle. "President Joseph Smith, Jun., said that the first business of the meeting was, for the Three Witnesses of the Book of Mormon, to pray, each one, and then proceed to choose twelve men from the Church, as Apostles, to go to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people.

"The Three Witnesses, viz., Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris, united in prayer.

"These three witnesses were then blessed by the laying on of the hands of the [First] Presidency.

"The Witnesses then, according to a former commandment [the present revelation], proceeded to make choice of the Twelve. Their names are as follows:

"1. Lyman E. Johnson "2. Brigham Young "3. Heber C. Kimball "4. Orson Hyde "5. David W. Patten "6. Luke S. Johnson "7. William E. M'Lellin "8. John F. Boynton "9. Orson Pratt "10. William Smith "11. Thomas B. Marsh "12. Parley P. Pratt" (Smith, History of the Church, 2:186-87).

These men were ordained in the quorum according to age, from oldest to youngest.

18:42 Who have arrived at the years of accountability. See Doctrine and Covenants 68:27.
