Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 19

DATE: MARCH 1830

PLACE: MANCHESTER, NEW YORK

This revelation came in response to Martin Harris's inquiry to the Prophet regarding his standing before the Lord. Troubled in spirit by his transgression, concerned about his farm, which he had mortgaged to finance the printing of the Book of Mormon, and perhaps sobered by the responsibility attendant to the remarkable vision shown to him and the other special witnesses of the Book of Mormon, Martin was desirous to receive both confirmation and direction from the Lord.

From the personal recollections of Joseph Knight, a participant in these events, we have the following story: "In the Spring of 1830 I went with my Team and took Joseph out to Manchester to his Father. When we was on our way he told me that there must be a Church formed But did not tell when. Now when we got near to his fathers we saw a man some Eighty Rods Before us run acros the street with a Bundle in his hand. 'There,' says Joseph, 'there is Martin going a Cros the road with some thing in his hand.' Says I, 'how Could you know him so far? Says he, 'I Believe it is him,' and when we Came up it was Martin with a Bunch of morman Books. He Came to us and after Compliments he says, 'The Books will not sell for no Body wants them.' Joseph says, 'I think they will sell well.' Says he, 'I want a Commandment.' 'Why,' says Joseph, 'fullfill what you have got.' 'But,' says he, 'I must have a Commandment.' Joseph put him off. But he insisted three or four times he must have a Commandment.

"We went home to his fathers and Martin with us. Martin stayed at his Fathers and slept in a Bed on the flor with me. Martin awoke me in the nite and asked me if I felt any thing on the Bed. I told him no. Says I, 'Did you?' 'Yes, I felt some thing as Big as a grat Dog Sprang upon my Brest.' Says I, 'Was you not mistekened.' 'No,' says he. 'It was so.' I Sprang up and felt, But I Could see nor feal nothing. In the morning he got up and said he must have a Commandment to Joseph and went home. And along in the after part of the Day Joseph and Oliver Received a Commandmant which is in Book of Covenants Page 174 [D&C 19]" (Jessee, "Joseph Knight," 36-37; spelling and punctuation as in original).

In this revelation we obtain insights relative to the suffering of Christ not given in other scriptural texts. We are also granted an expanded understanding relative to the nature of divine punishment and the suffering awaiting the unrepentant. This section ranks among the most instructive of our doctrinal revelations.

God's Judgments and Punishments

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 19:1-12

19:1 "The death on Calvary," said Elder Orson F. Whitney, "was no more the ending of that divine career, than the birth at Bethlehem was its beginning" (Conference Report, April 1927, 101). Christ is an eternal being. He has existed from the beginning and will continue to live in glory throughout all eternity. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:4.

Alpha and Omega. The first and last letters of the Greek alphabet are used as name-titles for Christ. Figuratively, they represent the timeless and eternal nature of the attributes of Deity.

19:2 Having accomplished and finished the will of him whose I am. Having explained the plan of salvation to all his children and the central place of the One who would make of himself an offering for their sins, the Father in the Grand Council of Heaven asked, "Whom shall I send?" (Abraham 3:27). He whom we know as Jesus of Nazareth responded, saying, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2). As he hung upon the cross, the suffering of Gethsemane and Calvary now behind him, the Savior declared, "Father, it is finished, thy will is done" (JST Matthew 27:54).

19:3 The destroying of Satan and his works at the end of the world. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:114.

The last great day of judgment. Reference is to the time that follows the Millennium a period of one thousand years of righteousness. It is instructive in the context of this revelation to note that the scriptures do not speak of a final judgment in which all people of the earth are brought before God at one time to receive rewards and punishments. Rather, the Lord speaks of judgment that has a great last day in which he will banish Satan and his hosts into their own place. At that time all of God's children who belong to this earth will have had judgment passed upon them. Statements, such as those found in the Book of Mormon, that "the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works" (Alma 11:41) do not intend to convey the idea that all will be judged on one final day of judgment any more than all will be resurrected the same day. The principle being taught is that there will be judgment for each individual's works and that there is a time at the end of the Millennium when all will have received that judgment.

19:5 Weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. This phrase is a proverbial way of dramatizing the intensity of the sorrow, anguish, and bitterness that are the fruits of sin.

19:6 It is not written that there shall be no end to this torment, but it is written endless torment. The phrase "endless torment" is not found in the Bible, though it appears seven times in the Book of Mormon (2 Nephi 9:19, 26; 28:23; Jacob 6:10; Mosiah 3:25; 28:3; Moroni 8:21). Martin Harris must have read of endless torment in a Book of Mormon manuscript. He apparently understood the phrase to mean that his suffering was of necessity to be endless in duration. Had the opportunity been his to study the text of the book more carefully, he would have discovered that this was not the case. The Book of Mormon clearly states that people may be delivered from hell, or endless torment. "O the greatness of the mercy of our God, the Holy One of Israel! For he delivereth his saints from that awful monster the devil, and death, and hell, and that lake of fire and brimstone, which is endless torment" (2 Nephi 9:19; see also v. 26). Jacob's message in referring to endless torment is that such would be the state of all mankind, if there had been no atonement made.

Similarly, Alma declared, "I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins" (Alma 36:12). Yet, this torment, which he described as "inexpressible horror," "exquisite" in its bitterness, lasted only three days, or until the time that Alma called upon the mercy of Christ to deliver him from his awful state (Alma 36:14, 21). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:17.

19:7 It is written eternal damnation . . . that it might work upon the hearts of the children of men. Just as the righteous will be raised up in the resurrection unto eternal life, so the wicked will be cast into outer darkness in the great and last day of judgment. "And thus did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probationthat by his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life, even as many as would believe; And they that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, because they repent not; for they love darkness rather than light, and their deeds are evil" (D&C 29:43-45).

During his mortal ministry the Savior declared, "But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation" (Mark 3:29). Eternal damnation is the punishment of those who remain unrepentant and, consequently, are eternally cast out of God's presence. The contrast between rewards and punishments makes plain the greatness of God's blessings as well as the severity of his punishments. This clear distinction works on their hearts "to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great Mediator of all men" rather than "to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil" (2 Nephi 2:27).

19:10-13 Here we are told that both eternal and endless are nouns rather than adjectives used in many texts to describe the punishment that comes from God. By way of illustration, in the Salt Lake Valley near what is known as the Point of the Mountain is a large institution designed to confine law breakers. It bears the name Utah State Penitentiary because it belongs to the State of Utah and is used to punish those who have broken the laws of the state. In like manner, the Lord has a place to confine those who have broken his laws. It bears the name "eternal punishment" or "endless punishment," which denote ownership, not the duration of the punishment involved.

Elder James E. Talmage explained: "To hell there is an exit as well as an entrance. Hell is no place to which a vindictive judge sends prisoners to suffer and to be punished principally for his glory; but it is a place prepared for the teaching, the disciplining of those who failed to learn here upon the earth what they should have learned. True, we read of everlasting punishment, unending suffering, eternal damnation. That is a direful expression; but in his mercy the Lord has made plain what those words mean. 'Eternal punishment,' he says, is God's punishment, for he is eternal; and that condition or state or possibility will ever exist for the sinner who deserves and really needs such condemnation; but this does not mean that the individual sufferer or sinner is to be eternally and everlastingly made to endure and suffer. No man will be kept in hell longer than is necessary to bring him to a fitness for something better. When he reaches that stage the prison doors will open and there will be rejoicing among the hosts who welcome him into a better state. The Lord has not abated in the least what he has said in earlier dispensations concerning the operation of his law and his gospel, but he has made clear unto us his goodness and mercy through it all, for it is his glory and his work to bring about the immortality and eternal life of man" (Conference Report, April 1930, 97).

Christ Suffered for the Sins of All Who Will Repent

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 19:13-24

19:16 I, God, have suffered these things. Only a God can atone for the sins of another. Referring to the atoning sacrifice of the Savior, Amulek explained that "it must be an infinite and eternal sacrifice" (Alma 34:10). Further, Christ was able to offer himself a sacrifice for sin, explained Lehi, because of his "merits, and mercy, and grace" (2 Nephi 2:8). The Savior uniquely merited the ability to suffer for the sins of others because he was sinless, and justice, therefore, could not demand that he suffer punishment for sin. When he suffered for sin, it was not for his own sins; rather, his suffering met the demands of justice for the sins of others. He was not constrained by law to suffer for the sins of others but did so out of his mercy and loving kindness to them. The concept of grace indicates aid that comes from a divine source. Therefore, Christ was uniquely qualified to offer grace through the atoning sacrifice because as a member of the Godhead he condescended to become the Only Begotten Son of God in the flesh. His divine sonship as the Only Begotten Son of God enabled him to suffer "more than man can suffer, except it be unto death" (Mosiah 3:7).

19:17 If they would not repent they must suffer even as I. If they do not repent, "the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death" (Alma 11:41). Thus, the unrepentant suffer a spiritual death in which they are cut off from the presence of God, and the Spirit of the Lord is withdrawn from them. Those who inherit the telestial kingdom are numbered among those who must suffer the demands of justice for sin in the spirit world. "These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:106).

The suffering referred to by the Savior is not a quantity of punishment meted out and experienced for a predetermined length of time. Individuals suffer as long as they remain in sin. When they repent, the atonement of Christ has claim upon them. "Hence the salvation of Jesus Christ was wrought out for all men," taught the Prophet Joseph Smith, "in order to triumph over the devil; for if it did not catch him in one place, it would in another; for he stood up as a Savior. All will suffer until they obey Christ himself" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 357). Therefore, the suffering continues until individuals repent and forsake their sins. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:6.

There are those who have falsely supposed that Christ's suffering supplants suffering on the part of those who repent. This simply is not the case. There is no repentance without suffering. Teaching this principle to his son Corianton, Alma said, "Now, repentance could not come unto men except there were a punishment, which also was eternal as the life of the soul should be, affixed opposite to the plan of happiness, which was as eternal also as the life of the soul. Now, how could a man repent except he should sin? How could he sin if there was no law? How could there be a law save there was a punishment? Now, there was a punishment affixed, and a just law given, which brought remorse of conscience unto man" (Alma 42:16-18). What the present text means is that the repentant soul will not have to suffer "even as" the Savior suffered. But it does not mean that they will not have to suffer. Nor should it be supposed that their suffering is confined to the natural consequences of their actions. In addition to those consequences, he or she must experience the anguish associated with true repentance.

President Spencer W. Kimball said of personal suffering that it "is a very important part of repentance. One has not begun to repent until he has suffered intensely for his sins. . . . If a person hasn't suffered, he hasn't repented. . . . He has got to go through a change in his system whereby he suffers and then forgiveness is a possibility" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 88, 99).

Elder Dallin H. Oaks explained that "some Latter-day Saints who wrongly think repentance is easy maintain that a little sinning will not hurt. Young people of this persuasion may say, 'It is okay to have a few free ones, because it is easy to repent before your mission or marriage.' The adult versions are more sophisticated and more pernicious. Perhaps some would even assert that a person is better off after he has sinned and repented. 'Get a little experience with sin,' one argument goes, 'and then you will be better able to counsel and sympathize with sinners. You can always repent.'

"I plead with my brothers and sisters, my young friends and my older friends, avoid transgression! The idea that one can deliberately sin and easily repent or that one is better off after sinning and repenting are devilish lies of the adversary. Would anyone seriously contend that it is better to learn firsthand that a certain blow will break a bone or that a certain mixture of chemicals will explode and burn off our skin? Are we better off after we have sustained and then scarred over from such injuries? It is obviously better to heed the warnings of wise persons who know the effects of certain traumas on our bodies" ("Sins, Crimes, and Atonement," 7).

Responding to the issue as to why it is necessary for one to suffer when serious transgression is involved, Elder Oaks said, "We often think of the results of repentance as simply cleansing us from sin. But that is an incomplete view of the matter. A person who sins is like a tree that bends easily in the wind. On a windy and rainy day the tree bends so deeply against the ground that the leaves become soiled with mud, like sin. If we only focus on cleaning the leaves, the weakness in the tree that allowed it to bend and soil its leaves may remain. Merely cleaning the leaves does not strengthen the tree. Similarly, a person who is merely sorry to be soiled by sin will sin again in the next high wind. The susceptibility to repetition continues until the tree has been strengthened" ("Sin and Suffering," 150).

19:18 Which suffering caused myself . . . to tremble because of pain. This revelation is unique among all scripture in its intimacy. Jesus Christ speaks of his suffering and of the feelings attending it. No one else shared this experience with him. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "We do not know, we cannot tell, no mortal mind can conceive the full import of what Christ did in Gethsemane. We know he sweat great gouts of blood from every pore as he drained the dregs of that bitter cup his Father had given him.

"We know he suffered, both body and spirit, more than it is possible for man to suffer, except it be unto death.

"We know that in some way, incomprehensible to us, his suffering satisfied the demands of justice, ransomed penitent souls from the pains and penalties of sin, and made mercy available to those who believe in his holy name.

"We know that he lay prostrate upon the ground as the pains and agonies of an infinite burden caused him to tremble and would that he might not drink the bitter cup.

"We know that an angel came from the courts of glory to strengthen him in his ordeal, and we suppose it was mighty Michael, who foremost fell that mortal man might be.

"As near as we can judge, these infinite agoniesthis suffering beyond comparecontinued for some three or four hours" (Conference Report, April 1985, 9-10).

Bleed at every pore. "Blood cometh from every pore," prophesied King Benjamin, "so great shall be his anguish for the wickedness and the abominations of his people" (Mosiah 3:7; see also Luke 22:44). The Savior confirmed the declarations of Luke and King Benjamin concerning the extent of his suffering. Elder Neal A. Maxwell offered insight into the symbolic significance of the Savior's anguish: "His infinite atonement affected every age, every dispensation, and every person (see 2 Nephi 9:7; 25:16). Hence the appropriate symbolism of His bleeding at each and every porenot just some" (Conference Report, October 1988, 41).

Would that I might not drink the bitter cup. "Later, in Gethsemane," observed Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "the suffering Jesus began to be 'sore amazed' (Mark 14:33), or, in the Greek, 'awestruck' and 'astonished.'

"Imagine, Jehovah, the Creator of this and other worlds, 'astonished'! Jesus knew cognitively what He must do, but not experientially. He had never personally known the exquisite and exacting process of an atonement before. Thus, when the agony came in its fulness, it was so much, much worse than even He with his unique intellect had ever imagined! No wonder an angel appeared to strengthen him! (See Luke 22:43.)

"The cumulative weight of all mortal sinspast, present, and future pressed upon that perfect, sinless, and sensitive Soul! All our infirmities and sicknesses were somehow, too, a part of the awful arithmetic of the Atonement. (See Alma 7:11-12, Isaiah 53:3-5, Matthew 8:17.) The anguished Jesus not only pled with the Father that the hour and cup might pass from Him, but with this relevant citation. 'And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee; take away this cup from me' (Mark 14:35-36)" (Conference Report, April 1985, 92).

19:19 Finished my preparations unto the children of men. The way is prepared for all to come back into the presence of God through Christ's atoning for the transgression of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden and through his resurrection from the dead. Further, the Atonement and the Resurrection completed the Savior's preparation of the way in which we can be redeemed from spiritual death caused by our own sins and return to our Father again to dwell with him throughout eternity.

19:20 In the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit. This is the only revelation in which the Savior has unveiled that his suffering for sin included the withdrawal of the Spirit. This fact is intimated in the Savior's soul-wrenching cry from Golgotha, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (Matthew 27:46). With reference to that moment on the cross, Elder James E. Talmage wrote: "What mind of man can fathom the significance of that awful cry? It seems, that in addition to the fearful suffering incident to crucifixion, the agony of Gethsemane had recurred, intensified beyond human power to endure. In that bitterest hour the dying Christ was alone, alone in most terrible reality. That the supreme sacrifice of the Son might be consummated in all its fulness, the Father seems to have withdrawn the support of His immediate Presence, leaving to the Savior of men the glory of complete victory over the forces of sin and death" (Jesus the Christ, 661).

President Brigham Young provided increased understanding regarding the withdrawal of the Spirit from the Savior as part of the atoning sacrifice: "The Father withdrew His spirit from His son, at the time he was to be crucified. . . . At the very moment, at the hour when the crisis came for him to offer up his life, the Father withdrew Himself, withdrew His Spirit, and cast a vail over him. That is what made him sweat blood. If he had had the power of God upon him, he would not have sweat blood; but all was withdrawn from him, and a veil was cast over him, and he then plead with the Father not to forsake him" (Journal of Discourses, 3:206).

The immediate context of the Savior's reference to Joseph Smith and Martin Harris was the loss of the 116-page manuscript (D&C 3). At that time Joseph and Martin suffered excruciating spiritual pain. The Lord indicated in this revelation that this suffering resulted from the withdrawal of his Spirit. These men in some measure had experienced that. Yet, even that anguish was but a sliver of pain in comparison to the suffering for sin that Jesus Christ experienced.

Lucy Mack Smith gave insight to the punishment that Joseph and Martin tasted on the occasion. She wrote that on hearing that the manuscript was lost, her son Joseph clenched his hands together, crying that all was lost. "He wept and groaned, walking the floor continually. . . .

"I besought him not to mourn so, for it might be that the Lord would forgive him, after a short season of humiliation and repentance on his part. But what could I say to comfort him when he saw all the family in the same state of mind that he was? Our sobs and groans and the most bitter lamentations filled the house. Joseph, in particular, was more distressed than the rest. . . . He continued walking backwards and forwards, weeping and grieving like a tender infant until about sunset, when we persuaded him to take a little nourishment. . . .

"I well remember that day of darkness, both within and without. To us, at least, the heavens seemed clothed with blackness, and the earth shrouded with gloom. I have often said within myself that if a continual punishment, as severe as that which we experienced on that occasion, were to be inflicted upon the most wicked characters who ever stood upon the footstool of the Almightyif even their punishment were no greater than that, I should feel to pity their condition" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 165-66, 171).

19:21 Show not these things unto the world. A loving Father does not reveal truths to his children that they are not prepared to receive but, rather, gives them milk until they can bear meat. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "the Lord deals with his people as a tender parent with a child, communicating light and intelligence and the knowledge of his ways as they can bear it" (History of the Church, 5:402). Alma explained that "it is given unto many to know the mysteries of God; nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him" (Alma 12:9).

Instructions Concerning the Printing of the Book of Mormon

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 19:25-41

19:25 Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife. It is not known why Martin Harris would receive this particular warning. Martin's marriage was unhappy, due in part to his wife's decided opposition to his involvement in the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon. It may be that problems in his marriage were opening the door to temptation. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 3:7.

19:26-35 On 25 August 1829, more than six months previous to this revelation, Martin Harris mortgaged 240 acres of his farm to pay for the printing of five thousand copies of the Book of Mormon. E. B. Grandin, who was also the publisher of the book, held the contract for three thousand dollars. Martin agreed to deed a sufficient amount of his farm to pay the debt if the money could not be raised within eighteen months by the sale of the Book of Mormon to interested parties. As we have noted, Martin was concerned about losing his farm. His concern proved to be well- founded because the citizens near Palmyra voted to boycott purchasing the Book of Mormon. To pay the debt, Martin sold 151 acres of the family farm, which included the frame home he had built earlier in his married life. His wife, Lucy, had made preparations to provide for herself and the children, if she ever deemed it necessary to end the marriage. "When the property was about to be sold, [she] left him, taking their children, and never again returned to live with Martin Harris" (Tuckett and Wilson, Martin Harris Story, 51).

19:27 The Jew, of whom the Lamanites are a remnant. The Lamanites can be considered Jews in the sense that the families of Lehi and Ishmael were citizens of the southern kingdom and thus were Jewish naturals. As to blood lineage, Lehi was a descendant of Manasseh; Ishmael was a descendant of Ephraim (Erastus Snow, Journal of Discourses, 23:184).

19:30 Reviling not against revilers. This admonition became very practical advice for Martin a short time after the Book of Mormon came off the press. The Palmyra Courier reported: "Shortly after the completion of the printing of the Book of Mormon, Martin Harris began (his effort) to sell the work, and was daily seen on the street, inviting his friends and neighbors to buy. His form was conspicuous, with a grey suit of homespun, his head surmounted by a large stiff hat, while under his arm he carried several copies of the book" (31 May 1872, 2). During one of these occasions Martin had opportunity to practice this counsel. "Harris was proverbially a peaceful as well as an honest man. He was slow to retaliate an offence. . . . Urging the sale of the book . . . he fell into debate about its character with a neighbor of an irascible temperament. His opponent became angry, and struck him a severe blow upon the right side of his face. Instantly turning toward the assailant the other cheek, he [Harris] quoted the Christian maxim, reading it from the book in his hand [Book of Mormon] page 481 [as it also appears in Matthew 5:39], 'Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also'" (Tucker, Progress of Mormonism, 61).

19:31 Of tenets thou shalt not talk. Tenets are doctrinal beliefs that distinguish those of various denominations from one another. This verse instructs us that in presenting our message we are to avoid peripheral discussionsbe they to establish common ground or to find faultand instead center on the message of the Restoration.
