Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20 AND 22

The Articles and Covenants of the Church

DATE: APRIL 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE AND MANCHESTER, NEW YORK

On Tuesday, 6 April 1830, in upstate New York, a small group of people gathered in the log home of Peter Whitmer Sr. They did so according to divine command, for the time had come to establish the Church of Jesus Christ once again upon the earth. The meeting began with solemn prayer. Those present were then invited to sustain Joseph Smith Jr. and Oliver Cowdery as "their teachers in the things of the kingdom of God" and to organize the Church. This was done unanimously. Joseph Smith then ordained Oliver Cowdery an elder in the Church, and Oliver ordained Joseph to the same office. The sacrament of bread and wine was then administered to those constituting the formal organization of the Church. By name they were Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer Jr., Samuel H. Smith, and David Whitmer. Though Joseph, Oliver, Samuel, and Hyrum had previously been baptized, they were baptized again, most likely before the meeting here described. They were then confirmed members of the Church and given the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Joseph Smith noted, "The Holy Ghost was poured out upon us to a very great degree some prophesied, whilst we all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly" (History of the Church, 1:78). The revelation recorded in section 21 of the Doctrine and Covenants was then received. Following this, others were ordained to various offices in the priesthood and made expressions of faith. The meeting was then concluded with prayer. At that point several of those present desired to be united with the Church and were baptized. Among them were the Prophet's parents, Joseph Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith, as well as Martin Harris and Orrin Porter Rockwell.

As early as June 1829 Joseph Smith asked Oliver Cowdery to formulate an expression of basic principles and practices of the soon-to-be-organized Church. Oliver in turn asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord about what he should do. Doctrine and Covenants 18 was given in response to that request. In the revelation Oliver was directed to rely upon the teachings "concerning the foundation of my church, my gospel, and my rock" (D&C 18:4) as contained in the Book of Mormon. Drawing upon the principles in the Book of Mormon, Oliver submitted a manuscript to the Prophet. "Then Joseph Smith, or both he and Oliver Cowdery, revised that document. They put it in the format now found in section 20" (Woodford, "Articles and Covenants," 264-65).

Section 20 binds together a number of separate revelations. It appears that verses 1 through 4, which designate the day upon which the Church was to be organized, were given early in April 1830. Other sections of the revelation were at least influenced by Oliver's draft and may have existed before that date. Section 20 is divided into distinct discussions concerning the brief history that preceded the Church organization, a declaration of beliefs, requirements for baptism, duties of priesthood offices and members, ordinances of the Church, and record keeping. This revelation and section 22 became known among the early members as the Articles and Covenants of the Church.

Organization of the Church Directed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:1-4

20:1 The day upon which Joseph Smith was to organize the Church is here identified as 6 April 1830. This identification of the date, expressed in the manner customary at the time, should probably not be understood as a confirmation that the organization of the Church took place 1,830 years after the birth of Christ. If, as we learn in the Gospel of Matthew, the wise men visited Herod before finding the Christ child, we can with some certainty identify the year of his birth. History shows that Herod died before the Passover of 750 A.U.C. (750 years after the founding of Rome), which corresponds to the year 4 B.C. in our reckoning of time. Herod's order to slay the children in and around Bethlehem "from two years old and under" (Matthew 2:16) suggests that Christ was born in 5 or 6 B.C. (McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 1:349-50). Both history and the testimony of our modern prophets indicate that Christ was born on April 6 (see Lee, Conference Report, April 1973, 4; Kimball, Conference Report, April 1974, 4).

The Church of Christ. The name "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" was given in a revelation on 26 April 1838. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 115:4.

20:2 Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received the Melchizedek Priesthood at the hands of Peter, James, and John almost a year before the organization of the Church. They had not, however, been ordained to an office within the priesthood; one cannot hold an office in a non- existent organization. They were apostles in the sense that they were special witnesses of Christ, having translated the Book of Mormon, been instructed by Moroni, and received both the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods at the hands of divine messengers. In the meeting in which the Church was organized, Joseph and Oliver were ordained elders. If they had already held the office of apostle, this ordination would have been unnecessary.

Ordained an apostle. The word ordained is frequently used in the Doctrine and Covenants to mean "designated" or "appointed." For instance, revelations speak of "the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and that which cometh of the earth" as being ordained (D&C 49:19). In section 89 we are told that "wholesome herbs God hath ordained" for the use of man, as were fruits in their season and all grains (D&C 89:10). Emma Smith is spoken of as having been ordained (D&C 25:7). Those who become sons of perdition are spoken of as having been "ordained unto this condemnation" (D&C 76:48).

The first elder. The designation of Joseph and Oliver as "first" and "second" elders of the Church was added to the original document which simply read "elders." This denomination helps dramatize their role as the presiding officers in the Church during its early years when its size did not justify the organizational structure known to us today. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 21:10, 12.

The Book of Mormon Proves the Divinity of the Restoration

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:5-12

20:5 He had received a remission of his sins. This alludes to the First Vision in which Joseph was told that his sins were forgiven him (McConkie and Millet, Joseph Smith, 371). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:17, page 10.

He was entangled again in the vanities of the world. Joseph Smith explained: "During the space of time which intervened between the time I had the vision and the year eighteen hundred and twenty-threehaving been forbidden to join any of the religious sects of the day, and being of very tender years, and persecuted by those who ought to have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they supposed me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner to have reclaimed me I was left to all kinds of temptations; and, mingling with all kinds of society, I frequently fell into many foolish errors, and displayed the weakness of youth, and the foibles of human nature; which, I am sorry to say, led me into divers temptations, offensive in the sight of God. In making this confession, no one need suppose me guilty of any great or malignant sins. A disposition to commit such was never in my nature. But I was guilty of levity, and sometimes associated with jovial company, etc., not consistent with that character which ought to be maintained by one who was called of God as I had been. But this will not seem very strange to any one who recollects my youth, and is acquainted with my native cheery temperament" (Joseph Smith-History 1:28).

20:6 An holy angel. The angel referred to here is Moroni.

20:8 The "means" prepared by which the Book of Mormon was translated were the Urim and Thummim. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:35, page 21; Doctrine and Covenants 9:7-10; 10:1.

20:9 The fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:34, page 20.

20:10 The writers of the Book of Mormon wrote by the spirit of inspiration; their words are scripture. Moroni, and others of their number, have testified of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon to many. The best known illustration of this is found in the testimony of the three witnesses (introductory pages to the Book of Mormon).

20:11-12 Three reasons for which the Lord gave us the Book of Mormon are stated in these verses. First, in an age when the reliability of the Bible is constantly questioned, the Book of Mormon comes forth as proof of the Bible's credibility. It is an independent witness of the prin ciple of revelation, of the prophetic office as known to the ancients, of the ministry of angels, and of the saving principles of the gospel. The Book of Mormon reaffirms the promises made to the fathers relative to the redemption of Israel. It fulfills biblical prophecy concerning the visit of Christ to these "other" sheep (John 10:16). It also fulfills prophecy about a book that would come forth to aid in the gathering of Israel (Isaiah 29:11-12, 14, 18; Ezekiel 37:15-28). Second, the Book of Mormon constitutes a sure proof that Joseph Smith is a prophet. A host of internal evidences verify that the book is not the work of men, not the least of which is the invitation given to all honest seekers of truth to inquire of God relative to the book's truthfulness (Moroni 10:3-5). Third, the Book of Mormon evidences that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever. Thus Nephi described the Holy Ghost as "the gift of God unto all those who diligently seek him, as well in times of old as in the time that he should manifest himself unto the children of men. . . . For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round" (1 Nephi 10:17, 19).

20:11 Proving to the world that the holy scriptures are true. Here we are told that one of the primary purposes of the Book of Mormon is to prove that the Bible is true. This same message was given to Joseph of Egypt when the Lord told him of the mission and ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. "Unto him will I give power to bring forth my word unto the seed of thy loins," the ancient Joseph was told, "and not to the bringing forth of my word only, saith the Lord, but to the convincing them of my word, which shall have already gone forth among them in the last days" (JST Genesis 50:30; 2 Nephi 3:11). Curiously, it is a common practice among Latter- day Saint missionaries to attempt to prove the Book of Mormon is true using Bible texts. In contrast, the Lord directs that we do the reverse, showing to those not of our faith how the Book of Mormon proves the Bible true. It is the knowledge and testimony restored to us through the Book of Mormon that unlock the greatness of the Bible.

All to Be Judged by Their Acceptance or Rejection of the Book of Mormon

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:13-16

20:13-16 Speaking to the Nephites, the resurrected Christ said that those of the last days who would not accept his words as they came to them through the Book of Mormon would be "cut off from among my people who are of the covenant" (3 Nephi 21:11). That is to say they will not receive the blessings of salvation found in the house of the Lord because they rejected the gospel as it came to them through the Book of Mormon and the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Many profess to accept Christ and his gospel as found in the Bible while rejecting that gospel as it comes to them through those the Lord has chosen to be his agents in this dispensation. There is not and never can be salvation in such a course. The food eaten by the ancients will not strengthen our bodies, nor will their baptisms cleanse our spirits. Those of whom we read in the Bible found salvation through their allegiance to gospel principles taught by the living oracles of their own day, not through the faith of a people who lived long before them, and so must we. For our day, those accepting the testimony of Christ as found in the Book of Mormon and complying with the laws and ordinances of the gospel as directed by living prophets are promised crowns of glory. Those rejecting the Book of Mormon and the direction of those the Lord has appointed as his messengers in this day have no such promise.

Creation, Fall, Atonement, Baptism

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:17-28

20:17 By these things we know that there is a God in heaven. The antecedents to "by these things" as found in the previous verses are the First Vision (v. 5) and the Book of Mormon (vv. 6-16). In effect, this verse announces a new gospel dispensation. "Gospel dispensations are those periods of time during which the Lord reveals or dispenses the doctrines of the gospel to men so that reliance need not be placed on past ages for this saving knowledge" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 200-201). Our testimony is to stand on revelation that is immediate and personal to us and to our day. Thus we profess to know that there is a God in heaven because he revealed himself in our day. We believe that he speaks because he has spoken to us, and we trace all ordinances of salvation through that authority revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

From everlasting to everlasting. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 132:20.

20:18 The biblical declaration that man is created in the image and likeness of God has been robbed of its purpose and meaning by historical Christianity (Genesis 1:27). Having determined that God has no corporeal image, apostate Christianity can only conclude that this biblical passage cannot possibly mean what it says. This text is argued to have reference to some part of the mind or spirit of man rather than the body as the context clearly suggests. The revelations of the Restoration leave no question on the matter. In Moses 6:9 we read: "In the image of his own body, male and female, created he them, and blessed them, and called their name Adam." In the Book of Mormon, Abinadi taught that Christ would "take upon him the image of man, and it should be the image after which man was created in the beginning; or in other words, he said that man was created after the image of God, and that God should come down among the children of men, and take upon him flesh and blood, and go forth upon the face of the earth" (Mosiah 7:27).

20:19 That he should be the only being whom they should worship. In the most proper sense the true Saint, in all gospel dispensations, has worshiped but one God. He is the Father of our spirits. Christ, through his atonement, reconciles us to the Father. Because we are "saved" (meaning reconciled to the Father) only through the merits and mercy of Christ, we pray to the Father in his name. All that Christ does is done "according to the will of the Father" (v. 24). Thus when the plan of salvation was presented in the Grand Council of Heaven and the need for a redeemer explained, the Father asked, "Whom shall I send?" (Abraham 3:27), and it was Christ who responded, saying: "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2).

20:21 The Almighty God gave his Only Begotten Son. Though the Almighty God is the Father of the spirits of all humankind, Christ alone was begotten of him in the flesh and is known as the Only Begotten Son.

As it is written in those scriptures which have been given of him. The King James Version of the Bible attests that Christ was the Only Begotten of the Father. Most modern translations reject this doctrine. Where we are accustomed to reading that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16), we now read that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son," or that "God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son." These translations deny us our divine inheritance and are supported by a theology that holds Christ as the Son of God only in a metaphorical sense.

20:25-27 Peter testified that there was but one name under heaven whereby men could be saved (Acts 4:12). In his instruction to the Ephesians, Paul reminded them that there was but "one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all" (Ephesians 4:5-6). This text announces another singular truth, one long lost to traditional Christianity: there is but one plan of salvation. Further, this plan was first known to Adam and has been known to the faithful Saints of all dispensations. This plan requires faith in Christ as the Only Begotten of the Father, repentance from sin, baptism by those in authority, receipt of the Holy Ghost, and endurance in faith to the end. God spoke to Adam, saying: "If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you" (Moses 6:52).

Teaching this principle, Joseph Smith said: "For our own part we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell with Himself; and this we cannot believe, since there has been no change in the constitution of man since he fell; and the ordinance or institution of offering blood in sacrifice was only designed to be performed till Christ was offered up and shed His bloodas said before that man might look forward in faith to that time. It will be noticed that, according to Paul, (Galatians 3:8) the Gospel was preached to Abraham. We would like to be informed in what name the Gospel was then preached, whether it was in the name of Christ or some other name. If in any other name, was it the Gospel? And if it was the Gospel, and that preached in the name of Christ, had it any ordinances? If not, was it the Gospel? And if it has ordinances what were they? Our friends may say, perhaps, that there were never any ordinances except those of offering sacrifices before the coming of Christ, and that it could not be possible before the Gospel to have been administered while the law of sacrifices of blood was in force. But we will recollect that Abraham offered sacrifice, and notwithstanding this, had the Gospel preached to him. That the offering of sacrifice was only to point the mind forward to Christ, we infer from these remarkable words of Jesus to the Jews: 'Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad' (John 8:56). So, then, because the ancients offered sacrifice it did not hinder their hearing the Gospel; but served, as we said before, to open their eyes, and enable them to look forward to the time of the coming of the Savior, and rejoice in His redemption. We find also, that when the Israelites came out of Egypt they had the Gospel preached to them, according to Paul in his letter to the Hebrews, which says: 'For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it' (Hebrews 4:2). It is said again, in Galatians 3:19, that the law (of Moses, or the Levitical law) was 'added' because of transgression. What, we ask, was this law added to, if it was not added to the Gospel? It must be plain that it was added to the Gospel, since we learn that they had the Gospel preached to them. From these few facts, we conclude that whenever the Lord revealed Himself to men in ancient days, and commanded them to offer sacrifice to Him, that it was done that they might look forward in faith to the time of His coming, and rely upon the power of that atonement for a remission of their sins. And this they have done, thousands who have gone before us, whose garments are spotless, and who are, like Job, waiting with an assurance like his, that they will see Him in the latter day upon the earth, even in their flesh" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 59-61).

20:28 There is no thought in such passages to suggest that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of the same essence as is declared in the creeds of apostate Christianity. It is the perfect unity of the Godhead that is stressed here. The whole system of salvation consists of our becoming one with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We are saved to the extent that we have learned to believe as they believe, think as they think, and act as they would act. Thus in his great intercessory prayer, Christ said: "Neither pray I for these alone [referring to the Twelve], but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me" (John 17:20-23). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:16.

Laws Governing Repentance, Justification, Sanctification, and Baptism

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:29-37

20:29 All men must repent and believe. The expression of belief can never replace the need to repent. Both devils and scoundrels believe in Christ, but neither will have place in the kingdom of heaven (James 2:19).

Believe on the name of Jesus Christ. The charge here is to believe in Christ and, moreover, to believe on the "name" of Christ, which is placed on those he has chosen to act in his stead (Abraham 1:18). It is one thing to say one has faith in Christ and quite another to demonstrate it by sustaining those he has appointed to lead his Church.

Worship the Father in his name. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:19.

20:30 Justification. There cannot be a kingdom of God without a system of government and laws. To hold citizenship in that kingdom we must abide by the laws of that kingdom. We are justified when we have complied with the requirements of the law. If our actions are in question, we are justified if those actions, as judged by God, are ratified or approved. Thus we stand innocent or vindicated by the law. The purpose of this verse is to sustain the necessity of the laws and ordinances of the gospel. It is to affirm that the grace of Christ does not dispense with the necessity of obedience to the laws of God. Rather, it states that in and through the atonement of Christ all may be saved by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel (Article of Faith 3).

The principle of justification is illustrated in the baptism of Christ. It will be remembered that when Christ sought baptism at the hands of the Baptist, John "forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" Taking advantage of the teaching moment, Christ responded, "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" (Matthew 3:14-15). That is to say, though I do not need baptism for a remission of sins, I must still comply with the law in order to be justified. This is precisely what Nephi is teaching us when he said: "Now, if the Lamb of God, he being holy, should have need to be baptized by water, to fulfil all righteousness, O then, how much more need have we, being unholy, to be baptized, yea, even by water!" Then in response to the question of how Christ fulfilled all righteousness in his baptism, he said that he humbled himself before the Father and witnessed to him that he would be obedient in keeping his commandments. By his willing obedience to the law he is vindicated by the law and becomes an example to all men showing them "the straitness of the path, and the narrowness of the gate," by which they too must obtain citizenship in his Father's kingdom (2 Nephi 31:5, 9).

The great revelation on the law of justification for our dispensation is found in Doctrine and Covenants 132:5-20.

20:31 Sanctification. Through the grace of Christ those who have been justified can be cleansed from sin and be made holy. The text extends this promise to those who serve God with all their might, mind, and strength. Sanctification comes through the Holy Ghost, who purges from the souls of men both the desire for sin and its dreadful effects (Alma 13:12). Teaching this principle, the scriptures repeatedly speak of the necessity of our being baptized not only by water but by "fire and by the Holy Ghost" (2 Nephi 31:17; see also 31:13; Luke 3:16; 3 Nephi 9:20; D&C 19:31; 33:11; 39:6). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:33.

20:32-34 All who are subject to death, all who have blood coursing through their veins, are heirs to the effects of the fall of Adam. All such must labor and pray continually that they do not fall. None are excused from the charge to endure in faith to the end. Nephi stated it thus: "Wherefore, ye must press forward with a steadfastness in Christ, having a perfect brightness of hope, and a love of God and of all men. Wherefore, if ye shall press forward, feasting upon the word of Christ, and endure to the end, behold, thus saith the Father: Ye shall have eternal life" (2 Nephi 31:20).

Brigham Young said: "Do not suppose that we shall ever in the flesh be free from temptations to sin. Some suppose that they can in the flesh be sanctified body and spirit and become so pure that they will never again feel the effects of the power of the adversary of truth. Were it possible for a person to attain to this degree of perfection in the flesh, he could not die neither remain in a world where sin predominates. Sin has entered into the world, and death by sin. I think we shall more or less feel the effects of sin so long as we live, and finally have to pass the ordeals of death. Do not understand that in the flesh we shall ever overcome the power of sin to such a degree that we shall never taste death" (Journal of Discourses, 10:173).

20:35 The Articles and Covenants of the Church, which we now know as sections 20 and 22, were read by the Prophet to those assembled at the first conference of the Church held 9 June 1830 at Fayette, New York. They became the first revelations received by Joseph Smith to be formally sustained by the body of the Church. The reading of these revelations became the practice at early Church conferences (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 2n). Zebedee Coltrin, Orson Hyde, A. Sidney Gilbert, Orson Pratt, and others had copies of the revelations that they used for this purpose (Woodford, "Historical Developments," 265). In order to do so these men had to make their own longhand copy of the revelations. As those copies are compared we find the same problem that existed in the meridian Church: no two were exactly the same. The possibility existed for those making their own copy of the revelation to add to or take from it. This verse comes as a warning, like that given to those of old (Revelation 22:18-19), that they were neither to take from or add to the revelations. This does not suggest that the Prophet himself could not edit his own revelations.

With the formal publication of the revelations in our day we are not in a position to add to or take from holy writ as was done anciently (1 Nephi 13:23-29). We can, however, add to or take from their intended meaning in the interpretation we place on them. All scriptural commentary is a measure of the spiritual maturity and integrity of those making it. The same, of course, is true of the manner in which we choose to apply the teachings of holy writ in our lives.

20:37 This verse restates the prerequisites for baptism as given in Moroni 6:1-3.

"And truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto the remission of their sins." Our faith in Christ is measured by the extent to which we pattern our lives after him. The things we choose to do evidence for whom we have chosen to labor. The truly repentant will bring forth, as Luke stated it, "fruits worthy of repentance" (Luke 3:8), or as Alma said it, bring forth "works which are meet for repentance" (Alma 5:54).

Having listed many of the attributes of godliness, Peter said, "If these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins" (2 Peter 1:8-9).

One of the dramatic experiences of the young church centered on this phrase. Telling the story, Joseph Smith said: "Shortly after we had received the above revelations, Oliver Cowdery returned to Mr. Peter Whitmer's, Sen., and I began to arrange and copy the revelations, which we had received from time to time; in which I was assisted by John Whitmer, who now resided with me.

"Whilst thus employed in the work appointed me by my Heavenly Father, I received a letter from Oliver Cowdery, the contents of which gave me both sorrow and uneasiness. Not having that letter now in my possession, I cannot of course give it here in full, but merely an extract of the most prominent parts, which I can yet, and expect long to, remember.

"He wrote to inform me that he had discovered an error in one of the commandmentsBook of Doctrine and Covenants: 'And truly manifest by their works that they have received of the Spirit of Christ unto a remission of their sins.'

"The above quotation, he said, was erroneous, and added: 'I command you in the name of God to erase those words, that no priestcraft be amongst us!'

"I immediately wrote to him in reply, in which I asked him by what authority he took upon him to command me to alter or erase, to add to or diminish from, a revelation or commandment from Almighty God.

"A few days afterwards I visited him and Mr. Whitmer's family, when I found the family in general of his opinion concerning the words above quoted, and it was not without both labor and perseverance that I could prevail with any of them to reason calmly on the subject. However, Christian Whitmer at length became convinced that the sentence was reasonable, and according to Scripture; and finally, with his assistance, I succeeded in bringing, not only the Whitmer family, but also Oliver Cowdery to acknowledge that they had been in error, and that the sentence in dispute was in accordance with the rest of the commandment. And thus was this error rooted out, which having its rise in presumption and rash judgment, was the more particularly calculated (when once fairly understood) to teach each and all of us the necessity of humility and meekness before the Lord, that He might teach us of His ways, that we might walk in His paths, and live by every word that proceedeth forth from His mouth" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:104-5).

Duties of Elders, Priests, Teachers, and Deacons

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:38-67

20:38 An apostle is an elder. All holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood are properly referred to as "elder." Such usage helps preserve the sacred nature of such offices as high priest, patriarch, or apostle.

20:41 Laying on of hands. Rich symbolism is associated with all gospel ordinances. The hand is a symbol of power or authority, the extended hand a symbol of friendship, confidence, and trust. The laying on of hands represents the placing of God's hand or power upon the head of the one being blessed (D&C 36:1-2).

In restoring the Aaronic Priesthood to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, John the Baptist told them that the Aaronic Priesthood was without "the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost." This authority, he explained, would be given to them by Peter, James, and John who would restore the "Priesthood of Melchizedek" (Joseph Smith- History 1:70, 72). This evidences that the laying on of hands to confer blessings or authority reaches back to ancient times. Indeed, whenever the higher priesthood has been on the earth the authority to bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost has existed also. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:70, page 120; Doctrine and Covenants 20:41, "Laying on of hands."

Baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost. To obtain salvation all accountable persons must receive two baptisms. They must be baptized of water and of the Spirit (D&C 76:51-52). The baptism of the Spirit is called the baptism of fire and of the Holy Ghost (Matthew 3:11; Luke 3:16; 2 Nephi 31:13-14; 3 Nephi 11:35; 12:1-2; Mormon 7:10; D&C 33:11; 39:6). Fire is an agent of purification and symbolizes the cleansing of the soul (Alma 13:12). Thus sanctification comes by the reception of the Holy Ghost (3 Nephi 27:19-21).

"The baptism of fire is not something in addition to the receipt of the Holy Ghost; rather, it is the actual enjoyment of the gift which is offered by the laying on of hands at the time of baptism. 'Remission of sins,' the Lord says, comes 'by baptism and by fire, yea, even the Holy Ghost.' (D. & C. 19:31; 2 Ne. 31:17.) Those who receive the baptism of fire are 'filled as if with fire.' (Hela. 5:45)" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 73).

20:43 To confirm the church. In the same ordinance in which someone is given the gift of the Holy Ghost they are also confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Membership in the Church can be obtained in no other way.

20:45 The Holy Ghost should direct what we say and do in all meetings in which the gospel is taught or in which the affairs of the Church are administered. Such meetings should always accord themselves with the "commandments and revelations" already given. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 46.

20:46 In the early history of the Church, those holding the office of a priest were, on occasion, called to serve as missionaries. This was the case with Wilford Woodruff, who observed, "I went out as a priest, and my companion as an elder, and we traveled thousands of miles, and had many things manifested to us. I desire to impress upon you the fact that it does not make any difference whether a man is a priest or an apostle, if he magnifies his calling. A priest holds the key of the ministering of angels. Never in my life, as an apostle, as a seventy, or as an elder, have I ever had more of the protection of the Lord than while holding the office as a priest" (Discourses, 300). Again Woodruff testifed, "I had the administration of angels while holding the office of a priest" (Discourses, 298).

20:47 To pray vocally. Occasionally we hear it said that we should not pray vocally because Satan can hear our prayers. Satan has no power to interfere with a heartfelt prayer be it vocal or silent. Vocal and public prayers are very much a part of our faith. For such occasions as a temple dedication a written prayer is also appropriate (D&C 109).

20:60 Ordained by the power of the Holy Ghost. As all meetings are to be conducted under the direction of the Holy Ghost (v. 45) so are all gospel ordinances. This text repeats the instruction of Moroni on how men are to be ordained to the priesthood (Moroni 3:1-4).

20:61 This church of Christ. This reference is to the branch in Fayette, New York, where the Church was organized.

20:65 Verses 65 through 67, which reflect a church organization that exceeds what was necessary in April of 1830, were added by the Prophet some time after the rest of the revelation was given (Smith, History of the Church, 1:68n).

20:65 Without the vote of that church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 26:2.

20:66 Traveling bishops. In February 1831 Edward Partridge became the first man called to serve as a bishop in this dispensation (D&C 41:9). In December of that same year Newel K. Whitney was also called to serve in that capacity (D&C 72). These men served as regional or traveling bishops: Whitney for Ohio and the eastern states, Partridge for Missouri. Congregations of the Saints were not divided into what are now called wards, presided over by a standing bishop, until the early 1840s in Nauvoo.

20:67 President of the high priesthood. This phrase lends itself to two distinctive usages. Anyone holding a position of presidency in the Melchizedek Priesthood, that is if they are the presiding officer, could properly be addressed as the "president of the high priesthood" in the context of their calling or office. In its fullest and most proper sense the title applies alone to the president of the Church. Only he presides over all other priesthood officers. Of his office revelation states: "The duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses Behold, here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church" (D&C 107:91-92). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:29.

To be ordained by. As used here the phrase "ordained by" means approved by and should not be confused with ordination to a priesthood office.

Duties of Members

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:68-69

20:68 Between baptism and the conferral of the Holy Ghost and the partaking of the sacrament appropriate instruction should be given the new member. We cannot live a covenant if we do not understand that covenant.

20:69 A godly walk and conversation. In Webster's 1828 Dictionary, conversation is defined as, the "general course of manners; behavior; deportment; especially as it respects morals."

Blessing of Children

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:70-71

20:70 Bring them unto the elders before the church. As there are to be no private interpretations of scripture (2 Peter 1:20) so there are no private ordinances of the gospel. All gospel ordinances belong to the Church and are to be performed at the invitation and under the direction of those who preside. For instance, even though a man holds the office of an elder he has no right to baptize his own children and give them the gift of the Holy Ghost save he receives that direction from his own bishop. This text applies this principle to the blessing of little children.

20:71 To father Abraham the Lord said, "I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee, and it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old" (JST Genesis 17:11). To those of our dispensation the Lord said, "Inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents" (D&C 68:25).

None are to be baptized save they are "accountable and capable of committing sin." The baptism of little children, or anyone else who is not accountable for their acts, in the words of Mormon "setteth at naught the atonement" of Christ "and the power of his redemption" (Moroni 8:10, 20).

Mode of Baptism

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:72-74

20:72-74 For nearly two thousand years the historical Christian world has debated the necessity, mode, and purpose of baptism. Among their number the matter remains hopelessly unresolved. Indeed, the only possible resolution of this and a host of other issues can be found in a new dispensation of the gospel. That is, the simple truths of salvation must be dispensed anew from the heavens. This, of course, is precisely what happened with this revelation and the organization of the Church under the direction of Joseph Smith. Given that the God of the historical Christian world has surrendered both speech and the attendant right to give revelation, such a solution is rejected by them. Yet, despite all of their objections, John the Baptist has indeed returned to earth and restored the authority by which he baptized the Son of God and a host of other faithful souls. He conferred that authority upon the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and had them baptize each other. Now in this revelation, in concert with the revelation on baptism given to the Nephites (3 Nephi 11:23-27), the mode of baptism is restored. This instruction, of necessity, preceded the organization of the Church.

The Sacrament

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:75-79

20:77 Willing to take upon them the name of thy Son. Commenting on this text, Elder Dallin H. Oaks observed, "It is significant that when we partake of the sacrament we do not witness that we take upon us the name of Jesus Christ. We witness that we are willing to do so. . . . The fact that we only witness to our willingness suggests that something else must happen before we actually take that sacred name upon us in the most important sense.

"What future event or events could this covenant contemplate? The scriptures suggest two sacred possibilities, one concerning the authority of God, especially as exercised in the temples, and the otherclosely related concerning exaltation in the celestial kingdom. . . .

"Willingness to take upon us the name of Jesus Christ can therefore be understood as willingness to take upon us the authority of Jesus Christ. According to this meaning, by partaking of the sacrament we witness our willingness to participate in the sacred ordinances of the temple and to receive the highest blessings available through the name and by the authority of the Savior when he chooses to confer them upon us" (Conference Report, April 1985, 102-3).

20:78 The wine. See Doctrine and Covenants 27:2-3.

Regulations for Governing Church Membership

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 20:80-84

20:81 The several churches, composing the church of Christ. The terms ward and stake as units of Church organization had not yet come into use. The first stake was organized in 1834. The term ward as a unit of Church organization came in the Nauvoo era.

20:84 Take a letter certifying that they are regular members in good standing. In our worldwide Church, membership records are kept on a computer network administered from the headquarters of the Church in Salt Lake City.
