Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 22

In the Book of Commandments this section appeared immediately before section 20, suggesting the possibility that it had been received prior to the organization of the Church. This seems a reasonable assumption given that it requires those who had been baptized by either Joseph Smith or Oliver Cowdery to be baptized again as members of the Church. It was first published in the The Evening and the Morning Star as the concluding part of what we know as section 20 (June 1832, 1). Together these revelations now recorded in sections 20 and 22 were known as the Articles and Covenants of the Church.

Baptism Is a New and Everlasting Covenant

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 22:1

22:1 All old covenants have I caused to be done away in this thing. With the restoration of the priesthood and the organization of the Church and kingdom of God once again upon the earth, the Church alone possesses the authority to speak for God and to perform the ordinances of salvation. Similarly, before the coming of Christ in the flesh, faithful Israelites were duty bound to honor the proscriptions of the law of Moses. After Christ's coming they were to let go of the law of Moses and embrace the order instituted by the Savior.

A new and an everlasting covenant. The covenants of salvation are new in that they have been restored anew in this dispensation. They are everlasting in that they remain the same in all gospel dispensations and their effects are everlasting.

Baptism is a new and an everlasting covenant. The composite of all gospel covenants constitutes the new and everlasting covenant. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 132:4-6.

That which was from the beginning. The ordinance of baptism for the remission of sins has existed from the days of Adam (D&C 20:25-26; Moses 6:52-53), as have all gospel ordinances. Teaching this principle, Joseph Smith said: "Now taking it for granted that the scriptures say what they mean, and mean what they say, we have sufficient grounds to go on and prove from the Bible that the gospel has always been the same; the ordinances to fulfill its requirements, the same; and the officers to officiate, the same; and the signs and fruits resulting from the promises, the same" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 264).

Baptism by Authority Necessary

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 22:2-4

22:2 The law of Moses. Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and a number of others were baptized by the authority restored by John the Baptist prior to the organization of the Church. With the organization of the Church the question arises, Did they need rebaptism? In response the Lord said, "You cannot enter in at the strait gate by the law of Moses." That is to say, as the law of Moses was legal and binding until the time of fulness came with Christ, so the baptisms performed by the authority restored by John the Baptist were legal and binding until the organization of the Church on 6 April 1830. Those baptized prior to this time were baptized for the remission of sins but not for admission into a then nonexistent church.

By your dead works. This refers to those baptisms that were performed by those not having priesthood authority. Such baptisms, even if performed "a hundred times" are dead. That is, they have no life in them because they were performed without authority.

22:3 Because there were no legal administrators upon the earth, the Lord restored both the priesthood and the Church through which the ordinances of salvation could again be administered.

22:4 Those who were arguing against the need of their rebaptism are invited to conform to the order instituted by the God of heaven.
