Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 21

DATE: 6 APRIL 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

In all gospel dispensations the true Saint has followed living prophets. By contrast it is characteristic of false religion to pay homage to the prophets of ages past while distorting and twisting their words to justify rejecting the living oracles. For instance, in our day it is common to hear people say, "My religion is Bible religion," not realizing that the statement itself is unbiblical. No one living during Bible times ever had a Bible, because it was compiled at a later date. The faithful of whom we read in the Bible are identified by their willingness to following the particular prophet sent to them. Nothing could illustrate more perfectly the principles involved than to have Joseph Smith receive a revelation in the very meeting at which the Church was organized, which defined his role as a prophet and seer and the role of those who would place themselves under covenant to sustain him. This is the revelation the Prophet received.

The Role of the Prophet

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 21:1-3

21:1 A record kept among you. Both as a Church and as families we are a record-keeping people. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints has a more complete and perfect history than any other organization of comparable size upon the face of the earth. Virtually without exception those events for which adequate records do not exist are the result of the persecution of the Saints, not their lack of discipline or obedience in keeping this commandment.

Seer. In Old Testament times a prophet was called a seer, from the Hebrew re'eh, meaning "one who sees" (1 Samuel 9:9). Contextually this definition carried the idea of seeing that which was hidden to others. The Hebrew hozen, meaning "one who sees a vision," was also translated "seer." Among Book of Mormon peoples a prophet was understood to be a man "chosen of God" to speak his words (Helaman 9:16; Alma 5:11). He was one to whom God had given great power and authority (Helaman 11:18) to act in his name (Alma 19:4). The Book of Mormon makes a clear distinction between a seer and a prophet. Ammon declares a seer to be greater than a prophet. By way of explanation he states: "A seer is a revelator and a prophet also; and a gift which is greater can no man have, except he should possess the power of God, which no man can; yet a man may have great power given him from God. But a seer can know of things which are past, and also of things which are to come, and by them shall all things be revealed, or, rather, shall secret things be made manifest, and hidden things shall come to light, and things which are not known shall be made known by them, and also things shall be made known by them which otherwise could not be known" (Mosiah 8:16-17).

A prophet. Defining the office and call of a prophet, Anthony W. Ivins explained, "A careful study of the etymology of the word and of the lives, works and character of the prophets of old makes clear the fact that a prophet was, and is, one called to act as God's messenger. He is to teach men the character of God, and define and make known to the people, his will. He is to denounce sin, and declare the punishment of transgression. He is to be above all else a preacher of righteousness, and when the people depart from the path which he has marked out for them to follow, is to call them back to the true faith. He is an interpreter of the scripture, and declares its meaning and application. When future events are to be declared he predicts them, but his direct, and most important calling is to be a forth- teller, or director of present policy, rather than a foreteller of that which is to come" (Conference Report, October 1925, 20).

An apostle of Jesus Christ. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:2.

Through the will of God the Father. God chooses his prophets. Our Father in Heaven foreordained that Joseph Smith should be the prophet to open the dispensation of the fulness of times.

Through . . . the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ. The call of every prophet is dependent upon divine help. Only through the direction and power of the Savior was the Prophet Joseph Smith able to be a seer, translator, and revelator.

21:2-3 This revelation, which was given during the meeting at which the Church was organized, identifies the importance of the principle of revelation upon which principle the Lord's Church has been built in all gospel dispensations (Matthew 16:18). "What constitutes the kingdom of God?" Joseph Smith asked. In response the Lord said, "Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the kingdom of God is not" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 272).

The Role of the Member

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 21:4-8

21:4-5 Walking in all holiness before me. With the restoration of the gospel comes the restoration of the charge to be a holy people. To the children of Israel at the time of Moses the Lord said, "Sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy" (Leviticus 11:44), and again, "Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation" (Exodus 19:6). Peter repeated this charge to the meridian Saints, saying, "As he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation [meaning conduct]" (1 Peter 1:15), and, "Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light" (1 Peter 2:9).

21:4 Meaning the church. This phrase links or ties that which follows to all who are members of the Church. It is directed to those who are members of the Church today as much as it was to those to whom it was given in April of 1830.

21:5 His word ye shall receive as if from mine own mouth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:38.

In all patience and faith. It is not to be expected that the wisdom in the direction given by our prophets will always be immediately apparent. Faith must always be a part of the life of the Latter-day Saint. President Harold B. Lee explained this principle: "There will be some things that take patience and faith. You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. . . . It may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life. But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself, with patience and faith, the promise is that 'the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory' (D&C 21:6)" (Conference Report, October 1970, 152).

21:6 By doing these things. The promises given in this verse are given to those who follow the living prophet and walk in holiness.

The gates of hell shall not prevail against you. A gate prevails when it keeps us in from or out of the place we desire to go. Because of the atonement of Christ the gates of hell that is the place of departed spiritswill not prevail. Ultimately all spirits will be reunited with their bodies in a union that is inseparable.

The promise given in this verse is that the prince of darkness and all the legions of hell cannot prevail over the Saints of God. As the Lord would yet tell Joseph Smith of his enemies, "Their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:9). Such is the promise here granted to all the household of faith. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:10 "The gates of hell shall not prevail."

Disperse the powers of darkness from before you. The battle for the souls of men is between light and darkness, truth and error, righteousness and wickedness. The promise given here is that darkness will be dispelled by light, falsehood by truth, and wickedness by righteousness for those who trod the path of holiness. To the extent that they heed the voice of the living prophet they too will become prophets, and light and truth will be their companions.

Cause the heavens to shake for your good. As we choose to march with the armies of heaven, they choose to march with us. "The rights of the priesthood," Joseph Smith taught, "are inseparably connected with the powers of heaven." These powers, he said, "cannot be controlled nor handled only upon the principles of righteousness" (D&C 121:36).

21:7 The cause of Zion. "Zion is the name given by the Lord to his Saints; it is the name by which the Lord's people are always identified. Of the Saints in Enoch's day the record says: 'And the Lord called his people ZION, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them' (Moses 7:18). 'This is ZionThe pure in heart,' he said in this day (D&C 97:21). Thus The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is Zion. Joining the Church is becoming a citizen of Zion" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 854).

21:8 Unto the remission of his sins. Through his faith and works Joseph Smith stood clean before the Lord.

The Saints Will Be Loyal to the Prophet

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 21:9-12

21:9 They shall believe on his words. This phrase constitutes the test of discipleship for a Latter-day Saint. Elder Bruce R. McConkie stated it thus, "The test of discipleship is how totally and completely and fully we believe the word that was revealed through Joseph Smith, and how effectively we echo or proclaim that word to the world" ("This Generation," 7).

21:10-12 During the meeting at which this revelation was given Joseph Smith ordained Oliver Cowdery an elder; Oliver Cowdery then ordained Joseph Smith to the same office. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:2.

21:12 The first preacher. In Nauvoo Joseph Smith was a confident and powerful speaker; in Fayette he was not. As with all men he had to grow up into the office that was his. Oliver Cowdery was called on to deliver the first public discourse in this dispensation. That took place five days later, on Sunday, at the home of Peter Whitmer Sr., where this revelation was received on the day the Church was organized.
