Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 23

DATE: APRIL 1830

PLACE: MANCHESTER, NEW YORK

Doctrine and Covenants 23 brings together five separate revelations as published in the Book of Commandments. The date given in that publication is 6 April 1830. All but Joseph Knight were told that they were "under no condemnation," meaning that the course they were pursuing was pleasing to the Lord. Oliver Cowdery, with Hyrum and Samuel Smith, was numbered among the six original members of the Church and as such would have been baptized that morning. Joseph Smith Sr. and his wife, Lucy, were baptized after the meeting. As indicated in the revelation given to him, Joseph Knight was resisting the responsibility to prayboth publicly and in privateand had not been baptized. Thus he does not receive the assurance given the others.

Revelation to Oliver Cowdery

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 23:1-2

23:1 Beware of pride. This warning proved to be most telling; pride was, in the words of Joseph Fielding Smith, "one of Oliver Cowdery's besetting sins" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:120-21). Oliver Cowdery stood at the side of Joseph Smith during some of the most important events of this dispensation. He was the Prophet's primary scribe in the translation of the Book of Mormon. He was shown by Moroni the plates from which it was translated and heard the God of heaven testify that it was true. He was with the Prophet when both the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods were restored. At the organization of the Church he was sustained as its second elder and later was sustained as an assistant or associate president of the Church. He was with the Prophet in the Kirtland Temple when Christ appeared to acknowledge his acceptance of that edifice as his house. Oliver there received with the Prophet power and authority at the hands of Moses, Elias, and Elijah. In the earth's history few men have been so honored, and yet, he lost the spirit of his calling and left the Church for a time.

"If he could have humbled himself in the troubled days of Kirtland he would not have lost his place and membership in the Church," Joseph Fielding Smith explained. "That which had been bestowed upon him was exceedingly great and had he been willing to humble himself, it was his privilege to stand with the Prophet Joseph Smith through all time and eternity, holding the keys of the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. However, at this particular time when this word was sought [D&C 23], he was free from condemnation. He was commanded to make known his calling to both the Church and also to the world, and while doing this his heart would be opened to teach them the truth from henceforth and forever. His great mission was to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Prophet Joseph Smith holding the keys of salvation for this dispensation. It was also his duty to bear witness to all mankind of the restoration of the Gospel" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:121).

Wilford Woodruff said he heard Joseph Smith say that Oliver Cowdery . . . said to him, "'If I leave this Church it will fall.'

"Said Joseph, 'Oliver, you try it.' Oliver tried it. He fell, but the kingdom of God did not" (Discourses, 123).

Revelation to Hyrum Smith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 23:3

23:3 Thy tongue loosed. Nearly a year prior to this revelation, Hyrum had sought the privilege of declaring the gospel. In response to that desire the Lord told him that there was much that he needed to do to receive such a calling. The simple reality is that we cannot teach what we do not know, and the Holy Ghost cannot call to our remembrance that which we have not learned. "Seek not to declare my word," Hyrum was told, "but first seek to obtain my word, and then shall your tongue be loosed; then, if you desire, you shall have my Spirit and my word, yea, the power of God unto the convincing of men. But now hold your peace; study my word which hath gone forth among the children of men, and also study my word which shall come forth among the children of men, or that which is now translating, yea, until you have obtained all which I shall grant unto the children of men in this generation, and then shall all things be added thereto" (D&C 11:21-22). Having more fully prepared himself, Hyrum is now entitled to the companionship of the Spirit and the direction that comes from it.

Thy duty is unto the church forever, and this because of thy family. Like many things in patriarchal blessings this promise could not have been fully understood at the time it was given. It would be three years before the office of church patriarch would be restored and Joseph Smith Sr. identified as the man through whom this lineal office would descend. At his death in September of 1840, that office fell to Hyrum, his oldest living son. Thus Hyrum was destined because of his family to serve in the Church. At the time of his death he was serving both as church patriarch and as an associate president of the Church with his brother the Prophet (D&C 124:94-96).

Revelation to Samuel Smith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 23:4

23:4 Samuel. "The last of the Eight Witnesses was a younger brother of the Prophet's. He was born in the year 1808, hence was twenty- two years of age when he beheld and handled the Nephite plates. He was of a serious, religious nature, even in his youth; and with three others of his father's family joined the Presbyterian church. While Joseph the Prophet was engaged with Oliver Cowdery in translating the Nephite record, in Harmony, Pennsylvania, Samuel paid him a visit in the month of May 1829, about the time that the Aaronic Priesthood was conferred upon the Prophet and Oliver by the ministration of John the Baptist. Samuel had come to inquire about the work and Joseph bore testimony of its truth and showed him some of the translation of the Book of Mormon. Samuel seems not to have been easily converted, but after much inquiry he retired to the woods and sought, by secret and fervent prayer, for wisdom to enable him to judge for himself concerning the things of which his brother had testified. The result was that he obtained a revelation for himself sufficient to convince him of the truth, and on the 25th day of May, 1829, he was baptized by Oliver Cowdery and returned to his father's house, in Manchester, New York, greatly glorifying and praising God. He was the third person baptized by divine authority in the new dispensation, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery being the first two. He was also one of the six members by whom the organization of the Church was effected on the 6th day of April, 1830" (Roberts, New Witnesses for God, 2:293-94).

Not as yet called to preach. In time, Samuel was called as the first missionary of the Restoration. He traveled to the areas of Victor- Mendon, New York. The copies of the Book of Mormon that he left in that area were instrumental in the conversion of Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball, as well as their extended families.

Revelation to Joseph Smith Sr.

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 23:5

23:5 Joseph Smith Sr. was the father of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the first patriarch in this dispensation. In the language of the Prophet he was "the oldest man of the blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham" (Smith, History of the Church, 3:381), meaning he was the oldest living firstborn son of Joseph of Egypt and thus the rightful heir to the office of church patriarch (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 38-39, 151).

Revelation to Joseph Knight

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 23:6-7

23:6 You must take up your cross. The Savior himself explained this phrase saying, "For a man to take up his cross, is to deny himself all ungodliness, and every worldly lust, and keep my commandments" (JST Matthew 16:26; D&C 56:2; 112:14).

23:7 It is your duty to unite with the true church. Because he was reluctant to pray, Joseph Knight had not obtained the witness of the Spirit to which he was entitled and thus was not baptized on the day the Church was organized. On the 9th of June of the same year he and his wife were baptized by Oliver Cowdery. In the last years of his life the Prophet spoke affectionately of Joseph Knight: "While I contemplate the virtues and the good qualities and characteristics of the faithful few, which I am now recording in the Book of the Law of the Lord, 'of such as have stood by me in every hour of peril, for these fifteen long years past,' say, for instance, my aged and beloved brother, Joseph Knight, Sen., who was among the number of the first to administer to my necessities, while I was laboring in the commencement of the bringing forth of the work of the Lord, and of laying the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints. For fifteen years he has been faithful and true, and even-handed and exemplary, and virtuous and kind, never deviating to the right hand or to the left. Behold he is a righteous man, may God Almighty lengthen out the old man's days; and may his trembling, tortured, and broken body be renewed, and in the vigor of health turn upon him, if it be Thy will, consistently, O God; and it shall be said of him, by the sons of Zion, while there is one of them remaining, that this man was a faithful man in Israel; therefore his name shall never be forgotten" (Smith, History of the Church, 5:124-25).
