Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 1; DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24

DATE: JUNE AND JULY 1830

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

As the seed of the gospel began to take root and the tender plant broke ground, the enemy of all righteousness made every imaginable effort to destroy it. In June 1830 a conference was held in Fayette where several of the brethren were ordained to the priesthood. After this meeting Joseph Smith returned with his family to Harmony, Pennsylvania. Shortly thereafter he and his wife, in company with Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, and David Whitmer, visited the branch of the Church at Colesville, New York. There on a Saturday afternoon a stream was dammed to create a place for baptisms the next day. Learning of this, a mob, incited by local clergy, tore the dam down during the night. The Saints responded by rebuilding the dam early Monday morning and baptizing thirteen people before the mob could reassemble. Upon their return the mob surrounded the home of Joseph Knight where Joseph Smith confronted them. Later that evening the Prophet was arrested on the charge of setting the country in an uproar by his preaching and teaching the Book of Mormon.

Joseph was tried and acquitted in South Bainbridge and immediately arrested again and taken to Colesville for trial. Again he was acquitted. A few days later he and Oliver returned to the home of the Knights to confirm those who had been baptized; however, they found it necessary to flee to avoid conflict with the mob which was again assembling.

It was in the midst of all this harassment that the Prophet recorded Moses 1. Of these events he said, "Amid all the trials and tribulations we had to wade through, the Lord, who well knew our infantile and delicate situation, vouchsafed for us a supply of strength, and granted us 'line upon line of knowledgehere a little and there a little,' of which the following was a precious morsel . . ." (Smith, History of the Church, 1:98).
