Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 1

Moses 1 constitutes the beginning of the Prophet's labor known to us as the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. It is a revelation given to Moses sometime after his experience at the burning bush yet before he led the children of Israel out of Egypt (Moses 1:17, 26). Coming in the midst of so many difficulties, this revelation was received by the members of the Church as an expression of God's love for them.

The Revelation of God and His Glory to Moses

MOSES 1:1-11

Moses 1:1-11 From these verses, which recount Moses' experience when he was caught up into the presence of God, we learn a very singular truth about the nature of man. To endure the presence of God, it was necessary for Moses to be transfigured that is transformed from his natural state to a higher state of glory. In this glorified state he was able to witness the visions of eternity. This privilege was accorded him because he was a son of God in the similitude of his Only Begotten and because it was preparatory to the work to which he had been called. After Moses returned to his natural state, with a great sense of amazement he said, "Now, for this cause I know that man is nothing, which thing I never had supposed" (v. 10). Thus we learn that natural or fallen man is "nothing," while that same man, clothed in the glory which comes only from God, becomes a being of infinite worth.

Moses' Confrontation with Satan

MOSES 1:12-24

Moses 1:12-24 Having been clothed in the glory of God and having learned that he himself was indeed a son of God, Moses then learned to judge between the God of light and glory and the prince of darkness. Satan came before him and demanded to be worshiped as the Only Begotten of the Father. Moses detected the great counterfeiter of all saving truths for Satan is devoid of glory. "Where is thy glory, that I should worship thee?" (v. 13) Moses asked. Here we have the second great lesson to be found in this revelation the truths of salvation require both teacher and student to be clothed in the robes of righteousness. That which can be taught or learned without the aid of the Spirit is not of God. It may hold sway in earthly kingdoms bring power and influence among menbut it has no place in the gospel of Christ nor in the kingdom of his Father.

Moses Again Receives the Glory of God

MOSES 1:25-42

Moses 1:25-42 Moses is now told that he will enjoy the power of God, even that he will "be made stronger than many waters" (v. 25) that he might deliver the Lord's people from bondage. With the glory of God upon him, he was then shown a series of visions. First came the creation of the earth even every particle of it. This was preparatory to his writing the account of the creation. Then came the history that would follow: Moses was shown every soul destined to come to this earth. The vision of countless worlds followed each created by Christ under the direction of the Father. Nevertheless, Moses was told "only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof" (v. 35). In this setting the Lord explained to Moses, and to everyone with the faith to accept his words, "This is my work and my gloryto bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (v. 39).
