Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24

"After our departure from Colesville, after the trial, the Church there were very anxious, as might be expected, concerning our again visiting them, during which time Sister Knight, wife of Newel Knight, had a dream, which enabled her to say that we would visit them that day, which really came to pass, for a few hours afterwards we arrived; and thus was our faith much strengthened concerning dreams and visions in the last days, foretold by the ancient Prophet Joel; and although we this time were forced to seek safety from our enemies by flight, yet did we feel confident that eventually we should come off victorious, if we only continued faithful to Him who had called us forth from darkness into the marvelous light of the everlasting Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

"Shortly after our return home, we received the following commandments . . ." (Smith, History of the Church, 1:101).

Joseph Smith's Calling

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24:1-9

24:1 As the night follows the day, so opposition follows truth. The promised "restoration of all things" has witnessed the revival of all past arguments against God's earthly kingdom along with the spirit of antagonism known to the Saints of all dispensations past. "It seems," said Joseph Smith, "as though the adversary was aware, at a very early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of darkness combine against me?" (Joseph Smith-History 1:20).

The Church was but weeks old when Joseph Smith was arrested on charges of being a disorderly person and setting the country in an uproar by preaching the Book of Mormon. The arresting constable was to have delivered him into a mob ambush, but, impressed with his character, instead aided his escape. "James Davidson and John Reid, Esqrs., respectable farmers, men renowned for their integrity, and well versed in the laws of their country," were retained to defend the Prophet, which they did successfully (Smith, History of the Church, 1:89). "But alas!" as Reid told the story, "the devil, not satisfied with his defeat, stirred up a man not unlike himself" (Smith, History of the Church, 6:394) to go to the adjoining county and obtain a writ against Joseph there. Allowed neither food nor rest, Joseph was immediately taken captive by the arresting officer. "He took me to a tavern," Joseph recounted, "and gathered in a number of men, who used every means to abuse, ridicule and insult me. They spit upon me, pointed their fingers at me, saying, 'Prophesy, prophesy!' and thus did they imitate those who crucified the Savior of mankind, not knowing what they did" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:91).

Friends of the Prophet again sought Davidson and Reid to defend him. "I made every reasonable excuse I could," John Reid said, "as I was nearly worn down through fatigue and want of sleep, as I had been engaged in law suits for two days, and nearly the whole of two nights. . . . While Mr. Knight was pleading with me to go, a peculiar impression or thought struck my mind, that I must go and defend him, for he was the Lord's anointed. I did not know what it meant, but thought I must go and clear the Lord's anointed. I said I would go, and started with as much faith as the Apostles had when they could remove mountains, accompanied by Father Knight, who was like the old patriarchs that followed the ark of God to the city of David" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:95; emphasis added).

Of the second trial Joseph Smith said: "Many witnesses were again called forward and examined, some of whom swore to the most palpable falsehoods, and like the false witnesses which had appeared against me the day previous, they contradicted themselves so plainly that the court would not admit their testimony. Others were called, who showed by their zeal that they were willing enough to prove something against me, but all they could do was to tell something which somebody else had told them" (History of the Church, 1:92). These trials were but the pattern, the prototype, of that which the future would witness a thousand times over, though the enemies of the Church would quickly learn that printer's ink was safer than public cross-examination.

Of his attorneys the Prophet said: "They spoke like men inspired of God, whilst those who were arrayed against me trembled under the sound of their voices, and quailed before them like criminals before a bar of justice" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:94). This too prefigured many a future scene.

"Whilst I was engaged in the case, . . . and when I came to speak upon it," said John Reid, "I was inspired with an eloquence which was altogether new to me, and which was overpowering and irresistible. I succeeded, as I expected, in obtaining the prisoner's discharge" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 234).

Called and chosen. One does not choose to be the Lord's servant. The choice of who will serve him and what and where that service will be rests with God alone. It was not the church of Joseph Smith that was being restored but the Church of Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith was his servant, first called and ordained in the councils of heaven to the ministry that was his.

24:2 Thou art not excusable in thy transgressions. No one is above the law. Joseph Smith was as accountable for misdeeds as anyone else, perhaps more so because of his office and calling. We are reminded of the charge given by the Savior to the Nephite Twelve. "Ye must watch and pray always," he said, "lest ye be tempted by the devil, and ye be led away captive by him" (3 Nephi 18:15). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 3:4.

24:3 Magnify thine office. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:33.

The church which is in Colesville, Fayette, and Manchester. During this period there were three main branches of the Church: Manchester, consisting primarily of the Smith family; Fayette, consisting primarily of the Whitmer family; and Colesville, consisting primarily of the Knight family.

They shall support thee. Reference is to the branches of the Church previously mentioned. There is no thought of a paid ministry here. The Prophet was not being allocated a salary, yet he would require food and lodging while he labored in behalf of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 43:13.

24:4 To sustain those whom the Lord has called and chosen is to be blessed; to oppose them is to be cursed (D&C 121:16-23).

24:5 The Prophet began at this time to arrange and copy the revelations he had received for publication (Smith, History of the Church, 1:104). It was also at this time that he received the revelation known to us as Moses 1, which was the beginning of his work on the Inspired Version of the Bible.

24:6 By the power of the Holy Ghost one can speak or write spontaneously. Joseph Smith did both. He commonly received revelations in meetings with others present. Indeed, we would be within the mark to say that most of his revelations were received in this manner. Initially, he did not record revelations as he received them; he had, however, the ability to recall them at will (Smith, History of the Church, 5:xxxii). This revelation directed him to prepare the revelations he had received so that copies could be made of them.

Parley P. Pratt, who was present when several revelations were received, described the process thus: "Each sentence was uttered slowly and very distinctly, and with a pause between each, sufficiently long for it to be recorded, by an ordinary writer, in long hand.

"This was the manner in which all his written revelations were dictated and written. There was never any hesitation, reviewing or reading back, in order to keep the run of the subject" (Pratt, Autobiography, 48). William E. McLellin, in like manner, said: "I, as scribe, have written reve lations from the mouth of [the Prophet]. And I have been present many times when others wrote for Joseph; therefore I speak as one having experience. The scribe seats himself at a desk or table, with pen, ink, and paper. The subject of enquiry being understood, the Prophet and Revelator enquires of God. He spiritually sees, hears, and feels, and then speaks as he is moved upon by the holy Ghost, the 'thus saith the Lord,' sentence after sentence, and waits for his amanuenses to write and then read aloud each sentence. Thus they proceed until the revelator says Amen, at the close of what is then communicated. I have known [Joseph], without premeditation, to thus deliver off in broken sentences, some of the most sublime pieces of composition which I ever perused in any book" (in Backman, Joseph Smith and the Doctrine and Covenants, 1-2).

I will send unto them a cursing instead of a blessing. One cannot accept the servants of God without at the same time accepting the message they have been commissioned to bear. One could not, for instance, profess to accept Joseph Smith as a prophet and at the same time reject the Book of Mormon. As with the servants of God so with the revelations of God: we are blessed by accepting them and cursed by rejecting them.

24:7-9 Joseph's call was to labor in the things of the Spirit. In this he was to be blessed. Others would be granted the ability to accumulate the wealth of the world. He would not. Those so blessed are expected to contribute liberally of their means to the building of the kingdom of God. Critics of the Prophet have accused him of attempting to obtain power and wealth. Such charges expose only their own desires and ignorance. Every key, power, and authority that Joseph ever received he gave to others. The same was true of temporal thingsall that he had he freely gave to those in need.

Brigham Young described Joseph's nature: "You that have lived in Nauvoo, in Missouri, in Kirtland, Ohio, can you assign a reason why Joseph could not keep a store, and be a merchant? Let me just give you a few reasons, and there are men here who know how matters went in those days. Joseph goes to New York and buys 20,000 dollars' worth of goods, comes into Kirtland and commences to trade. In comes one of the brethren, 'Brother Joseph, let me have a frock pattern for my wife.' What if Joseph says, 'No, I cannot without the money.' The consequence would be, 'He is no Prophet,' says James. Pretty soon Thomas walks in. 'Brother Joseph, will you trust me for a pair of boots?' 'No, I cannot let them go without the money.' 'Well,' says Thomas, 'Brother Joseph is no Prophet; I have found that out, and I am glad of it.' After a while, in comes Bill and sister Susan. Says Bill, 'Brother Joseph, I want a shawl, I have not got the money, but I wish you to trust me a week or a fortnight.' Well, brother Joseph thinks the others have gone and apostatized, and he don't know but these goods will make the whole Church do the same, so he lets Bill have a shawl. Bill walks off with it and meets a brother. 'Well,' says he, 'what do you think of brother Joseph?' 'O he is a first-rate man, and I fully believe he is a Prophet. See here, he has trusted me this shawl.' Richard says, 'I think I will go down and see if he won't trust me some.' In walks Richard. 'Brother Joseph, I want to trade about 20 dollars.' 'Well,' says Joseph, 'these goods will make the people apostatize; so over they go, they are of less value than the people.' Richard gets his goods. Another comes in the same way to make a trade of 25 dollars, and so it goes. Joseph was a first-rate fellow with them all the time, provided he never would ask them to pay him. In this way it is easy for us to trade away a first- rate store of goods, and be in debt for them" (Journal of Discourses, 1:215).

Oliver Called to Preach

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24:10-12

24:10-12 Oliver is charged to be tireless in defense of the faith. In so doing he is promised great strength and the power of God unto the convincing of men. He is also reminded that his strength is in the Lord not himself. Future events would prove that to be the case.

Miracles

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24:13-14

24:13-14 We do not trifle with that which is sacred. Miracles are not to be called for save the Spirit of the Lord directs. No revealed direction is necessary, however, to rebuke the devil or to administer to the sick or those bitten by poisonous serpents. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 63:8-9.

Dusting of the Feet

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24:15-17

24:15-17 Those who go forth in the service of the Lord also go forth with the promise of his protection. "Their arm shall be my arm, and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:14).

24:15 Casting off the dust of your feet. The same injunctions given in this revelation were given by the Savior to the Twelve in the meridian day. Luke records it thus: "Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece. And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. And who soever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them" (Luke 9:1-5). Commenting on this verse, Elder James E. Talmage observed: "To ceremonially shake the dust from one's feet as a testimony against another was understood by the Jews to symbolize a cessation of fellowship and a renunciation of all responsibility for consequences that might follow. It became an ordinance of accusation and testimony by the Lord's instructions to His apostles as cited in the text. In the current dispensation, the Lord has similarly directed His authorized servants to so testify against those who wilfully and maliciously oppose the truth when authoritatively presented (D&C 24:15; 60:15; 75:20; 84:92; 99:4). The responsibility of testifying before the Lord by this accusing symbol is so great that the means may be employed only under unusual and extreme conditions, as the Spirit of the Lord may direct" (Jesus the Christ, 345).

After the call of the Twelve in our day, we would understand this authority to rest with them, as it did anciently, or to those to whom they directly give it. The authority to perform the same has not been given to missionaries generally. Those performing this ordinance are further directed that it not be done in the presence of those they are testifying against "lest thou provoke them, but in secret; and wash thy feet, as a testimony against them in the day of judgment" (D&C 60:15). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 75:20-21.

Take Neither Purse nor Scrip

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 24:18-19

24:18 Purse nor scrip. To travel without purse or scrip is to travel without money or food. A "scrip" was a bag made from skins that was often used to carry scraps of food.
