Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 25

DATE: JULY 1830

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

Numbered among the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants are those given to people collectively and individually. This, however, is the only revelation given specifically to a woman. What is of greatest significance here is that this revelation given to the Prophet's wife, Emma Smith, is intended in principle and purpose for the instruction and blessing of faithful women everywhere. It is a revelation on the role of women.

Emma an Elect Lady

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 25:1-6

25:1 Emma Smith, my daughter. Emma had recently been baptized. In this revelation Christ acknowledges her as his daughter. All who have taken upon themselves the name of Christ in the waters of baptism and covenanted to live worthy of that name may be adopted into the family of Christ and are in a figurative sense his sons and daughters (Mosiah 5:7; D&C 39:4).

As recorded in the Book of Commandments, this revelation simply read, "Emma, my daughter." "Smith" was added in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, apparently to aid the reader.

25:2 Here Emma receives the promise that if she continues in the path of faith and virtue her life will be preserved to accomplish all that she was ordained to do in the councils of heaven. The Lord has said, "What I say unto one I say unto all" (D&C 93:49), from which we can conclude that this same promise is shared by every virtuous and faithful woman who has taken upon herself the name of Christ and lived according to that covenant. They have the promise that they will receive an everlasting inheritance in Zion (D&C 59:2-3).

25:3 Thou art an elect lady. This designation, which is used in only one other instance in scripture (2 John 1:1), identifies a woman who is called and chosen as a servant of the Lord even before her birth. Emma would yet become the first woman in this dispensation to receive the fulness of temple blessings and to preside over the Relief Society. On the day of the organization of the Relief Society, the Prophet recorded that "elect" meant to be "elected to a certain work, &c., and that the revelation was then fulfilled by Sister Emma's election to the Presidency of the Society, she having previously been ordained to expound the scriptures" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:552-53).

25:4 Apparently Emma had been disgruntled because she had not been permitted to see the plates and other things shown to the special witnesses of the Book of Mormon (D&C 17).

25:5 Many would look to Emma for an example. She would have the opportunity to do much good. It was her destiny to be a leader among the daughters of Zion, yet her greatest call and office was to be that of wife and companion to her husband.

25:6 Go with him. Emma is directed not to remain behind in Harmony, Pennsylvania. Emma's parents had been turned against the Prophet by Nathaniel Lewis, a local minister and brother to her mother. Once Emma left Harmony with Joseph, she never saw her parents again.

Be unto him for a scribe. Emma had served for a short period as Joseph's scribe in the translation of the Book of Mormon. She would yet act in a similar capacity as the Prophet labored on the Inspired Version of the Bible.

Emma to Write, Expound Scripture, and Select Hymns

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 25:7-11

25:7 Thou shalt be ordained. To avoid confusing this action with a priesthood ordination, today we would say "set apart." See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:2.

Expound scripture. To "expound" is to interpret. Emma was to have a special gift in making plain that which the prophets and apostles had written.

25:8 Emma was baptized on 28 June 1830 at Colesville, New York. Before she could be confirmed and given the gift of the Holy Ghost, Joseph was arrested "for setting the country in an uproar by preaching the Book of Mormon." Vilified by his captors, he was subjected to two spurious trials before being released. It was not until August that Emma was able to be confirmed.

25:9 Thy husband shall support thee in the church. In the Book of Commandments this read, "Thy husband shall support thee from the church," conveying the idea that she need not worry about Joseph's expending all his time and energy in the service of the Lord because the Church would provide for them.

25:11 Make a selection of sacred hymns. The singing of hymns has been an important part of worship among the Lord's people in all dispensations. Of the peoples of the Book of Mormon we are told that "their meetings were conducted by the church after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done" (Moroni 6:9). Emma was directed to compile the first collection of hymns in this dispensation. This selection of sacred hymns was published in Kirtland, Ohio, in 1835. It consisted of ninety hymns printed without music, only a few of which were written by Latter- day Saint authors.

Principles Applicable to All

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 25:8-16

25:12 By tradition our worship services begin with a hymn. We do so because of the great power in music to attract the Spirit of the Lord. Generally, all are invited to participate in the singing. "The song of the righteous," the Lord said, "is a prayer unto me." Significantly, it is the heart to which the Lord listens, not the beauty of the voice.

25:13 Cleave unto the covenants which thou hast made. Marriage vows superseded Emma's allegiance to her parents. As the Lord told Adam, "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh" (Moses 3:24).

25:14 Beware of pride. As the wife of Joseph Smith and as a woman of great ability, Emma is especially warned against pride. Perhaps the murmuring for which she was admonished (v. 4) included envy of the circle of faithful brethren that had with Joseph entertained angels, received reve lations, and performed miracles. Of necessity they had shared confidences and counsel to which she could not be privy.

25:16 This is my voice unto all. Although this revelation was given to Emma Smith, it is true that all faithful women will be well served by its admonitions and blessed in like manner by its promises. Through Emma the Lord is saying to all women of faith that if they will walk in paths of virtue they will be preserved to accomplish their life's mission and they will be assured an inheritance in Zion (v. 2). They too have the promise that their sins have been forgiven (v. 3). Those who have husbands are charged to be a comfort to them (v. 5); indeed, the greatest labor they will perform will be that which they find at their husbands' side. Their husbands will find strength in their strength, courage in their courage, and faith in their faith (v. 5). It is also their right to expound scripture and, for that matter, to interpret and apply the various manifestations of the Spirit to their families and in their various assignments in the Church (v. 7). Following the instruction to give time to writing and learning (v. 8), would enhance the ability of every woman to bless others. President Spencer W. Kimball observed that "children may not recover from the ignorance of their mothers" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 320). Few blessings are of greater worth to a child than a well- read mother. The admonition of the Lord also includes the direction that a faithful woman lay aside the things of this world in preference to those things of a better world (v. 10). Also included in the instruction from the Lord is the direction for Emmaand all womento lift up her heart and rejoice, cleave to her covenants, beware of pride, and continue in the spirit of meekness (vv. 13-14), and finally to "keep [the] commandments continually" (v. 15).
