Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 26

DATE: JULY 1830

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

This revelation was given at Harmony, Pennsylvania, in July of 1830 to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer. Though but two verses in length, this revelation is of particular importance in establishing the law of common consent. The manner in which it is referred to in the revelation assumes that those receiving it are already familiar with the principle. The principle, which is associated with the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood, finds expression as early as May of 1829. Joseph Smith recorded: "The word of the Lord came unto us in the chamber [the upper floor of Peter Whitmer's log home], commanding us that I should ordain Oliver Cowdery to be an Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ; and that he also should ordain me to the same office; and then to ordain others, as it should be made known unto us from time to time. We were, however, commanded to defer this our ordination until such times as it should be practicable to have our brethren, who had been and who should be baptized, assembled together, when we must have their sanction to our thus proceeding to ordain each other, and have them decide by vote whether they were willing to accept us as spiritual teachers or not" (History of the Church, 1:60-61).

Instruction to Study and Preach

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 26:1

26:1 Studying of the scriptures. The direction to Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and John Whitmer to "study of the scriptures" apparently referred to the work they had commenced on the translation of the Bible (Matthews, Plainer Translation, 27).

Confirming the church at Colesville. There was both great interest in the Church and great opposition to it at Colesville. The intervention of mobs had prevented the confirmation of those who had been baptized there.

Go to the west to hold the next conference. The second conference of the Church was held at Fayette, New York, about one hundred miles northwest of Harmony, Pennsylvania. It commenced 26 September 1830 and continued for three days.

The Law of Common Consent

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 26:2

26:2 Agency is one of the fundamental laws of heaven. There can be no forced righteousness, nor can laws and leaders be imposed upon us. As Latter-day Saints we maintain that it is the right of every man or woman to "worship how, where, or what they may" (Article of Faith 11). In the churches of men it is the right of those who formed them to determine their doctrines and choose their leaders. By contrast, the Lord restored the Church of Jesus Christ, and because the Church belongs to Christ it is his right to run it. It is for him to decree its laws and choose its officers; nevertheless, true religion always preserves to its adherents the right of conscience and freedom of choice. Thus the Lord has instituted in his Church a principle known as the law of common consent. According to this law those who lead can do so only with the consent of those who are expected to follow. In like manner, it is the right of those who are to be bound by that scripture and law to consent to do so. Every offering within the Church and kingdom of God must be a free will offering.

The consent of those so governed is obtained by the simple act of raising one's hand in an affirmative or negative vote when the proposition is put forward in the appropriate meeting. A negative vote is appropriate if the one making it is aware that something in the life of the individual being sustained is out of harmony with the standards of the Church. Negative votes are not given simply because the one called is not the preference of those voting or does not appear to be the most qualified. It has been said that in some instances pigeons are called to preside over eagles. In such cases the eagle must learn to fly in formation under the direction of the pigeon or wander off and be lost.

In the meeting at which the Church was organized, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were sustained by those who constituted its membership to preside as the first and second elders of the Church. The question is asked, What would have happened had they not received that sustaining vote? In answer we would respond that the refusal of those present to sustain them would not take from them either the Aaronic or Melchizedek Priesthood or the keys which had been conferred upon them. This authority would still have rested with them and thus the Lord would have led them to another people willing to sustain them. Those having rejected them would have closed the door of salvation to themselves. In like manner, the question is asked, What would happen if we as a people chose not to have a particular principle binding upon us? The answer, of course, is that it would not be binding and thus we would have closed the door in our own faces to the blessings that were associated with it. We could choose, for instance, not to be bound by the prohibitions of the Word of Wisdom, but in so choosing we would forfeit all blessings associated with that law (D&C 89:18-21; 28:10). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 72:7; 73:2.
