Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 27

DATE: AUGUST 1830

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA

"Early in the month of August [1830]," Joseph Smith stated, "Newel Knight and his wife paid us a visit at my place in Harmony, Pennsylvania; and as neither his wife nor mine had been as yet confirmed, it was proposed that we should confirm them, and partake together of the Sacrament, before he and his wife should leave us. In order to prepare for this I set out to procure some wine for the occasion, but had gone only a short distance when I was met by a heavenly messenger, and received the following revelation, the first four paragraphs [D&C 27:1-5a, 14, 15a, 18b] of which were written at this time, and the remainder in the September following" (History of the Church, 1:106).

Emblems to Be Used in Partaking of the Sacrament

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 27:1-4

27:2-3 Because of this revelation we as a Church use water in place of wine in the sacrament. Two and a half years after this revelation was given Joseph Smith received a health law known as the Word of Wisdom. Relative to the use of wine or strong drink it states: "That inasmuch as any man drinketh wine or strong drink among you, behold it is not good, neither meet in the sight of your Father, only in assembling yourselves together to offer up your sacraments before him. And, behold, this should be wine, yea, pure wine of the grape of the vine, of your own make. And, again, strong drinks are not for the belly, but for the washing of your bodies" (D&C 89:5-7). "Strong drinks" is a biblical phrase which has reference to any drink with intoxicating qualities. When Christ returns, we are told that he will again partake of the "fruit of the vine" (Matthew 26:29) with us in a great sacrament meeting.

Recounting the events that followed this experience, Joseph recorded the following: "In obedience to the above commandment, we prepared some wine of our own making, and held our meeting, consisting only of five, viz., Newel Knight and his wife, myself and my wife, and John Whitmer. We partook together of the Sacrament, after which we confirmed these two sisters into the Church, and spent the evening in a glorious manner. The Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon us, we praised the Lord God, and rejoiced exceedingly" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:108).

Christ and His Servants from All Dispensations to Partake of the Sacrament Together

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 27:5-14

27:5-14 In the judgment of many students of the Doctrine and Covenants, these verses are descriptive of the great meeting yet to be held at Adam-ondi-Ahman. Expressing this view, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote as follows: "Before the Lord Jesus descends openly and publicly in the clouds of glory, attended by all the hosts of heaven; before the great and dreadful day of the Lord sends terror and destruction from one end of the earth to the other; before he stands on Mount Zion, or sets his feet on Olivet, or utters his voice from an American Zion or a Jewish Jerusalem; before all flesh shall see him together; before any of his appearances, which taken together comprise the second coming of the Son of God before all these, there is to be a secret appearance to selected members of his Church. He will come in private to his prophet and to the apostles then living. Those who have held keys and powers and authorities in all ages from Adam to the present will also be present. And further, all the faithful members of the Church then living and all the faithful saints of all the ages past will be present. It will be the greatest congregation of faithful saints ever assembled on planet earth. It will be a sacrament meeting. It will be a day of judgment for the faithful of all the ages. And it will take place in Daviess County, Missouri, at a place called Adam-ondi-Ahman" (Millennial Messiah, 578-79).

"With reference to the use of sacramental wine in our day, the Lord said to Joseph Smith: 'You shall partake of none except it is made new among you; yea, in this my Father's kingdom which shall be built up on the earth.' In so stating, he is picking up the language he used in the upper room. Then he says: 'The hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth.' Jesus is going to partake of the sacrament again with his mortal disciples on earth. But it will not be with mortals only. He names others who will be present and who will participate in the sacred ordinance. These include Moroni, Elias, John the Baptist, Elijah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph (who was sold into Egypt), Peter, James, and John, 'and also with Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of days.' Each of these is named simply by way of illustration. The grand summation of the whole matter comes in these words: 'And also with all those whom my Father hath given me out of the world' (D&C 27:4-14). The sacrament is to be administered in a future day, on this earth, when the Lord Jesus is present, and when all the righteous of all ages are present. This, of course, will be a part of the grand council at Adam-ondi-Ahman" (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 587).

27:5 At the Last Supper, when Jesus instituted the sacrament, he explained the symbolism of the wine that the apostles drank, saying, "This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom" (Matthew 26:28-29). Doctrine and Covenants 27:5 states that Moroni will be in attendance at that meeting. The verses that follow expand the list of those who are invited to partake of the sacrament with the Savior to include all who have been faithful to their testimony of him.

Fulness of my everlasting gospel. See commentary on Joseph Smith- History 1:34, page 20.

The stick of Ephraim. The stick of Ephraim is the Book of Mormonthe testimony of Christ written by the descendants of Joseph who was sold into Egypt as prophesied by Ezekiel (Ezekiel 37:15-28).

27:6 Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things. The 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants includes the phrase "or restorer of all things." In this sense the name Elias is a title, which properly belongs to all the ancient prophets who came to aid in the restoration of all things. No single messenger from the presence of God restored all things; rather the composite of all messengers is properly referred to as Elias. Each of the individual messengers is also referred to as such. "Who is Elias?" the Savior asked. He then responded to his own question, saying, "Behold, this is Elias, whom I send to prepare the way before me" (JST Matthew 17:13).

The specific messenger mentioned in this verse is identified in the verse that follows. The Elias who appeared to Zacharias was Gabriel, who in turn was identified by the Prophet Joseph Smith as Noah (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157).

27:10 By whom the promises remain. Reference is to the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Abraham 2:9-11). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110:12.

27:11 Michael, or Adam. The name Michael, which means "who is like God," is the name by which Adam was known in the councils of heaven (D&C 128:21).

27:12 This text confirms the restoration of the Melchizedek Priesthood, for which we have no date or official account. Erastus Snow, who served as an apostle for nearly forty years, gives the following account of the restoration of the higher priesthood: "In due course of time, as we read in the history which he [Joseph Smith] has left, Peter, James and John appeared to him it was at a period when they were being pursued by their enemies and they had to travel all night, and in the dawn of the coming day when they were weary and worn who should appear to them but Peter, James and John, for the purpose of conferring upon them the Apostleship, the keys of which they themselves had held while upon the earth, which had been bestowed upon them by the Savior. This Priesthood conferred upon them by those three messengers embraces within it all offices of the Priesthood from the highest to the lowest. As has been often taught us that the keys of the presidency of this Apostleship represent the highest authority conferred upon man in the flesh. And by virtue of these keys of Priesthood the Prophet Joseph from time to time proceeded to ordain and set in order the Priesthood in its various quorums as we see it today in the Church" (Journal of Discourses, 23:183).

27:13 The keys of my kingdom. Peter, James, and John committed three things to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery: the Melchizedek Priesthood; the keys of that priesthood, meaning the right to preside over all of its functions and offices; and the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times. The holding of such keys is properly referred to as the apostleship, for keys are the distinctive characteristic of that office.

A dispensation of the gospel for the last times. A gospel dispensation is a period of time in which the truths of salvation are dispensed anew from the heavens so that there is no dependency on the revelations given to those of an earlier age. If priesthood has not come down by descent, it too must be restored. Ours is the final dispensation of the gospel. In it all priesthood, keys, powers, authorities, and doctrines known to any of the Lord's people in a previous day must be restored. Thus the Church stands completely independent of the doctrine and practices of historical Christianity. We do not borrow from their doctrine nor their practices. Neither do we seek their approval of our doctrine or practices.

I will gather together in one all things. This language traces to the apostle Paul, who prophesied that in the dispensation of the fulness of times the Father would "gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him" (Ephesians 1:10). The first among those things restored from the heavens came through the First Vision. It was the knowledge of God and his willingness to reveal his mind and will to men. Then came the priesthood, both Aaronic and Melchizedek. After that, "divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:21).

Thereafter the tribes of Israel are to be gathered from among every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, as are the scriptural records kept by their fathers (2 Nephi 29:14), and "the islands shall become one land; and the land of Jerusalem and land of Zion shall be turned back into their own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided" (D&C 133:23-24). This, the dispensation of the fulness of all past dispensations, will enjoy the restoration of all the glory, power, and knowledge known to any dispensation in the past. In addition to which the Lord said, "I deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 124:41).

27:14 This verse constitutes the invitation to all faithful Latter-day Saints to attend the great sacrament meeting over which the Savior will preside in Adam-ondi-Ahman.

Gird Up Your Loins

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 27:15-18

27:15 Gird up your loins. The long loose dress of the ancient world made it necessary for men who were going to run or make a journey to put a belt or band around their waist. This was also thought to give the body strength, and it provided an ideal place for carrying weapons.

27:18 Be agreed as touching all things whatsoever ye ask of me. There is a strength in unified prayer that is not found otherwise. For instance, we read that the Nephite Twelve were "united in mighty prayer and fasting" when Jesus appeared to them (3 Nephi 27:1). Similarly, Joseph Smith and six elders united in prayer and were rewarded with one of the greatest revelations on priesthood given in this dispensation (D&C 84:1). "Whatsoever ye shall ask in faith," the Lord said, "being united in prayer according to my command, ye shall receive" (D&C 29:6).
