Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 28

DATE: SEPTEMBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

During the summer of 1830 Joseph Smith recorded that "a spirit of persecution began again to manifest itself against us in the neighborhood where I now resided [Harmony, Pennsylvania]," which he said began with "a man of the Methodist persuasion, who professed to be a minister of God. This man had learned that my father-in- law and his family had promised us protection, and were friendly, and inquiring into the work; and knowing that if he could get him turned against me, my friends in that place would be but few, he visited my father-in- law, and told him falsehoods concerning me of the most shameful nature, which turned the old gentleman and his family so much against us, that they would no longer promise us protection nor believe our doctrines" (History of the Church, 1:108).

It appears that the Methodist minister mentioned by Joseph Smith was Nathaniel C. Lewis, brother to Emma Smith's mother (Porter, "Study of the Origins," 169). Joseph and Oliver had been threatened by mobs from time to time, but the influence of Isaac Hale, Emma's father, had served as a protection to them. Now that he and Emma's mother had been soured against the Prophet, it became necessary for Joseph and Oliver to seek protection elsewhere.

"Towards the latter end of August," Joseph wrote, "in company with John and David Whitmer, and my brother Hyrum Smith, I visited the Church at Colesville, New York. Well knowing the determined hostility of our enemies in that quarter, and also knowing that it was our duty to visit the Church, we had called upon our Heavenly Father, in mighty prayer, that He would grant us an opportunity of meeting with them, that he would blind the eyes of our enemies, so that they would not know us, and that we might on this occasion return unmolested. Our prayers were not in vain, for when within a little distance of Mr. Knight's place, we encountered a large company at work upon the public road, amongst whom were several of our most bitter enemies. They looked earnest at us, but not knowing us, we passed on without interruption. That evening we assembled the Church, and confirmed them, partook of the Sacrament, and held a happy meeting, having much reason to rejoice in the God of our salvation, and sing hosannas to His holy name. Next morning we set out on our return home, and although our enemies had offered a reward of five dollars to any one who would give them information of our arrival, yet did we get out of the neighborhood, without the least annoyance, and arrived home in safety. Some few days afterwards, however, Newel Knight came to my place, and from him we learned that, very shortly after our departure, the mob came to know of our having been there, when they immediately collected together, and threatened the brethren, and very much annoyed them during all that day.

"Meantime, Brother Knight had come with his wagon, prepared to move my family to Fayette, New York. Mr. Whitmer, having heard of the persecutions against us at Harmony, Pennsylvania, had invited us to go and live with him; and during the last week in August we arrived at Fayette, amidst the congratulations of our brethren and friends.

"To our great grief, however, we soon found that Satan had been lying in wait to deceive, and seeking whom he might devour. Brother Hiram Page had in his possession a certain stone, by which he had obtained certain 'revelations' concerning the upbuilding of Zion, the order of the Church, etc., all of which were entirely at variance with the order of God's house, as laid down in the New Testament, as well as in our late revelations. As a conference meeting had been appointed for the 26th day of September, I thought it wisdom not to do much more than to converse with the brethren on the subject, until the conference should meet. Finding, however, that many, especially the Whitmer family and Oliver Cowdery, were believing much in the things set forth by this stone, we thought best to inquire of the Lord concerning so important a matter; and before conference convened, we received the following . . ." (Smith, History of the Church, 1:108-10).

Joseph Smith Holds the Keys of the Mysteries

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 28:1-7

28:1-7 It was Oliver Cowdery's right and responsibility as the second elder of the Church to teach, as directed by the Spirit. He was to teach those things revealed through Joseph Smith the Prophet. It was not his right, however, to receive revelation for the Church. The Lord's house is a house of order, and there can never be more than one man on earth at a time who can speak by way of revelation to the whole Church. Teaching this principle, Joseph Smith said: "I will inform you that it is contrary to the economy of God for any member of the Church, or any one, to receive instruction for those in authority, higher than themselves; therefore you will see the impropriety of giving heed to them; but if any person have a vision or a visitation from a heavenly messenger, it must be for his own benefit and instruction; for the fundamental principles, government, and doctrine of the Church are vested in the keys of the kingdom" (History of the Church, 1:338; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 21). This principle was an important clarification for many early members of the Church who had come from a congregational background in which any member of the congregation could proclaim doctrine. Such misunderstanding led to an earlier error on the part of Oliver Cowdery. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:37.

28:2 For he receiveth them even as Moses. Miriam and Aaron, the sister and brother of Moses and themselves great leaders in Israel, were critical of Moses' marriage to an Ethiopian woman. "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us?" they asked. Then we read: "And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood in the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth. And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth [face to face as one man speaketh with another], even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them; and he departed. And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous." Aaron, in a repentant spirit, plead with Moses to seek a healing blessing for their sister. Thus Aaron and Miriam were required to seek the blessing of heaven through the very mediator whom they had murmured against. The healing blessing was granted, nevertheless it was required that Miriam remain seven days outside the camp of Israel before they could again resume their march (Numbers 12:2, 5-10).

Both Moses and Joseph Smith were dispensation heads and as such enjoyed an intimacy with God not known to many other prophets.

28:7 Keys of the mysteries, and the revelations. To hold the keys of the mysteries and revelations is to possess the right to turn the key that opens the heavens to us. In the theological sense, a mystery is something that can only be known by revelation. Sacred rituals are referred to as mysteries because participation in them also has the effect of unlocking the heavens to us, bringing an understanding that could not otherwise be had.

Until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead. As long as Joseph Smith was the presiding officer in the Church he alone could receive reve lation for the Church. If the Prophet proved unworthy, the Saints had the assurance that the Lord would call another in his stead. In accordance with the law the Lord had established that only the presiding officer of the Church can receive revelation for the Church, the revelation announcing that at some time someone else would replace Joseph Smith, of necessity, could come only through him (D&C 35:18; 43:3-4; 90:2-4).

Oliver Cowdery to Preach to the Lamanites

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 28:8-10

28:8 Shortly after Oliver's call to preach to the Lamanites, Peter Whitmer Jr., Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson were also called to accompany him (D&C 30:5; 32:1-3). Despite their lack of success among the Lamanites, the mission itself proved to be of great importance to the young Church. The missionaries set out on their 1,500 mile journey on foot. Near Buffalo, New York, they visited the Catteraugus Indians and left the Book of Mormon with them. From there they proceeded to Kirtland, Ohio. There they met Sidney Rigdon, a popular Campbellite minister and former friend and instructor of Elder Pratt's. After learning of the Book of Mormon and being convinced that he had no authority to minister the ordinances of the gospel, Sidney Rigdon and many of his congregation were baptized. Thereafter the missionaries found themselves teaching day and night. "In two or three weeks from our arrival in the neighborhood with the news, we had baptized one hundred and twenty-seven souls," noted Elder Pratt, "and this number soon increased to one thousand. The disciples were filled with joy and gladness; while rage and lying was abundantly manifested by gainsayers; faith was strong, joy was great, and persecution heavy" (Pratt, Autobiography, 36). Among the converts who quickly established themselves as men of unusual capacity were Isaac Morley, John Murdock, and Lyman Wight.

Near Sandusky, Ohio, the missionaries visited the Wyanddot tribe and preached the gospel to them. In January of 1831 the missionaries passed through St. Louis and St. Charles where little interest was taken in their message. "We travelled," Elder Pratt recounted, "on foot for three hundred miles through vast prairies and through trackless wilds of snow no beaten road; houses few and far between; and the bleak northwest wind always blowing in our faces with a keenness which would almost take the skin off the face. We traveled for whole days, from morning till night, without a house or fire, wading in snow to the knees at every step, and the cold so intense that the snow did not melt on the south side of the houses, even in the mid- day sun, for nearly six weeks. We carried on our backs our changes of clothing, several books, and corn bread and raw pork. We often ate our frozen bread and pork by the way, when the bread would be so frozen that we could not bite or penetrate any part of it but the outside crust" (Pratt, Autobiography, 40).

After traveling four months and suffering untold hardships the missionaries arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, which was then the western frontier. They rested at Independence, then crossed the frontier and visited the Shawnee and the Delaware Indians. These tribes exhibited great interest in the Book of Mormon, which aroused the ire of ministers of other faiths who prevailed upon the Indian agents to expel the missionaries from that part of the country. They returned to Jackson County, where they labored with measurable success.

28:9 From the Book of Mormon (Ether 13) the Saints learned that a New Jerusalem was to be established upon this the American continent. This prophecy caused some speculation among them as to where the City of Zion would be established. The revelation answering that question would come in July of 1831. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:2.

Satan Deceived Hiram Page

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 28:11-16

28:11-16 The Lord directed that Oliver Cowdery, rather than the Prophet, labor to correct Hiram Page. This was to be done privately.

28:11 That stone. A "peepstone" appearing to be the one used by Hiram Page to receive his revelations is now in the possession of the RLDS Church. It is a flat stone about seven inches long and four inches wide and one- quarter inch thick. It is dark gray in color with waves of brown and purple. It also has a small hole drilled through one end so that it could be worn on a chain around Hiram's neck (Wright, "Hiram Page Stone," 85).

28:12 Contrary to the church covenants. The Articles and Covenants of the Church (D&C 20 and 22) placed Joseph Smith as the first, or presiding, elder of the Church. As this revelation affirms, it would be for him and him alone to receive revelations for the Church. Thus the revelation concerning the location of the New Jerusalem, of necessity, had to come through Joseph.

28:13 By common consent. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 26:2; 72:7; 73:2.
