Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 3-5

DATE: JUNE-OCTOBER 1830

PLACE: HARMONY, PENNSYLVANIA, AND FAYETTE, NEW YORK

"The subjects of these chapters of Genesis translated by the Prophet have to do with the spiritual and temporal creations, agency, the rebellion of Lucifer, the fall of Adam, and the introduction of the gospel to Adam and his posterity," explained Robert J. Matthews. "The doctrinal emphasis is clear and prominent in the Joseph Smith Translation but is almost totally lacking in any other Bible.

"In the Prophet's translation of Genesis 1-5, principles are woven into a story line relating the events of the Garden of Eden, Satan's rebellion, his temptation of Adam and Eve, their eating the forbidden fruit, and their being ushered out of the garden. In contrast, the material in Doctrine and Covenants 29:30-45 is a brief statement of doctrinal principles without the storyactually a summary of the doctrine found in the longer narrative of Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis 1-5. Thus, for maximum comprehension, the Prophet's translation of Genesis 1-5 (Moses 2-5) should be read just prior to a study of Doctrine and Covenants 29, since that appears to be the order in which they were received.

"The historical relationship between these two revelations begins a pattern repeated in later revelations, a pattern which shows that many of the concepts contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were first presented to the mind of the Prophet during his translation of the Bible and actually were recorded first in that translation. Later many of these subjects were enlarged upon and appeared as parts of various sections of the Doctrine and Covenants" (Bible! A Bible! 151).

Prior to and following the reception of Doctrine and Covenants 29, the Prophet Joseph Smith worked on the inspired translation of the Bible. He began with Genesis, from which we received the selections published in the Pearl of Great Price as Moses 1 through 8. Moses 3 and 4 appear to have been received while the Prophet Joseph Smith resided in Harmony, Pennsylvania, between June and August 1830. Moses 5 was received after Joseph and Emma moved to Fayette, New York, during the last week of August. Doctrinal connections between Moses 5 and Doctrine and Covenants 29 suggest that the translation of Moses 5 most likely preceded the reception of section 29.
