Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 3

Nephi wrote that "my father, Lehi, took the records which were engraven upon the plates of brass, and he did search them from the beginning. And he beheld that they did contain the five books of Moses, which gave an account of the creation of the world, and also of Adam and Eve, who were our first parents" (1 Nephi 5:10-11). It is evident from Lehi's teachings that he had a more complete record than is found in our modern Bible. This would accord with Nephi's statement that many plain and precious things, including covenants of the Lord, were taken from the Bible before it went forth to the nations of the earth (1 Nephi 13:20-29). It is also significant that many of the items of doctrine and prophecy to which Lehi refers and upon which he gives commentary are found in the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis (2 Nephi 2; Moses 3-4).

God Created All Things Spiritually before They Were Naturally upon the Earth

MOSES 3:1-9

Moses 3:5 I . . . created all things . . . spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. The state of creation before the fall of Adam is herein revealed. The events described in the Creation account in Genesis are of a spiritual-physical nature. Adam and Eve were created in a physi cal state from the dust of the earth, but they could not die. Death did not enter the world until after the Fall. "Now what is a spiritual body?" asked President Joseph Fielding Smith. "It is one that is quickened by spirit and not by blood" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:76). Thus, the spirit that flows through the body gives it the description of being "spiritual." All crea tions were sustained by spirit element before the fall of Adam. Hence, the spiritual creation and organization of element in a paradisiacal state required the fall to mortality to bring to pass God's purposes. After Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit, blood formed in their bodies, and other changes were introduced into the world, by which all of creation became natural (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 268-69). The means by which plants and animals were changed to a natural state has not yet been revealed; however, "in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all thingsThings which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereofThings most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven" (D&C 101:32-34; emphasis added). Meanwhile, it seems to have been necessary for Christ to work out a blood atonement because Adam made a blood fall.

I . . . had created all the children of men; . . . for in heaven created I them. The earth is not the first home of any of God's creations. All living things were created spiritually before being placed on earth. They were composed of spirit matter or more refined element (D&C 131:7), waiting for the time when they might come to earth and take upon them a physical body one which would be permanently theirs in the Resurrection. The reference in this verse to the spirit creation concerns an event that had already taken place before the spiritual-physical creation that was revealed to Moses. "There is no account of the creation of man," explained Joseph Fielding Smith, "or other forms of life when they were created as spirits. There is just the simple statement that they were so created before the physical creation. The statements in Moses 3:5 and Genesis 2:5 are interpolations into the account of the physical crea tion, explaining that all things were first created in the spirit existence in heaven before they were placed upon this earth.

"We were all created untold ages before we were placed on this earth. We discover from Abraham 3:22-28, that it was before the earth was formed that the plan of salvation was presented to the spirits, or 'intelligences.' This being true, then man, animals and plants were not created in the spirit at the time of the creation of the earth, but long before" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:75-76).

Although this revelation refers specifically to plants and the children of men as having been created in a spirit state before coming to earth, animals were also created in this manner. The spirits of all creations are in the likeness of their earthly bodies. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:2.

There was not yet flesh upon the earth. Reference is to mortal flesh in which "the life of the flesh is in the blood" (Leviticus 17:11). In the sense that blood had not yet been introduced into the spiritual-physical creation "there was not yet flesh on the earth."

Moses 3:7 The first flesh upon the earth. This is not to say that Adam was the first of all God's creations. Indeed, all of the creative accounts (Genesis, Moses, Abraham, and the temple) make a point of the fact that the earth was created for Adam and that he was the last of God's creations placed here. The phrase "first flesh" means that he was the first living thing to be subject to death. "Since flesh often means mortality Adam is spoken of as the 'first flesh' upon the earth, meaning he was the first mortal on the earth, all things being created in a non-mortal condition, and becoming mortal through the fall of Adam. Jesus is the 'Only Begotten of the Father' in the flesh, meaning he is the only one begotten of the Father into mortality" (Bible Dictionary, 675-76).

The first man also. There were no pre-Adamites. Adam was the "first man" created by the Father (Moses 1:34) and declared by him to be his son (Moses 6:22).

Moses 3:9 It became also a living soul. As "the spirit and the body are the soul of man" (D&C 88:15), so plants became living souls as spirit matter and the dust of the earth combined in their creation.

It remaineth in the sphere in which I, God, created it. Lehi, commenting on this principle as recorded on the plates of brass, stated: "All things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end" (2 Nephi 2:22). Thus, there was no death among all of the life on earth before the fall of Adam.

I, the Lord God, planted the tree of life . . . and also the tree of knowledge. The tree of life and tree of knowledge were of supreme importance to the plan of God in furthering the progression of his children. "To bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man" explained Lehi, "after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created, it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter" (2 Nephi 2:15). As recounted in the passages that follow, the choices offered by these two trees help to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man. The fruit of the tree of life represents eternal life, and the fruit of the tree of knowledge offers the changes by which Adam and Eve became mortal and provided physical bodies to God's spirit children. See Doctrine and Covenants 29:39.

Woman a Helpmeet for Man

MOSES 3:10-25

Moses 3:17 Thou mayest choose for thyself. Conflicting commandments were given to Adam and Eve. They were told to multiply and replenish the earth (Moses 2:28). They were also told not to partake of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil (Moses 3:17). They could not keep the first commandment without breaking the second (2 Nephi 2:25; Moses 5:11). "Just why the Lord would say to Adam that he forbade him to partake of the fruit of that tree is not made clear in the Bible account, but in the original as it comes to us in the Book of Moses it is made definitely clear. [The Lord told] Adam that if he wished to remain as he was in the garden, then he was not to eat the fruit, but if he desired to eat it and partake of death he was at liberty to do so" (Smith, Answers, 4:81). As the Fall came by free choices of man, so salvation through the Atonement must come in the same manner. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:39, "Agents unto themselves."

In the Garden of Eden there was no sin, pain, disease, decay, aging, corruption, or evil of any sort. For these to exist it would be necessary for Adam to do something to change the nature of the world over which God had given him dominion. Adam chose to do so, that is "Adam fell that men might be" (2 Nephi 2:25). Corruption in all its forms and evil in all its variety entered the world. In effecting the fall Adam created the need for a redeemer and thus placed the plan of salvation in motion (Moses 5:11).

Thou shalt surely die. By partaking of the forbidden fruit Adam and Eve became subject to both a physical death (separation of body and spirit) and a spiritual death (estrangement from the presence of God). See Doctrine and Covenants 29:39.

Moses 3:19 They were also living souls. As "the spirit and the body are the soul of man" (D&C 88:15), so animals have a dual nature of spirit and body. The spirits of all animals are in the likeness of their earthly bodies (D&C 77:2).

Moses 3:21-23 The imagery used to veil the account of Eve's birth is most beautiful, particularly so in a day when there is so much confusion about the role of women. Symbolically, Eve is created from Adam. She was not taken from the bones of Adam's head nor from the bones of his heel, for it is not the place of woman to be either above man or beneath him. Her place is at his side, and so she is taken, in the figurative sense, from his rib the bone that girds the side and rests closest to the heart. Thus we find Adam declaring: "This I know now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man" (v. 23). Eve, unlike the rest of God's creations, was of Adam's bone and of his flesh, meaning that she was equal to him in powers, faculties, and rights. See commentary on Moses 5:1-2, page 224.

Moses 3:25 The man and his wife. Adam and Eve were married before the Fall brought death into the world. The marriage covenant is not restricted to the bounds of mortality but was designed to be eternal from the beginning. The Savior revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that marriage is part of "the law of my Holy Priesthood, as was ordained by me and my Father before the world was" (D&C 132:28).
