Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 4

How Satan Became the Devil

MOSES 4:1-4

Moses 4:1 I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained: "The contention in heaven was Jesus said there would be certain souls that would not be saved; and the devil said he could save them all, and laid his plans before the grand council, who gave their vote in favor of Jesus Christ. So the devil rose up in rebellion against God, and was cast down, with all who put up their heads for him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 357).

Perhaps some irony is to be found in the fact that those who embraced the cause wherein none were to be lost became the only ones who are everlastingly lost. They alone become "perdition," or hopelessly lost. They are "the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power; yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath. For all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father before the worlds were made" (D&C 76:37-39).

Give me thine honor. The Father's honor is his "everlasting dominion," which flows unto him "without compulsory means" (D&C 121:46). His children freely honor him, as he ordains only that which will bring to pass immortality and eternal lives. He is the author of the plan of salvation. He reigns in heaven with the scepter of righteousness and truth (D&C 121:46).

Pride, arrogance, haughtiness, lust for power, and lack of faith in God are manifested in the presumptuous offer of Lucifer. He desired to set up his own priesthood order. The order was designed to set himself up at its head and none would preside over him, not even God. Isaiah expressed Lucifer's desire in poetic verse: "For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High" (Isaiah 14:13-14). Those who are willing to give Lucifer honor as their father form his priesthood order and are known as sons of perdition.

Moses 4:2 Father, thy will be done. The Son had no plan of his own. The Father is the author of the plan of salvation. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "God himself, finding he was in the midst of spirits and glory, because he was more intelligent, saw proper to institute laws whereby the rest could have a privilege to advance like himself. The relationship we have with God places us in a situation to advance in knowledge. He has power to institute laws to instruct the weaker intelligences, that they may be exalted with himself" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 354).

The will of the Only Begotten Son has always been the will of the Father in all things. We learn of the Father's plan from the teachings of the Savior. "Behold I have given unto you my gospel, and this is the gospel which I have given unto youthat I came into the world to do the will of my Father, because my Father sent me. And my Father sent me that I might be lifted up upon the cross; and after that I had been lifted up upon the cross, that I might draw all men unto me, that as I have been lifted up by men even so should men be lifted up by the Father, to stand before me, to be judged of their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil" (3 Nephi 27:13-14).

Moses 4:3 Satan . . . sought to destroy the agency of man. The salvation guaranteed by Satan to all of the children of God would have come at the cost of their agency. The right of choice would have been lost to them. Without the right of choice there can be neither righteousness nor wickedness and therefore no purpose in our mortal probation. For God to have accepted such a proposal would in itself have destroyed the purpose of our creation.

Satan rebelled against me. When he was not chosen as the promised Messiah, Lucifer "was angry, and kept not his first estate" (Abraham 3:28). He sought to openly rebel against the authority of the Father. "A third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from [God] because of their agency" (D&C 29:36). "And there was war in heaven" (Revelation 12:7).

Moses 4:4 He became Satan, yea, even the devil. Lucifer had been a bearer of light, as his name, son of the morning, implies. He was "an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God . . . a son of the morning" (D&C 76:25-26). However, his rebellion led him to become Satan, meaning the slanderer and "the accuser of our brethren" (Revelation 12:10). He became a liar and "sought that which was evil before God. And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind" (2 Nephi 2:17-18).

Satan Tempts Eve

MOSES 4:5-11

Moses 4:5 The serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field. In this verse the serpent symbolizes Lucifer. Similar symbolism was used in the revelation given to John the apostle. He beheld "a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: . . . And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: . . . and his angels were cast out with him" (Revelation 12:3-4, 9). Commenting on the account of the fall of Adam as recorded on the brass plates, Lehi explained, "According to the things which I have read, [I] must needs suppose that an angel of God, according to that which is written, had fallen from heaven; wherefore, he became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God. And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind. Wherefore, he said unto Eve, yea, even that old serpent, who is the devil, who is the father of all lies, wherefore he said: Partake of the forbidden fruit, and ye shall not die, but ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil" (2 Nephi 2:17-18; emphasis added).

Moses 4:6 The serpent, (for he had drawn away many after him). Again, reference to the serpent is symbolic of Lucifer and those spirits that followed him in rebellion against God. However, the possibility that there was also an actual serpent or snake in the garden, through which the devil spoke, remains. Such is hinted at in verse 7: "he spake by the mouth of the serpent." An example of devils entering into the bodies of animals is recorded in the New Testament wherein evil spirits were permitted to enter into the bodies of swine (Luke 8:32-33). It may be that as "angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost" (2 Nephi 32:3), so devils speak by the power of Satan. That is, the serpent may signify that Satan spoke by the mouth of his angels.

He sought also to beguile Eve. Eve did not rebel against God in partaking of the forbidden fruit. She was innocent, like a little child, not knowing good from evil. Satan deceived her by lying to her, telling her that she would not surely die if she partook of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Thus, a law was transgressed, but a sin was not committed.

He knew not the mind of God. As is true of those whom the devil takes captive, so it is true of Lucifer and his fall to perdition: "They that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries" (Alma 12:11). All apostates are in a similar situation of having lost light and truth. "Strange as it may appear at first thought," expressed the Prophet Joseph Smith, "yet it is no less strange than true, that notwithstanding all the professed determination to live godly, apostates after turning from the faith of Christ, unless they have speedily repented, have sooner or later fallen into the snares of the wicked one, and have been left destitute of the Spirit of God, to mani fest their wickedness in the eyes of multitudes. . . . There is a superior intelligence bestowed upon such as obey the Gospel with full purpose of heart, which, if sinned against, the apostate is left naked and destitute of the Spirit of God. . . . When once that light which was in them is taken from them, they become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 67).

He sought to destroy the world. Referring to Lucifer, Lehi explained: "Because he had fallen from heaven, and he had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind" (2 Nephi 2:18). Lucifer believed that the fall of Adam would lead to the eventual captivity of all God's children. Lucifer was cut off from the presence of God, becoming spiritually dead. He believed that by tempting Eve to partake of the forbidden fruit that she too would be cut off from the presence of God. In this plan Lucifer was correct. Lehi further explained that God "gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents" (2 Nephi 2:21). In addition, the consequence of temporal death, as pronounced by God upon Adam and Eve if they partook of the forbidden fruit, was the separation of the body and spirit. In such a situation Adam and Eve, and their posterity, would become disembodied spirits after death, thus becoming like Lucifer. Because Lucifer has no faith and no light to comprehend Christ's atoning sacrifice, he believed, as Jacob described in the Book of Mormon, that "our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like into himself" (2 Nephi 9:9).

Adam and Eve's Fall; Death Enters the World

MOSES 4:12-25

Moses 4:12-25 The apostle Paul explained that "Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression" (1 Timothy 2:14). In other words, Eve partook of the fruit due to her innocent and trusting nature, not knowing good and evil. On the other hand, there was no deception involved when Adam partook of the forbidden fruit. It appears that Adam purposely fell that he might remain with Eve, according to the commandment of the Lord (v. 18). Further, they were commanded to multiply and replenish the earth, which they could not do in their immortal or paradisiacal state.

"What is meant by partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie, "is that our first parents complied with whatever laws were involved so that their bodies would change from their state of paradisiacal immortality to a state of natural mortality" (Sermons and Writings, 189).

Moses 4:13 They sewed fig-leaves together and made themselves aprons. The fig is a symbol of fertility. In clothing the sexual parts of their bodieswhich represent the power of creationwith fig leaves, Adam and Eve announced that they now had the power to procreate.

Moses 4:20 Because thou hast done this thou shalt be cursed. This curse, placed upon the serpent, symbolizes the curse placed upon those that followed Lucifer in the premortal life. Throughout eternity they will remain lower than the cattle or the beasts of the field, for even the beasts have bodies of flesh and bone and enjoy the privilege of resurrection, whereas the devil and his angels remain unembodied spirits forever.

Moses 4:21 He shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. "He" to whom reference is made is Christ. The biblical text, rather sadly, reads "it" (Genesis 3:15). It is Christ who will "bruise" (in Hebrew, "crush") Satan's head. Satan will have his moment of victory in the crucifixion of Christ (spoken of as bruising Christ's heel), but the ultimate victory over death and sin will rest with Christ (described here as bruising Satan's head).

Moses 4:22 I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception. This could have been translated "your pain in childbearing," or "your labor and groaning." The pain of childbearing rests with the woman. It seems also a part of the nature of women to feel a greater sorrow or pain in the improper actions of wayward children.

He shall rule over thee. "I have a question about the word rule," stated President Spencer W. Kimball. "It gives the wrong impression. I would prefer to use the word preside because that's what he does. A righteous husband presides over his wife and family" ("Blessings and Responsi bilities," 72). President Howard W. Hunter taught, "A man who holds the priesthood accepts his wife as a partner in the leadership of the home and family with full knowledge of and full participation in all decisions relating thereto. Of necessity there must be in the Church and in the home a presiding officer (D&C 107:21). By divine appointment, the responsi bility to preside in the home rests upon the priesthood holder (Moses 4:22). The Lord intended that the wife be a helpmeet for man . . . that is, a companion equal and necessary in full partnership. Presiding in righ teousness necessitates a shared responsibility between husband and wife; together you act with knowledge and participation in all family matters. For a man to operate independently of or without regard to the feelings and counsel of his wife in governing the family is to exercise unrighteous dominion" (Conference Report, October 1994, 68).

Adam and Eve Are Sent Forth from the Garden of Eden

MOSES 4:26-32

Moses 4:26 Mother of all living; . . . the first of all women, which are many. "Adam and Eve, who were our first parents" (1 Nephi 5:11) are the mortal progenitors of all men and women. It would appear that the first parents on each earth would properly bear the names Adam and Eve (Abraham 3:3).

Moses 4:27 Make coats of skins, and clothed them. After Adam and Eve had partaken of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, after they had blood flowing in their veins, after all things in the world of which they were a part had become subject to death, the God of Heaven taught them the law of sacrifice. This law required the deathby the shedding of blood of two lambs whose skins were then placed on Adam and Eve. These special garments were worn by them when they went out into the lone and dreary world. The garments constituted a constant reminder of the protection they would enjoy (through the blood of the Lamb, even the Son of God) from all the effects of the Fall.

Moses 4:31 Cherubim and a flaming sword. Cherubim are usually depicted as winged animals, such as bulls and lions. Sometimes they are composite creatures of several animals and have the face of a man. They are utilized in many cultures to represent the guardians of sacred buildings, treasures, trees, etc. All who return to the presence of God must be able to "pass by the angels, and the gods, which are set there" to guard the way so that those who have not been properly prepared may not enter (D&C 132:19).

When asked, "What does the scripture mean, which saith that God placed cherubim and a flaming sword on the east of the garden of Eden, lest our first parents should enter and partake of the fruit of the tree of life, and live forever?" (Alma 12:21), the prophet Alma explained, "Now we see that Adam did fall by the partaking of the forbidden fruit, according to the word of God; and thus we see, that by his fall, all mankind became a lost and fallen people. And now behold, I say unto you that if it had been possible for Adam to have partaken of the fruit of the tree of life at that time, there would have been no death, and the word would have been void, making God a liar, for he said: If thou eat thou shalt surely die. And we see that death comes upon mankind, yea, the death which has been spoken of by Amulek, which is the temporal death; nevertheless there was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state which has been spoken of by us, which is after the resurrection of the dead. . . . And now behold, if it were pos sible that our first parents could have gone forth and partaken of the tree of life they would have been forever miserable, having no preparatory state; and thus the plan of redemption would have been frustrated, and the word of God would have been void, taking none effect. But behold, it was not so; but it was appointed unto men that they must die; and after death, they must come to judgment, even that same judgment of which we have spoken, which is the end" (Alma 12:22-24, 26-27).
