Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 5

Adam and Eve Bring Forth Children

MOSES 5:1-3

Moses 5:1-3 Adam and Eve were the parents of many children and may have been grandparents before Cain and Abel were born.

Moses 5:1 Adam began to till the earth. Adam and Eve were neither ignorant nor helpless when they left Eden to begin life in this fallen world. While in Eden they had learned to dress and keep a garden (Moses 3:15) and undoubtedly learned much about animals and their various uses (Moses 2:26).

Moses 5:1-2 Eve, also, his wife, did labor with him . . . and she bare unto him sons and daughters. Created in the image and likeness of God, Adam and Eve became in their marriage the prototype of manhood and womanhood. They labored together, taught their children together, prayed together, and heard the voice of the Lord together. Indeed, according to the divine command, they became one flesh (Moses 3:24).

Adam Offers Sacrifice and Serves God

MOSES 5:4-15

Moses 5:4 For they were shut out from his presence. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:41, "The first death, even that same death which is the last death."

Moses 5:6 I know not. Obedience often precedes understanding. This, however, is not blind faith, for faith can only be exercised in principles that are true (Alma 32:21) and requires a knowledge of God, his commandments, and his power.

Moses 5:7 Is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father. Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed, "A long, wearisome road runs from Eden to Gethsemane, from the garden in which the promise of a Redeemer was first given to the garden in which the promised redemption was wrought. Long, wearisome centuriesforty periods of one hundred years each separated the promise of a Redeemer from his destined crucifixion. During all these slow-passing years millions upon millions of faithful souls looked forward, with an eye of faith, to that day when Messiah's infinite and eternal atoning sacrifice would free them from their sins. Lest they forget, the Lord gave them the ordinance of sacrifice, an ordinance perfectly designed to keep them in remembrance of that which was to be" (Promised Messiah, 383).

Moses 5:8 Do all that thou doest in the name of the Son. No more perfect evidence of apostasy could be cited than the notion in the historical Christian world that Christianitythat is the belief that salvation is in Christ began in the meridian of time, thus leaving those who lived in the first half of earth's history without claim upon the redeeming blood of Christ. That this simply was not the case is amply attested to in the Book of Mormon. The robbing of the Old Testament of this understanding is the classical illustration of plain and precious things having been taken from that record. Conversely, no more perfect evidence could be cited that Joseph Smith was a prophet than the restoration of the knowledge that from the days of Adam the knowledge of Christ and his gospel were known to the children of men.

From the first man to the last, salvation comes only in the name of Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith observed that "we cannot believe that the ancients in all ages were so ignorant of the system of heaven as many suppose, since all that were ever saved, were saved through the power of this great plan of redemption, as much before the coming of Christ as since; if not, God has had different plans in operation (if we may so express it), to bring men back to dwell with Himself; and this we cannot believe, since there has been no change in the constitution of man since he fell" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 59-60).

Call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. Each prayer offered in the name of Christ strengthens faith in the Only Begotten. By command we have been directed to pray only to the Father, doing so in the name of his Beloved Son.

The practice of the Saints and prophets of all ages was first given to Adam by the angel. They prayed to the Father in the name of his Only Begotten. Enoch prayed, "I ask thee, O Lord, in the name of thine Only Begotten, even Jesus Christ, that thou wilt have mercy upon Noah and his seed, that the earth might never more be covered by the floods" (Moses 7:50). The Lord said to Moses, "Call upon God in the name of mine Only Begotten" (Moses 1:17). The Nephite prophet Jacob declared, "We knew of Christ, and we had a hope of his glory many hundred years before his coming; and not only we ourselves had a hope of his glory, but also all the holy prophets which were before us. Behold, they believed in Christ and worshiped the Father in his name, and also we worship the Father in his name" (Jacob 4:4-5). All of the prophets worshiped the Father in the name of the Son.

Moses 5:9 The Holy Ghost. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 130:22-23.

Saying: I am the Only Begotten. This is a classic example of the prin ciple of divine investiture of authority. Here, the Holy Ghost speaks in the first person for Christ. Similarly, in many instances Christ speaks in the first person for the Father (Moses 1:6).

Moses 5:10 Adam blessed God. For Adam to bless God means that he praised God and that he rejoiced in his goodness and mercy. "And in nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments" (D&C 59:21).

Because of my transgression. We do not properly speak of Adam's sin but of his transgression. The distinction being made is that sin represents willful disobedience. Adam broke a law and thus transgressed, but he did so to comply with a greater command of God. Adam is heir to the consequence of the broken law, but he is not guilty of sinful rebellion (Moses 6:53; Article of Faith 2).

In this life I shall have joy. Without a knowledge of good and evil there could be no happiness. If Adam and Eve had not fallen, explained Lehi, "they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin" (2 Nephi 2:23).

Moses 5:11 Here Eve, a prophetess in her own right, utters one of the most perfect expressions of the plan of salvation ever uttered. Their transgression was necessary in order that they might have seed, know good from evil, be redeemed by Christ from their fallen state, and obtain eternal life, which is the privilege of all who are obedient to the laws and ordinances of the gospel.

We never should have had seed. If Adam and Eve had not partaken of the forbidden fruit they "would have had no children" (2 Nephi 2:23; Moses 6:48). Among the changes that the bodies of Adam and Eve experienced because of the Fall was the power to have children. Perhaps, as well as the blood of mortality forming in their bodies, something similar to hormonal changes enabled the bodies of Adam and Eve to produce seed. Immature children have blood, but they do not have the power to beget children.

Moses 5:13 I am also a son of God. Satan was born a spirit son of God, yet through his rebellion he was cast out of heaven and lost all claim to a divine inheritance. He received the name Perdition and is no longer numbered among those who may bear the name of God, nor be known as one of his sons.

Believe it not. From the time that Adam was the first prophet and preacher of righteousness, Satan has sent false prophets and preachers to oppose the truth. The Prophet Joseph Smith said: "In relation to the kingdom of God, the devil always sets up his kingdom at the very same time in opposition to God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365). Here Satan told those of the children of Adam who would listen to him to not believe the things that their parents were teaching them. That same practice is as common in our day as it was at the time of our first parents.

They loved Satan more than God. They loved the things of the world more than the things of God.

Carnal, sensual, and devilish. Fleshly pursuits can never bring lasting happiness but rather lead to captivity according to "the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself" (2 Nephi 2:27).

Cain and Abel Offer Sacrifice Cain Rebels, Loves Satan More Than God, and Becomes Perdition

MOSES 5:16-41

Moses 5:16-21 The Prophet Joseph Smith gave inspired commentary on these verses: "By faith in this atonement or plan of redemption, Abel offered to God a sacrifice that was accepted, which was the firstlings of the flock. Cain offered of the fruit of the ground, and was not accepted, because he could not do it in faith, he could have no faith, or could not exercise faith contrary to the plan of heaven. It must be shedding the blood of the Only Begotten to atone for man; for this was the plan of redemption; and without the shedding of blood was no remission; and as the sacrifice was instituted for a type, by which man was to discern the great Sacrifice which God had prepared; to offer a sacrifice contrary to that, no faith could be exercised, because redemption was not purchased in that way, nor the power of atonement instituted after that order; consequently Cain could have no faith; and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. But Abel offered an acceptable sacrifice, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God himself testifying of his gifts. Certainly, the shedding of the blood of a beast could be beneficial to no man, except it was done in imitation, or as a type, or explanation of what was to be offered through the gift of God Himself; and this performance done with an eye looking forward in faith on the power of that great Sacrifice for a remission of sins.

"But however various may have been, and may be at the present time, the opinions of men respecting the conduct of Abel, and the knowledge which he had on the subject of atonement, it is evident in our minds, that he was instructed more fully in the plan than what the Bible speaks of, for how could he offer a sacrifice in faith, looking to God for a remission of his sins in the power of the great atonement, without having been previously instructed in that plan? And further, if he was accepted of God, what were the ordinances performed further than the offering of the firstlings of the flock?

"It is said by Paul in his letter to the Hebrew brethren, that Abel obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts. To whom did God testify of the gifts of Abel, was it to Paul? We have very little on this important subject in the forepart of the Bible. But it is said that Abel himself obtained witness that he was righteous. Then certainly God spoke to him: indeed, it is said that God talked with him; and if He did, would He not, seeing that Abel was righteous deliver to him the whole plan of the Gospel? And is not the Gospel the news of the redemption? How could Abel offer a sacrifice and look forward with faith on the Son of God for a remission of his sins, and not understand the Gospel? The mere shedding of the blood of beasts or offering anything else in sacrifice, could not procure a remission of sins, except it were performed in faith of something to come; if it could, Cain's offering must have been as good as Abel's. And if Abel was taught of the coming of the Son of God, was he not taught also of His ordinances? We all admit that the Gospel has ordinances, and if so, had it not always ordinances, and were not its ordinances always the same?" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 58-59).

Moses 5:21 But unto Cain, and to his offering, he had not respect. God does not accept offerings made in unrighteousness. "The power, glory and blessings of the Priesthood could not continue with those who received ordination only as their righteousness continued," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith; "for Cain also being authorized to offer sacrifice, but not offering it in righteousness, was cursed. It signifies, then, that the ordinances must be kept in the very way God has appointed; otherwise their Priesthood will prove a cursing instead of a blessing" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 169).

Moses 5:23 Thou shalt rule over him. "All beings who have bodies," taught the Prophet Joseph Smith, "have power over those who have not" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 81). The Prophet further taught that "When those (spirits in the eternal world) have come into this world and received tabernacles, then died and again have risen and received glorified bodies, they will have an ascendancy over the spirits who have received no bodies, or kept not their first estate, like the devil" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 305-6). Therefore, following the last resurrection of those "who shall remain filthy still" (D&C 88:102), Cain, as well as others that become perdition, will have power over Lucifer, a personage of spirit only.

Moses 5:24 Thou shalt be called Perdition; for thou wast also before the world. Referring to Cain's choice to keep his first estate, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "That son of Adam, though a friend of Lucifer in pre- existence, did manage to gain mortal birth. He could have hearkened to his Father Adam and walked in the strait and narrow path. But instead he chose to follow a course which he had already charted, in a very real sense, in his first estate, an estate where he had been known as perdition. Coming from this background, Cain elected to use his agency to fight the truth in this life, and in his case he became a son of perdition" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:715). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:26, 35.

Moses 5:25 He rejected the greater counsel which was had from God. Cain's status was such that he enjoyed personal conversation with the Lord. No one in earth's history has received a more direct call to repentance than that which was given to Cain, for it had been his privilege to walk and talk with God. The Lord revealed that "he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation" (D&C 82:3). Thus, in consequence of Cain's love for Satan and rejection of the counsel given him by God, his punishment was meted out of equal nature. See commentary on Moses 5:38.

A cursing which I will put upon thee, except thou repent. In the improper offering he made, Cain had abused both the priesthood and the knowledge that was his. Of necessity he must repent or be cursedwhich cursing would result in the loss of both the knowledge of God that was his and the right to approach him in sacrifice or to perform any priesthood function.

Moses 5:26 Abel, . . . who walked in holiness before the Lord. "If, then Abel was a righteous man he had to become so by keeping the commandments," wrote the Prophet Joseph Smith (Times and Seasons, 3:905). Abel "received the priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam" (D&C 84:16). The Prophet taught that Abel "magnified the Priesthood which was conferred upon him, and died a righteous man, and therefore has become an angel of God by receiving his body from the dead, holding still the keys of his dispensation; and was sent down from heaven unto Paul to minister consoling words, and to commit unto him a knowledge of the mysteries of godliness" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 169). In killing Abel, Cain was killing the Lord's anointed.

Moses 5:31 Cain was called Master Mahan. The name Mahan means master of a great secret. Lucifer had been the "Mahan" or master of the secret that one might murder for gain in mortality. He taught this secret to Cain as part of the oath that he made with him (v. 30). In gaining power over Satan (v. 23) by killing his brother, Cain became the master of him who had mastery over all evil.

Moses 5:32 Cain rose up against Abel, his brother, and slew him. President George Q. Cannon explained: "The power of Satan from the beginning of time until the present has been directed against the Priesthood of the Son of God. Every effort of his has been for the destruction of that Priesthood or the weakening of its influence. He has not only sought to weaken the influence of the servants of God, but he has sought to take their lives. Hence the Savior said concerning him, that he was a murderer and a liar from the beginning. That has been his spirit" (Collected Discourses, 4:398).

Moses 5:33 I am free. In so saying, Cain illustrates the kind of dark distortion that is always associated with evil. Cain, who had known no bondage, will now never be without it. His sentence will be that of a fugitive and a vagabond, one who will never again know peace and happiness (v. 37). Repentance is beyond his reach, and he has forfeited all gospel blessings.

Moses 5:38 My punishment is greater than I can bear. Rather than being a recipient of Satan's promised freedom, Cain found himself in eternal bondage. See commentary on Moses 5:24.

Moses 5:39 From thy face shall I be hid. Cain chose a course that turned the blessings he had received into a cursing. He would now lose the authority or priesthood that had been his. No longer would Cain be able to stand in the presence of God as he had previously done (vv. 22-24). Those blessings promised him and his posterity through him were now lost. Of those who pursue such a course in our dispensation the Lord said, "They shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them from generation to generation" (D&C 121:21).

Moses 5:40 I the Lord set a mark upon Cain. The mark, which we understand to be a black skin, was not a curse but was placed on Cain at his request for his own protection.

Murder and Wickedness Spread

MOSES 5:42-55

Moses 5:42-55 The descendants and followers of Cain continued the wickedness associated with secret conspiracies, murdering for gain.

Moses 5:50 He slew him for the oath's sake. In order to keep their wicked works of darkness hidden, those belonging to the secret combination swore oaths of secrecy. When Irad, the grandson of Cain, revealed the secrets to the sons of Adam, he broke his oath. The oath was originally revealed to Cain by Satan: "Swear unto me by thy throat, and if thou tell it thou shalt die; and swear thy brethren by their heads, and by the living God, that they tell it not; for if they tell it, they shall surely die" (Moses 5:29). Therefore, Irad was killed for the 's sake."

The Gospel Preached from the Beginning

MOSES 5:56-59

Moses 5:58 The Gospel . . . preached, from the beginning. All true religion is revealed religion. In all ages and in all dispensations in which the gospel has been taught, it has been taught by angels, by the voice of Godmeaning revelation that is immediate and personal to those of that dayand by the Holy Ghost.

Moses 5:59 An holy ordinance. The holy ordinance to which reference is made was animal sacrifice. As the previous chapter ended, we were told that God taught that law to Adam and Eve while they were yet in Eden. We also learned that he clothed them in "coats of skins" (D&C 4:27), which were to act as a garment of protection, protecting them from all of the effects of the Fallthat is, through the blood of the Lamb, meaning the Atonement of Christ, all the effects of the Fall would be rectified.

This is followed by the story of Abel offering an acceptable sacrifice and thus gaining the approval of God, while his brother, Cain, refused to conform to the order of God and deliberately offered an unacceptable sacrifice. Angered at the Lord's rejection of his sacrifice and now having entered into league with Satan, he killed his brother, Abel. As a consequence he lost the spiritual privileges that were his, chief among which was the right to come unto the presence of the Lord. As the story continues into the next chapter, we read that God gave another son to Adam and Eve Seth, to whom he revealed himself because Seth offered an acceptable sacrifice. From all of this we can but conclude that the holy ordinance, through which all the promises made by the Lord to those of that ancient day were confirmed, was that law that promised them redemption in and through the blood of the Lamb.
