Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29

DATE: SEPTEMBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

"In these early days of the Church the Lord revealed to the Prophet for the benefit of the members, line upon line and precept upon precept, thus unfolding to them the great truths of the Gospel. This revelation was given a few days before the conference of September 26, 1830, and in anticipation of that gathering. The Lord had commanded Oliver Cowdery to tarry (Sec. 28:10) until after this conference should be held, before departing on his mission to the Lamanites. The wonderful doctrines explained in this revelation were of such importance that it was well for Oliver and his companions to know them, that they might teach the people on their way, and to the Lamanites when they arrived at their destination, with a more complete comprehension of the plan of Salvation than they otherwise would have had" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:139-40).

The Gathering of the Elect

29:1 Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM. Here Jesus Christ declares himself to be both our Redeemer and the same God who appeared to Moses on Sinai. The title "I AM" is derived from the third person singular form of the Hebrew verb "to be" and is transliterated by four letters YHWH. When directly translated, YHWH means "he is" or "he exists." Therefore, the very use of the title "I AM" affirms faith in the existence of God. The tetragrammaton YHWH was probably pronounced Yahweh. Later renditions of the name of God included attempts to pronounce the name of God from these letters. King James translators used the anglicized name Jehovah, but most often preferred to use the title LORD (with capital letters) to indicate where the biblical text contained YHWH, the name of Deity.

When Christ appeared to Moses on Mt. Sinai, he used the title "I AM" to identify himself as the God of the ancient patriarchs. "And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What is his name? what shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The LORD [YWHW] God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations" (Exodus 3:13-15).

29:5 Your advocate with the Father. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:3.

29:7 Mine elect. Many noble and great spirits were in mortality as the Restoration unfolded (Abraham 3:22-23; D&C 138:53-55). They were elected, or, in other words, foreordained by God, to be born in the lineage of Abraham. Bible and Book of Mormon prophets both spoke of the great and marvelous work that would take place in the last days that would result in the gathering of the elect in fulfillment of the covenants that God had made with their ancient fathers. Having proven themselves valiant in the cause of the Lord in premortality, they brought to earth the characteristics that distinguished them as faithful in that sphere. They are among those whom the Savior identified as his sheep who, he said, would know his voice (John 10:27).

29:8 Gathered in unto one place. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:1-3; 101:21-22; 115:5-6.

Destruction of the Wicked Will Precede the Millennium

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29:9-21

29:9 The destruction of the wicked at the end of the world is a theme that prevailed in the Restoration beginning with the instructions of Moroni to the youthful Joseph Smith. See commentary on Joseph Smith- History 1:37, page 23.

29:12 Isaiah prophesied of the time when Christ the "king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment" (Isaiah 32:1). Likewise, Daniel saw the day in which all other "thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, . . . the judgment was set, and the books were opened" (Daniel 7:9-10; Revelation 20:4). Commenting on these verses, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Thrones are cast down: the kingdoms of this world cease; it is the day when the Lord makes a full end of all nations. He alone shall be exalted in that day. The Ancient of Days, the oldest and most ancient of men, Adam our father, sits in judgment over the righteous of his race. Be it remembered that the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who were with the Lord in his ministry in Jerusalem, shall judge the whole house of Israel, meaning that portion of Israel who have kept the commandments, 'and none else' (D&C 29:12). There will be a great hierarchy of judges in that great day, of whom Adam, under Christ, will be the chief of all. Those judges will judge the righteous ones under their jurisdiction, but Christ himself, he alone, will judge the wicked" (Millennial Messiah, 584).

The second coming of the Savior also inaugurates the time of judgment for the righteous. It will be presided over by Adam, the Ancient of days. The meridian Twelve will judge the house of Israel under his direction. During his mortal ministry, the Savior told the Twelve in Jerusalem that when he came again, he would "sit in the throne of his glory," and he identified them as the princes mentioned by Isaiah who would "sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel" (Matthew 19:28). While in the Americas, the resurrected Lord instructed the Nephite Twelve that they would judge their people. Further, he explained that the Nephite Twelve, as a remnant of the House of Israel, would be judged of the Twelve Apostles at Jerusalem and that they in turn would judge their people (1 Nephi 12:9; Mormon 3:17-19).

During the millennial day the kingdom of heaven will become one with the kingdom of God on earth (D&C 65:5-6), and the Saints will reign with the Savior. The governing princes and judges of the kingdom will be under the direction of the holy priesthood. Many will preside in righteousness during that time. The original Twelve will preside over the whole house of Israel under the direction of Adam, who will act under the direction of Christ (D&C 78:16).

Clothed with robes of righteousness, with crowns upon their heads. Those who are exalted in celestial glory receive robes and crowns, even as the Savior Jesus Christ, to rule and reign with him in eternity as a royal priesthood.

29:14 These signs that the Second Coming is near are to take place immediately after the destruction of the wicked and the desolation of abomination in Jerusalem. See Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:31-32, 33, page 349.

29:16 A great hailstorm. Apparently, this will be one of several hailstorms sent by the Lord to call his children to repentance (D&C 43:25). Isaiah prophesied of hail that would bring the proud and wicked low prior to the time of peace and righteousness (Isaiah 32:15-19). In addition, Ezekiel spoke of the destruction of the armies of Gog by "overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone" (Ezekiel 38:22) in the latter- day war against the people of Israel. The apostle John saw in vision that at the opening of the seventh seal and after the testimony of thunderings, lightnings, and earthquakes, "there followed hail and fire mingled with blood" (Revelation 8:7), which destroyed a third part of both trees and grass. Further, John saw a time when "there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was exceeding great" (Revelation 16:21). This hailstorm, which will destroy the crops of the earth, as with all of the predicted natural disasters, will come as vengeance upon the wicked.

29:17 The cup of mine indignation is full. The symbolism is a graphic means of portraying the destruction of the wicked. It is the same as shown in the apocalyptic vision given to the apostle John recorded in the book of Revelation in which plagues filled cups to the brim and were poured out upon the inhabitants of the earth.

29:19 Their flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their sockets. The prophet Zechariah placed the fulfillment of this plague at a time when all nations will have gathered to battle against Jerusalem. "Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations. . . . And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth" (Zechariah 14:3, 12).

29:21 Abominations shall not reign. Regarding the scene portrayed in these verses, Wilford Woodruff declared, "No man can contemplate the truth concerning the nations of the earth without sorrow, when he sees the wailing, the mourning, and death, that will come in consequence of judgments, plagues, and war. It has already begun, and it will continue to multiply and increase until the scene is ended, and wound up.

"Do I delight in the destruction of the children of men? No. Does the Lord? No. He gives them timely warning, and if they do not listen to His counsel, they must suffer the consequences" (Journal of Discourses, 2:201).

The Last Resurrection and Final Judgment Follow the Millennium

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29:22-29

29:22 Men again begin to deny their God. At the end of the Millennium those who are sons of perdition will again defy the power of God. That is, those individuals who were overcome by Lucifer while in mortality will stand upon the earth in the flesh as resurrected beings for a short season (D&C 88:32). They will oppose Christ's right to rule and reign. They will seek to place Lucifer in his stead. "The devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. For Michael shall fight their battles, and shall overcome him who seeketh the throne of him who sitteth upon the throne, even the Lamb" (D&C 88:114-15).

29:23 A new heaven. "This earth will be rolled back into the presence of God," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and crowned with celestial glory" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181). Brigham Young taught that the earth will move through space to "return again unto the presence of the Father" (Journal of Discourses, 17:143). Thus, the heavens will literally become new for those who inhabit the earth as celestial beings.

A new earth. Following the Millennium the earth will "be prepared for the celestial glory; For after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father; that bodies who are of the celestial kingdom may possess it forever and ever" (D&C 88:18-20). Further, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "this earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon" (D&C 130:9).

29:24 Beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea. Regarding the salvation of beasts, fowls, and fishes, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught that those that fill the measure of their creation are resurrected and dwell in the celestial kingdom. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 77:2.

29:26 Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump. Michael is Adam, the first man (D&C 27:11). He is chief among God's sons and has been given "the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One" (D&C 78:16), who is Jesus Christ. The sounding of Michael's trump is to announce the resurrection of the dead. The Son of God loosed the bands of death for all through his atoning sacrifice and resurrection.

The prophet Daniel associated Adam with the time of the resurrection of his people (Daniel 12:1-2). Thus, it appears that the trump with which Adam announces the resurrection from the dead also signifies keys that Adam possesses in directing the resurrection. It is altogether appropriate that Adam, who imposed death upon all of his posterity, be the one to call them forth from their graves.

Concepts from the Translation of the Bible Explained: All Things Are Spiritual unto the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29:30-35

29:30-35 This revelation was given to clarify concepts revealed to the Prophet in his labor in translating the Bible. These verses and those that follow speak of the premortal existence, the creation of the earth, the fall of Adam, and the preaching of the plan of redemption during the first dispensation of the gospel.

29:30 The first shall be last. The state of the body in the first creation of man upon the earth will also be the state of the body in the last creation. That is, both will be immortal. True mortality will reign for a season and temporal death shall make its demands on all of God's creations upon this earth. Yet because Adam was created in a spiritual state (meaning one in which there was no death), so shall the resurrection bring to pass a similar state. Thus, the first state of man will also be the last. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:32.

I have created by the word of my power. The word of the Father's power is his Son, Jesus Christ. The word of the Son's power is his Spirit, the light of Christ. The words and power of Christ are those of the Father. The Father and the Son are one in their creative endeavors. Concerning his creations, the Lord explained, "And by the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten" (Moses 1:32-33). Excepting the birth of spirits, all the labor of creation is done by Christ under the direction of the Father.

Which is the power of my Spirit. The power by which the worlds were and are made is the light of Christ. Likewise, it is by that same power that the moon and stars have their existence. As our revelations read, "This is the light of Christ. As also he is in the sun, and the light of the sun, and the power thereof by which it was made" (D&C 88:7).

29:31 Both spiritual and temporal. Spiritual creation refers to the physical creation of Adam and Eve in an immortal state. That is, they could not die until after they partook of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which caused the Fall and introduced corruption into their bodies. After the Fall their bodies were temporal, or in other words they were in a temporary state. The Lord declared, "I . . . created all things . . . spiritually before they were naturally upon the face of the earth" (Moses 3:5).

29:32 First temporal, and secondly spiritual. The temporal, or mortal life upon the earth that will end in death, precedes life that is spiritual, or the resurrected state. In both instances, before the Fall and after the Resurrection, "spiritual bodies" are bodies that are not subject to death or corruption. Speaking of the body placed in a grave and its subsequent resurrection, the apostle Paul explained, "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body" (1 Corinthians 15:44).

Which is the last of my work. The phrase "last of my work" has reference to the Resurrection, which is the completion of the Lord's work, his crowning achievement.

29:33 My works have no end, neither beginning. All of God's creations are eternal. The Lord revealed to Moses, "for my works are without end, and also my words, for they never cease" (Moses 1:4). Similarly, they did not begin with their mortal creation, but existed before this earth was created. The Prophet Joseph Smith further explained: "Element had an existence from the time [God] had. The pure principles of element are principles which can never be destroyed; they may be organized and re-organized, but not destroyed. They had no beginning, and can have no end" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 351-52). God's eternal work is to create and "to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life" (Moses 1:39) of his creations.

29:34 Not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal. That which is "temporal" is limited by time; it is temporary. The laws of God are eternal. They are everlastingly the same. It could also be observed that because every action has its consequence, there is nothing we do that does not affect who and what we are, which in turn determines who and what we will be in the worlds to come. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:41.

Jedediah M. Grant explained the eternal nature of laws and the power which governs those laws: "If Joseph had a right to dictate me in relation to salvation, in relation to a hereafter, he had a right to dictate me in relation to all my earthly affairs, in relation to the treasures of the earth, and in relation to the earth itself. He had a right to dictate in relation to the cities of the earth, to the natives of the earth, and in relation to everything on land and on sea. That is what he had a right to do, if he had any right at all. If he did not have that right, he did not have the Priesthood of God, he did not have the endless Priesthood that emanates from an eternal being. A priesthood that is clipped, and lacks length, is not the Priesthood of God; if it lacks depth, it is not the Priesthood of God; for the Priesthood in ancient times extended over the wide world, and coped with the universe, and had a right to govern and control the inhabitants thereof, to regulate them, give them laws, and execute those laws. That power looked like the Priesthood of God. This same Priesthood has been given to Joseph Smith, and has been handed down to his successors" (Journal of Discourses, 2:13-14).

29:35 An agent unto himself. See commentary on verse 39.

The Devil and His Hosts Were Cast Out of Heaven to Tempt Man

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29:36-39

29:36 He rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine honor, which is my power. It is in the Joseph Smith translation that we find the earliest references to the rebellion of Lucifer in the councils of heaven. From it we learn that in the premortal life Satan came before the Father, "saying Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor" (Moses 4:1).

Thus, Lucifer "sought to destroy the agency of man" and "became Satan, yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will" (Moses 4:3-4). The Lord reiterated in this revelation to Joseph Smith that he gave unto man "that he should be an agent unto himself" (D&C 29:35). By deception Lucifer used that very agency to induce others to follow him until they lost their right of choice and the light that could enable them to seek repentance and forgiveness. Those who followed Lucifer made him their father in place of the true Father of their spirits and gave honor to the usurper of the true God. See commentary on Moses 4:1, page 217; Doctrine and Covenants 76:25.

Also a third part of the hosts of heaven. These are the spirits who fol lowed Lucifer in the premortal sphere. They came out in open rebellion against God and his Only Begotten Son. As Lucifer is called perdition, they are the sons of perdition. They receive the same punishment as did the devil himself. That is, they will never obtain a physical body and thus will not be resurrected. They are referred to as "devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself" (2 Nephi 9:9).

Because of their agency. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:28.

29:39 It must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men. Like Adam and Eve before the Fall, all humanity are "in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38). They know neither good nor evil. In a world in which both good and evil exist, God commands that we be righteous. By persuading men to do evil Satan presents opposition to the plan of God. Thus, the children of men become agents to choose of their own free will who they will follow, God or the devil.

Agents unto themselves. Agency is the gift of God. For agency to exist there must be laws, knowledge of the laws, freedom of choice in living the laws, and consequences appended to our actions.

We are given the responsibility to determine for whom and for what we will be agents. "For behold, ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold, God hath given unto you a knowledge and he hath made you free. He hath given unto you that ye might know good from evil, and he hath given unto you that ye might choose life or death; and ye can do good and be restored unto that which is good, or have that which is good restored unto you; or ye can do evil, and have that which is evil restored unto you" (Helaman 14:30-31). The devil, through his tempting, heightens our awareness of the decision that must be made; will we "do all things whatsoever the Lord [our] God shall command" us? (Abraham 3:25; 2 Nephi 2:11-16). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:28.

Concepts from the Translation of the Bible Explained: Spiritual Death

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29:40-45

29:40 The devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit. See commentary on Moses 4:5-25, page 219.

29:41 Because of his transgression. See commentary on Moses 5:10, page 226.

The first death, even that same death which is the last death. God warned Adam and Eve that if they partook of the forbidden fruit they would die. However, the death of the body was not the first death. The first death to come upon them was a "spiritual death" in which they were cast out of the presence of God. Later they also suffered a temporal or physical death in which their temporal bodies returned to the dust of the earth. Through the resurrection of Jesus Christ all mankind will be redeemed and brought back into the presence of God to be judged (Alma 42:23; Helaman 14:17). For the wicked "there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness" (Helaman 14:18) and are cast out of God's presence. Thus, the first death that came upon mankind will also be the last death to come upon the wicked.

29:42 Send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and redemption. See Moses 6:58.

29:43 Appoint unto man the days of his probation. Alma explained that "there was a space granted unto man in which he might repent; therefore this life became a probationary state; a time to prepare to meet God; a time to prepare for that endless state . . . which is after the resurrection of the dead" (Alma 12:24).

29:45 They receive their wages of whom they list to obey. See commentary on Moses 5:23, page 229.

Little Children Are Redeemed through the Atonement

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 29:46-50

29:47 They cannot sin. Little children are innocent because they do not comprehend the difference between good and evil. Lucifer cannot entice any soul to sin who does not comprehend good and evil. Thus, they are not accountable to God for their actions. Laws that might be transgressed or broken by little children are atoned for by Jesus Christ. If little children die "before they arrive at the years of accountability, [they] are saved in the celestial kingdom of heaven" (D&C 137:10).

Begin to become accountable before me. Becoming accountable is a process. Considerable accountability must be obtained a measurable time before baptism at eight years of age. The process then continues as the child grows to adulthood.

29:48 That great things may be required at the hand of their fathers. See Doctrine and Covenants 68:25-29.

29:50 He that hath no understanding. Speaking of those who are mentally disabled, President Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "[They] shall receive blessings just like little children who die in infancy. They are free from sin, because their minds are not capable of a correct understanding of right and wrong. Mormon, when writing to his son Moroni on the subject of baptism places deficient children in the same category with little children who are under the age of accountability, they do not require baptism, for the atonement of Jesus Christ takes care of them equally with little children who die before the age of accountability" (Answers, 3:20).
