Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 30

DATE: SEPTEMBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

Section 30 is a combination of three revelations received following a three-day conference of the Church. Among other things, the concern over false revelations received by Hiram Page through his "peepstone" was resolved during the conference (D&C 28:11-). The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "At length our conference assembled. The subject of the stone previously mentioned was discussed, and after considerable investigation, Brother Page, as well as the whole Church who were present, renounced the said stone, and all things connected therewith, much to our mutual satisfaction and happiness. We now partook of the Sacrament, confirmed and ordained many, and attended to a great variety of Church business on the first and the two following days of the conference, during which time we had much of the power of God manifested amongst us; the Holy Ghost came upon us, and filled us with joy unspeakable; and peace, and faith, and hope, and charity abounded in our midst. Before we separated we received the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:115). See introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 28.

David Whitmer Is Chastened

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 30:1-4

30:1 Feared man and have not relied on me. The Prophet and his wife, Emma, were dependent on David and Julia Whitmer for lodgings when this revelation was received. For him to give the revelation to the Whitmers, which he did without hesitation, evidences that his trust was in God, not man. David Whitmer, on the other hand, had chosen to support his brother-in- law, Hiram Page, in the use of his peepstone in order to maintain peace in the family.

30:2 You have not given heed unto my Spirit, and to those who were set over you. The seeds of David Whitmer's disaffection with the Prophet and the Church were sown very early. It appears that, with the exception of the Book of Mormon, he struggled with everything that came by revelation through Joseph Smith. His loyalty to the revelations received by his brother-in- law through his peepstone, in this instance, over that which had been revealed to the Prophet was but the foreshadowing of future difficulties he would have with revelations received by the Prophet. In future years we find him arguing that Joseph Smith originally taught that the Bible and the Book of Mormon contained "God's law in its completeness." He considered the Doctrine and Covenants unnecessary as its revelations were "purely personal." He categorically denied the coming of John the Baptist to restore the Aaronic Priesthood and the coming of Peter, James, and John to restore the higher priesthood. Similarly, he denied the coming of Moses, Elias, and Elijah in the Kirtland Temple (Cook, David Whitmer Interviews, xviii-xx).

30:3 You are left to inquire for yourself at my hand. The meaning here is that since you will not accept that which I have given through the Prophet, you will be left to that which you yourself can obtain from me.

Peter Whitmer Is Called As Oliver Cowdery's Companion on a Mission to the Lamanites

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 30:5-8

30:5 Take your journey with your brother Oliver. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 28:8.

30:7 None have I appointed to be his counselor over him in the church. Oliver Cowdery jointly held all the keys of the kingdom with Joseph Smith. When the Church was organized, he was sustained as the second elder or the second leading officer in the Church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:2.

Concerning church matters. This clarification of the extent of Joseph Smith's and Oliver Cowdery's authority to give direction to the Saints was not included in the 1833 Book of Commandments but was added in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. It was not intended that officers in the priesthood or in the Church be responsible to give direction outside their sphere of authority. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:34.

John Whitmer Called to Preach the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 30:9-11

30:10 At your brother Philip Burroughs'. Philip Burroughs was a farmer who lived in Fayette, New York. Thus, John Whitmer was called to serve at the house of a neighbor utilizing the Burroughs's home as the place where meetings were held. Earlier in the month, on 5 September 1830, Parley P. Pratt preached to a large audience at the Burroughs's home. He wrote, "On the next Sabbath I preached to a large concourse of people, assembled at the house of a Mr. Burroughs. The Holy Ghost came upon me mightily. I spoke the word of God with power, reasoning out of the Scriptures and the Book of Mormon. The people were convinced, overwhelmed in tears, and four heads of families came forward expressing their faith, and were baptized" (Pratt, Autobiography, 27).
