Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 31

DATE: SEPTEMBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

This is the last of the four revelations given by the Prophet in September of 1830 while in Fayette, New York, where the first conference of the Church had been held. The revelation was given to Thomas B. Marsh, who with his wife was converted to the Church by the Book of Mormon. This revelation announces how we as a people are to present our message to the world. Though it is a common practice among members of the Church to seek common ground with those who profess faith in Christ by an appeal to the Bible, the direction given in this revelation is that we declare the things that have been revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The message of the Restoration centers on the idea that it is not common ground we seek in sharing the gospel. There is nothing common about our message. The way we answer questions about our faith ought to be by finding the quickest and most direct route to the Sacred Grove. That is our ground. It is sacred ground. It is where testimonies are born and the greatest truths of heaven are unveiled.

We claim no priesthood, keys, power, authority, or doctrines that do not trace themselves directly to heaven. We have not built upon the theological rubble of the past. All that we have, and this includes our faith in the Bible and our understanding of it, has come to us by direct revelation in this dispensation. Doctrines from any other source are without authority among the Latter- day Saints. All doctrine and authority must come through the channels the Lord has ordained for our dispensation, and that channel is the priesthood and keys restored to the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Blessing and Assurances Given to Thomas B. Marsh

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 31:1-8

31:1 Because of your faith in my work. Thomas Marsh was a man of spiritual sensitivity. He followed the promptings of the Spirit as he traveled from Boston, Massachusetts, where he worked in a type foundry, to northwestern New York. He later wrote, "I believed the Spirit of God dictated me to make a journey west. I started in company with one Benjamin Hall, who was also led by the Spirit. I went to Lima, Livingston county, New York, where I staid [stayed] some three months, and then left for home. I called on my return at Lyonstown, on a family, whose names I do not recollect. On leaving there next morning the lady enquired if I had heard of the Golden Book found by a youth named Joseph Smith. I informed her I never heard anything about it, and became very anxious to know concerning the matter. On enquiring, she told me I could learn more about it from Martin Harris, in Palmyra.

"I returned back westward and found Martin Harris at the printing office, in Palmyra, where the first sixteen pages of the Book of Mormon had just been struck off, the proof sheet of which I obtained from the printer and took with me. As soon as Martin Harris found out my intentions he took me to the house of Joseph Smith, sen., where Joseph Smith, jun. resided, who could give me any information I might wish. Here I found Oliver Cowdery, who gave me all the information concerning the book I desired. After staying there two days I started for Charleston, Mass., highly pleased with the information I had obtained concerning the new found book.

"After arriving home and finding my family all well, I showed my wife the sixteen pages of the Book of Mormon which I had obtained, with which she was well pleased, believing it to be the work of God. From this time for about one year I corresponded with Oliver Cowdery and Joseph Smith, jun., and prepared myself to move west.

"Learning by letter that the Church of Jesus Christ had been organized on the 6th day of April, 1830, I moved to Palmyra, Ontario co., in September following, and landed at the house of Joseph Smith, sen., with my whole family. During the month [on 3 September 1830] I was baptized by David Whitmer, in Cayuga lake, and in a few days I was ordained an Elder by Oliver Cowdery with six Elders, at Father Whitmer's house" (Millennial Star, 26:375; spelling as in original).

31:2 The day cometh that they will believe and know the truth. Sister Marsh believed in the work of the Restoration when her husband first brought home the printer's proof sheet of the Book of Mormon. Their children were young at this time, being nine, seven, and three years of age. The particular challenge they had faced is unknown.

31:3 Your tongue shall be loosed. Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl noted: "As long as Thomas B. Marsh was faithful he was an eloquent speaker. At the time of the troubles in Clay County, Mo., he was elected a member of a committee to lay the grievances of the Saints before the authorities of the State. On that occasion he spoke so impressively that General Atchison, who was present, shed tears, and the meeting passed resolutions to assist the Saints in finding a new location" (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 165).

You shall declare glad tidings of great joy unto this generation. Just as the angelic announcement to the shepherds of the Savior's birth was a declaration of "good tidings of great joy" (Luke 2:10), so the proclamation that the Lord has restored the fulness of the gospel in these latter days is a declaration of "glad tidings." Significantly, the restoration of the gospel in this dispensation heralds the second coming of Christ and his millennial reign. Those called to go forth and declare the gospel go forth to declare "good tidings of great joy" as did their ancient counterparts. "Now, what do we hear in the gospel which we have received? A voice of gladness! A voice of mercy from heaven; and a voice of truth out of the earth; glad tidings for the dead; a voice of gladness for the living and the dead; glad tidings of great joy. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that bring glad tidings of good things, and that say unto Zion: Behold, thy God reigneth!" (D&C 128:19).

31:4 Declare the things which have been revealed to my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun. Our charge, as given here to Thomas B. Marsh, is to declare the truths revealed in our day, not just the truths revealed in ages past. As we go forth as missionaries, we have been commanded to teach from the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants rather than from that which was revealed to Isaiah, Jeremiah, Peter, or Paul.

The field which is white already to be burned. In previous revelations the field has also been referred to as being white, but in those revelations it was an indication that it was ready for harvest not destruction (D&C 4:4; 6:3; 11:3; 12:3, 14:3). The Lord explained that the kingdom of God is going forth upon the face of the earth to harvest the honest in heart and those "who are ready to receive the fulness of my gospel" (D&C 35:12). The Lord also announced that the world is ripening in iniquity and is ready for the destruction of the wicked. Before the field is burned, the wheat, or the righteous, must be harvested. The Lord revealed that "this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come, or the destruction of the wicked" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:31).

Counsel and Warnings Given to Thomas B. Marsh

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 31:9-13

31:9 Revile not against those that revile. To revile is to do that which is vile; that is, it is to speak to or about someone with abusive language. Obviously, such behavior is offensive to the Spirit of the Lord. We can never fight the adversary with the spirit of the adversary, for to do so is to give him the victory (Jude 1:9).

Govern your house in meekness, and be steadfast. Because he failed to heed this warning, Thomas B. Marsh lost his faith and experienced great difficulties in his family. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 112:10, 15.
