Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 32

DATE: OCTOBER 1830

PLACE: PROBABLY MANCHESTER, NEW YORK

This revelation given to Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson addressed their desires to preach the gospel to the Lamanites. On 26 September 1830 Oliver Cowdery was called to declare the gospel to the Native Americans, who had been identified as descendants of Book of Mormon peoples. A few days later Peter Whitmer Jr. was called to accompany Oliver as his companion on that mission (D&C 30:5-6). In this revelation, Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson are called to preach the gospel to the Lamanites and to accompany Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer Jr. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 28:8.

Parley P. Pratt and Ziba Peterson Are Called As Missionaries to the Lamanites

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 32:1-5

32:1 My servant Parley P. Pratt. The calling of Parley P. Pratt to accompany Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer on their mission to the Lamanites proved to have a great influence on the Restoration and the gathering of Israel. Parley's earlier association with a group of Reformed Baptists in the Kirtland, Ohio, area influenced him to stop in that vicinity, where Sidney Rigdon, along with two other important preachers in the Reformed Baptist movement Alexander Campbell and Walter Scotthad begun a religious group known as Disciples of Christ, or Campbellites. They had established several congregations near Kirtland that sought to live as the early Christians of the New Testament had. The four missionaries to the Lamanites requested to teach at one of the churches where Sidney preached. The missionaries soon found that their knapsacks would not carry enough copies of the Book of Mormon to satisfy the desires of the many who wanted to read it. Sidney Rigdon was given a copy, which he intently studied. He received a witness of its truthfulness. His conversion to the Restoration caused quite a stir in northern Ohio and throughout Pennsylvania and New York, where the Campbellites also had a strong influence.

In less than one month, 127 individuals were convinced of the truthfulness of the Restoration and were baptized. Not only did this double the total membership of the Church at that time but it also provided a number of the future leaders for the Church. Among those early members of the Church were Sidney Rigdon and Frederick G. Williams, future members of the First Presidency (D&C 35, 81, 90:6), and Edward Partridge, future presiding bishop (D&C 41:9). In addition, Kirtland, near the area where these conversions took place, became a gathering place for the Saints and the location of the first temple dedicated in this dispensation.

The Lord surely knew at the time that Elder Pratt was called to this missionary journey that he would influence his companions to stop in the Kirtland area. The hand of the Lord is easily discerned in the unusual collection of truth seekers gathered in that area. "The same God that placed that star in a precise orbit millennia before it appeared over Bethlehem in celebration of the birth of the Babe," observed Elder Neal A. Maxwell, "has given at least equal attention to placement of each of us in precise human orbits so that we may, if we will, illuminate the landscape of our individual lives, so that our light may not only lead others but warm them as well" (That My Family Should Partake, 86). The remarkable collection of men and women in and around Kirtland, like those in upstate New York, defies any thought of chance. The situation parallels that of the group of men assembled by the hand of the Lord to give birth to this nation.

32:2 Go with my servants, Oliver Cowdery and Peter Whitmer, Jun. At this time, Oliver Cowdery stood second only to Joseph Smith as a witness of the great events associated with the Restoration. While preaching in Mayfield, Ohio, on the way to Kirtland, he had the opportunity to bear his testimony of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon. So powerful was the testimony that he bore in Mayfield, Ohio, that a young lawyer, Varnum Card, turned to his friend begging him to lead him away. "Card's face was 'pale,' and 'his frame trembled as we walked away and mounted our horses.' Regaining his composure, Varnum Card evaluated his experience: ' "Mr. Barr, if you had not been there, I certainly should have gone into the water." He said the impulse was irresistible'" (Anderson, "Impact of the First Preaching," 491-92).

In like manner, the second witness, borne by Peter Whitmer Jr. as one of the eight witnesses of the gold plates, must have been cause for serious reflection on the part of their listeners.

32:3 Ziba Peterson also shall go with them. This missionary journey served to be of special importance for Ziba Peterson, who met and converted Rebecca Hooper who became his wife on 11 August 1831.

And I myself will go with them and be in their midst. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 50:43.
