Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 33

DATE: OCTOBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

The instruction to raise a warning voice, given here to newly ordained elders Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet, constitutes the pattern to be followed by all missionaries. Their boldness is to match that of their message. The two missionaries are directed three times to open their mouths, with the promise that they will be filled and "laden with sheaves" upon their backs. Their message is to be one of faith, repentance, and baptism. Such is the gospel they have been commissioned to bear. They are also to remember the Articles and Covenants (D&C 20 and 22) and bestow the gift of the Holy Ghost upon those they baptize. They are also instructed to teach from the Book of Mormon and to be prepared in all that they do for the return of Christ.

Laborers Called for the Eleventh Hour

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 33:1-4

33:1 Ezra Thayre and Northrop Sweet were both citizens of the Palmyra, New York, area. They were baptized in October 1830 by Parley P. Pratt. Brother Thayre, a builder of bridges, dams, and mills, had employed members of the Smith family (Cook, Revelations, 47). Ezra Thayre is mentioned later in the Doctrine and Covenants among those brethren who were called to travel to Missouri, where the Lord would designate the spot for the latter- day temple in Zion (D&C 52:22). Due to difficulties with covetousness, the Lord later revoked the command that he travel to Zion (D&C 56:5, 8). He marched with Zion's Camp and in 1835 was chosen as one of the Seventy. Following the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith, Thayre chose not to support the Quorum of the Twelve. Remaining in the Midwest, he eventually joined the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints.

Northrop Sweet faltered from the faith a few months after his conversion. After moving to Kirtland, Ohio, he became involved with manifestations of strange spirits. Elder George A. Smith recalled: "Joseph Smith came to Kirtland, and taught that people in relation to their error. He showed them that the Spirit of God did not bind men nor make them insane, and that the power of the adversary which had been manifested in many instances was visible even from that cause, for persons under its influence became helpless, and were bound hand and foot as in chains, being as immovable as a stick of timber. When Joseph came to instruct these Saints in relation to the true Spirit, and the manner of determining the one from the other, in a short time a number of those who had been influenced by those foul manifestations, apostatized. Among the number was Wycom Clark; he got a revelation that he was to be the prophet that he was the true revelator; and himself, Northrop Sweet and four other individuals retired from the Church, and organized the 'Pure Church of Christ,' as they called it, composed of six members, and commenced having meetings, and preaching, but that was the extent of the growth of his early schism" (Journal of Discourses, 11:4).

Whose word is quick and powerful. The Lord likens the power of the Spirit, which carries his words to the hearts of his children, to a force "quick and powerful, sharper than a two- edged sword." Nephi explained to his brothers that "the guilty taketh the truth to be hard, for it cutteth them to the very center" (1 Nephi 16:2). Ezra Thayre wrote concerning his personal experience, which illustrates these phrases: "When Hyrum [Smith] began to speak, every word touched me to the inmost soul. I thought every word was pointed to me. God punished me and riveted me to the spot. I could not help myself. The tears rolled down my cheeks, I was very proud and stubborn. There were many there who knew me, I dare not look up. I sat until I recovered myself before I dare look up. They sung some hymns and that filled me with the Spirit. When Hyrum got through, he picked up a book and said, 'here is the Book of Mormon.' I said, let me see it. I then opened the book, and I received a shock with such exquisite joy that no pen can write and no tongue can express. I shut the book and said, what is the price of it? 'Fourteen shillings' was the reply. I said, I'll take the book. I opened it again, and I felt a double portion of the Spirit, that I did not know whether I was in the world or not. I felt as though I was truly in heaven. Martin Harris rushed to me to tell me that the book was true. I told him that he need not tell me that, for I knew that it is true as well as he" (Cook, Revelations, 47-48).

Discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. God cannot be deceived. He alone can discern all the thoughts of men (D&C 6:16; 1 Kings 8:39). This knowledge causes the wicked to tremble when their evil intentions are made known. Such was the case of Zeezrom when he attempted to deceive Alma and Amulek. Alma declared to him that God "knows all thy thoughts, and thou seest that thy thoughts are made known unto us by his Spirit" (Alma 12:3).

33:3-4 The Lord expounds "all the scriptures in one" (3 Nephi 23:14). In this instance he illustrated the relationship between the parable of the laborers in the vineyard (Matthew 20:1-16); the allegory of Zenos (Jacob 5); and the vision of John the Beloved concerning the Apostasy and the restoration of the Church of Christ in the latter days (Revelation 12:1-6).

33:3 It is the eleventh hour. In the era of the Bible, division of time designated that the first hour of a day began at sunrise, or approximately 6:00 A.M. The eleventh hour came at about 5:00 P.M., or towards the end of the workday. "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder," the Savior taught, "which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard" (Matthew 20:1). In the parable of the laborers we learn that at "about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle? They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard" (Matthew 20:6-7). In symbolic fashion, the restoration of the gospel came in the eleventh hour. The laborers of all dispensations have served as coworkers in the vineyard of the Lord, some receiving their commission to work in the early hours that followed the Creation and others to work in these the last days.

33:4 My vineyard has become corrupted every whit. This image is drawn from the allegory of the olive trees as found in Jacob 5. "And it came to pass that they went down into the nethermost parts of the vineyard. And it came to pass that they beheld that the fruit of the natural branches had become corrupt also; yea, the first and the second and also the last; and they had all become corrupt" (Jacob 5:39). The vineyard is representative of the workplace of the Lord's servants. The complete corruption of the vineyard represents the apostate conditions of the world. As revealed through the prophet Zenos, the Lord's solution to the decay in his vineyard is to prune it one last time and to graft in the lost branches of the house of Israel. He will send forth his servants to gather his people before he burns the world.

Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven Is at Hand, and the Bridegroom Comes

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 33:5-18

33:5 Called forth out of the wilderness. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 5:14.

33:6 Will I gather mine elect. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:7.

33:7 Reap with all your might. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 4:4.

33:10 Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths straight. Similar to John the Baptist's mission to prepare the way for the mortal ministry of the Savior, the Saints of the latter-days are to prepare the way for the millennial ministry of Jesus Christ. Authors Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl observed: "Eastern potentates, when traveling from one part of the kingdom to another, would proclaim their coming and order their subjects to prepare the way for them, by building roads where there were none, if necessary; by leveling hills and filling up depressions, and straightening out the winding paths. . . . To prepare the way of the Lord and make His paths straight is to acknowledge His sovereignty and to make all necessary preparations for His reception. He will not come to reign until all necessary preparations for his coming have been made" (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 174). "Hear this, O Earth!" declared the Prophet Joseph Smith. "The Lord will not come to reign over the righteous, in this world, in 1843, nor until everything for the Bridegroom is ready" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 280).

33:13 Upon this rock I will build my church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:10, "Upon this rock."

The gates of hell. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:10, "The gates of hell shall not prevail."

33:14 Church articles and covenants. Reference is to Doctrine and Covenants sections 20 and 22.

33:17 Having your lamps trimmed and burning, and oil with you. This reference is to the parable of the ten virgins (Matthew 25:1-13). In this case the Bridegroom was to arrive at midnight. A lamp would do no good if it were not providing light to the individual who awaited his coming. The symbolism of the parable is simple: one must remain prepared for the coming of the Savior through righteous living. Just as the light shines outwardly, so the energy for the light comes from the olive oil, which is within the lamp. It is the same with our individual preparation for the coming of the Lord: the strength to endure is an inner strength that comes from the Spirit of God.

Anciently, lamps were small clay containers filled with oil and provided with cotton wicks that needed trimming after each use so that they would not smoke when lit again. It was best to keep the lamp continuously burning day and night, for it was a difficult labor to rekindle the flame, and the burning lamp could provide fire for whatever purpose was necessary, thus symbolizing our constant companion in the gift of the Holy Ghost.

33:18 I come quickly. The reference to the Savior coming quickly does not indicate the nearness of his second coming. Rather, as illustrated in the context of the parable of the ten virgins, it indicates that there will not be time to prepare for the separation of the righteous and the wicked after the Savior comes. Such preparation must have been made previous to his appearances.
