Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 34

DATE: 4 NOVEMBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

The Prophet recorded in his journal that "in the forepart of November, Orson Pratt, a young man nineteen years of age, who had been baptized at the first preaching of his brother, Parley P. Pratt, September 19th (his birthday), about six weeks previous, in Canaan, New York, came to inquire of the Lord what his duty was, and received the following answer" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:127-28).

Orson Pratt, along with his elder brother, Parley, was one of the original members called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in this dispensation. Concerning his early life and the events that led to his request that the Prophet Joseph Smith inquire of the Lord in his behalf, Orson wrote: "From the age of ten to nineteen I saw much of the world, and was tossed about without any permanent abiding place; but through the grace of God, I was kept from many of the evils to which young people are exposed; the early impressions of morality and religion, instilled into my mind by my parents, always remained with me; and I often felt a great anxiety to be prepared for a future state; but never commenced, in real earnest, to seek after the Lord, until the autumn of 1829. I then began to pray very fervently, repenting of every sin. In the silent shades of night, while others were slumbering upon their pillows, I often retired to some secret place in the lonely fields or solitary wilderness, and bowed before the Lord, and prayed for hours with a broken heart and contrite spirit; this was my comfort and delight. The greatest desire of my heart was for the Lord to manifest his will concerning me. I continued to pray in this fervent manner until September, 1830, at which time two elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints, came into the neighborhood, one of which was my brother Parley. They held several meetings which I attended.

"Being convinced of the divine authenticity of the doctrine they taught, I was baptized September 19, 1830. This was my birthday, being nineteen-years old. I was the only person in the country [region] who received and obeyed the message. Shortly after my baptism the Elders left.

"In October, 1830, I traveled westward over two hundred miles to see Joseph Smith, the Prophet. I found him in Fayette, Seneca County, N.Y., residing at the house of Mr. Whitmer. I soon became intimately acquainted with this good man, and also with the witnesses of the Book of Mormon. By my request, on the 4th of November, the Prophet Joseph inquired of the Lord for me, and received the revelation published in the Doctrine and Covenants" (as cited in Watson, Orson Pratt Journals, 8-9).

The Faithful Become the Sons of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 34:1-4

34:1-4 Through his faith in Christ, repentance, and obedience to the ordinances of baptism by water and fire, Orson Pratt was born of the Spirit. In order to enter into the kingdom of God all people "must be born again; yea, born of God," testified Alma, "changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters" (Mosiah 27:25). King Benjamin explained that those who make the covenants associated with baptism "shall be called the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters" for their "hearts are changed" through faith on the name of Christ and thus they "become his sons and his daughters" (Mosiah 5:7). To be born again is to be adopted as a son or daughter of Christ.

"Temporally speaking, only members of the family abide permanently in the house; servants come and go in their menial ministrations; they cannot abide forever in the house unless freed from their station as bondsmen; they remain outside the inner circle unless adopted as members of the family, thus being made legal heirs of all its privileges" (McConkie, Mortal Messiah, 3:159).

Preaching the Gospel Prepares the Way for the Second Coming

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 34:5-9

34:6 Lift up your voice as with the sound of a trump, both long and loud. At the time of his death on 3 October 1881, Orson Pratt had served as an apostle for more than forty- five years. He filled at least eleven missions to the Eastern States and crossed the Atlantic Ocean to Great Britain and the European continent another sixteen times to preach the gospel. In addition to his missionary labors, Orson Pratt was a tireless writer and defender of the faith. He authored several books and fifteen missionary tracts and served as editor of the Millennial Star, the Church's newspaper in England. He arranged the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants in chapters and verses with footnotes and references, and prepared the first American edition of the Pearl of Great Price for publication.

34:7 I shall come in a cloud. When the Lord returns it will be in light and glory, here described as a cloud. His coming is also described as "a pillar of fire" (D&C 29:12). Of his appearances anciently, we read that he "came down in a cloud" (Numbers 11:25) or "in the pillar of the cloud" (Numbers 12:5). Likewise, when he spoke with the brother of Jared, he "stood in a cloud" (Ether 2:14). The experiences of Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration were described by Matthew as a "bright cloud" (Matthew 17:5). Hebrew sources refer to the glory that attends the Lord as "The Presence" or the Shechinah.

34:9 The sun shall be darkened. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:42.

Prophecy Comes by the Power of the Holy Ghost

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 34:10-12

34:10 Prophesy, and it shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost. Of this prophecy, Elder Orson Pratt modestly observed: "This was a particular point in the revelation that seemed to me too great for me ever to attain to, and yet there was a positive command that I should do it. I have often reflected upon this revelation, and have oftentimes inquired in my heart'Have I fulfilled that commandment as I ought to have done? Have I sought as earnestly as I ought to obtain the gift of prophecy, so as to fulfill the requirement of Heaven?' And I have felt sometimes to condemn myself because of my slothfulness and because of the little progress that I have made in relation to this great, heavenly, and divine gift" (Journal of Discourses, 17:290-91). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 68:4.
