Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 35

DATE: DECEMBER 1830

PLACE: NEAR FAYETTE, NEW YORK

Doctrine and Covenants 35 addresses the preparation of Sidney Rigdon to be a servant of the Lord. Sidney served as the Prophet's scribe in the translation of the Bible and as the first counselor in the First Presidency of the Church. Of this revelation Joseph Smith recorded: "In December Sidney Rigdon came to inquire of the Lord, and with him came Edward Partridge; the latter was a pattern of piety, and one of the Lord's great men. Shortly after the arrival of these two brethren, thus spake the Lord" (History of the Church, 1:128).

Through the Atonement of Jesus Christ Men May Become One with God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 35:1-2

35:1 Alpha and Omega. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:1.

Whose course is one eternal round. "As one earth shall pass away," the Lord revealed to Moses, "and the heavens thereof even so shall another come; and there is no end to my works, neither to my words. For behold, this is my work and my gloryto bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:38-39).

35:2 A volume could be written about the truths announced in this verse, though it consists of but a single sentence. First, it introduces Jesus Christ as the source of the revelation. Indeed, every revelation for the salvation of men must come through Jesus Christ, his being the only name under heaven whereby salvation can come. Second, it affirms that he is the Son of God. It is the divine inheritance obtained thereby that enabled him to lay down his life in our behalf and to take it up again. Third, it reminds us that he died for our sins, not for sins he committed. Indeed, he is our Savior and we are saved by his goodness and grace. Fourth, it declares that the promise of salvation is only to those who choose to believe not simply in him but also "in his name," meaning they will reverence and accept those that have been commissioned to act in his behalf. For Sidney Rigdon that meant Joseph Smith. For us it means his legal and lawful successors. Fifth, it further confines the blessings of salvation to those who become sons of God, meaning those who are born again and live according to the things of the Spirit. Sixth, it reminds us, as John taught, that Christ, in order to obtain his own salvation, had to become one with God. That is he had to learn to think as God thinks, feel as God feels, and act as God acts. To do so is the system and process of salvation. No one who is unlike God can be saved (D&C 93:6-20). Thus, the obvious conclusion is then drawn that we must become one with Christ and thus one with the Father. This process of surrendering our will to that of our Fatheras did Christ constitutes the system and plan of salvation.

We note with interest that the same principles given here, in essentially the same order, are developed in the Lectures on Faith. Some have credited Sidney Rigdon with the writing of these lectures. Such a conclusion overstates the role played by Elder Rigdon, though he did work closely with the Prophet on them. The instruction in this verse may well have constituted a source of direction to them in that labor.

Sidney Rigdon Was Prepared for His Greater Work in the Restoration

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 35:3-7

35:4-6 Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "A great number of forceful, intelligent men who became leaders in the Church had been gathered by Sidney Rigdon, with the help of the Lord, in this part of the land. Without any question, the Spirit of the Lord had rested upon these men, as it did on Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt, to direct them to gather in Kirtland at that early day. When, therefore, Parley P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson and their companions came to Kirtland they found the way prepared for them through the preaching, very largely, of Sidney Rigdon, so that it was not a difficult matter for these missionaries to convince this group of the truth. While Sidney was preaching and baptizing by immersion without authority, which the Lord informed him in this revelation, yet it all resulted in good when the Gospel message reached them. These men were not only convinced and ready for baptism, but were in a condition by which the Priesthood could be given them, and this was done" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:160).

Miracles, Signs, and Wonders Come by Faith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 35:8-12

35:8 Mine arm is not shortened. Reference to the arm of the Lord symbolizes his power in working with the children of men. A shortened arm would suggest that his power had in some way been diminished. The Lord walked among mortal men, healing the sick, giving sight to the blind, unstopping deaf ears and dumb lips. At his word the lame took up their beds and walked. He promised his disciples, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto my Father" (John 14:12). The restoration of the fulness of the gospel included the power and authority of God to work great miracles. Ministers of that day and our own commonly teach that the power of God manifest in the miracles of the New Testament were a blessing bestowed on the Saints of an earlier day, but were not intended for our day. Here the Lord declares that his power is available to men on earth today and it is their faith that determines the miracles, signs, and wonders that will be manifest. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:64-72.

35:12 None that doeth good. Missionaries who go out to share the gospel meet many people who profess spiritual experiences. Such experiences are easily discerned by ascertaining their purpose. If the experience opens their hearts and minds to accept the fulness of the gospel when it comes to them, it is obviously of God. If, on the other hand, their purpose is to excuse themselves from any responsibility to accept additional light and truth and the blessings that come from it, their experiences obviously come from some other source. See commentary on D&C 84:45-46.

The message taken by these early missionaries to the Ohio Valley had just that effect. Many who were involved in back-to-the- Bible movements were more prepared to accept the message of the Restoration. On the other hand, this same message provided others with an excuse for refusing to listen to their message. The difference here was not the Bible but rather the ears of men.

Ready to receive the fulness of my gospel. In a later revelation, the Lord explains that the Spirit gives light to every individual that is born into the world. Those that will hearken to the voice of the Spirit will come into the kingdom and covenant with God to serve him. Those who do not hearken to the Spirit and instead reject the fulness of the gospel do so because they are "under the bondage of sin" (D&C 84:50).

The Lord Chooses the Weak of the World to Be His Servants

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 35:13-19

35:13 I call upon the weak things of the world. It is the degree of understanding one has received from the Spirit, not the degrees awarded by the understanding of men, that prepares an individual to teach or receive the gospel. We live in a world of information and knowledge, much of which has no power to save mankind, inspire faith, or encourage repentance. Only that which comes from God will bring men to God.

The perfect expression of this principle is found in the lives of those God calls to serve as missionaries. The latter- day missionary force is largely comprised of young men and women who are unacquainted with the ways of the world but who quickly learn to depend on the direction of the Spirit. The apostle Paul explained, "For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: but God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen" (1 Corinthians 1:26-28).

This principle was manifest in the calling of the unlearned boy, Joseph Smith, to be the servant of the Lord in restoring the fulness of the gospel in the latter days. When Sidney Rigdon first received the Book of Mormon and studied its contents, he was impressed by the fact that this powerful testament of Christ came through an unlearned man. Illustrating this point, A. W. Cowles records the following: "After a few days Cowdery returned and held a long interview with Rigdon. Rigdon had read a considerable portion of the book. He questioned Cowdery about Smith and found that he was entirely illiterate. Rigdon expressed the utmost amazement that such a man should write a book which seemed to shed a flood of light on all the old scriptures, open all their profoundest mysteries, and give them perfect consistency and complete system. In his fresh enthusiasm he exclaimed that if God ever gave a revelation, surely this must be divine" (as cited in Anderson, "Impact of the First Preaching," 479).

35:14 They shall fight manfully for me. Courage and faith will be the companions of every successful missionary. In June 1835 Elders David W. Patten, Wilford Woodruff, and Warren Parrish were together preaching the gospel in Tennessee. A local sheriff arrested them on false pretenses at the urging of a Methodist priest. A mock trial was held in which the defendants were not allowed to say a word in their own behalf. They were pronounced guilty. "Brother Patten, being filled with the Holy Ghost, arose to his feet, and by the power of God bound them fast to their seats while he addressed them. He rebuked them sharply for their wicked and unjust proceedings. Bro. Parrish afterwards said, 'My hair stood up straight on my head, for I expected to be killed.' When Patten closed, the Judge addressed him, saying, 'You must be armed with concealed weapons, or you would not treat an armed court as you have this.' Patten replied, 'I am armed with weapons you know not of, and my weapons are the Holy Priesthood and the power of God. God is my friend, and he permits you to exercise all the power you have, and he bestows on me all the power I have'" (in Jenson, LDS Biographical Encyclopedia, 1:78). Saints in the area paid the court costs, and the missionaries were set free. That evening a heavenly messenger appeared to Elder Patten and warned him that the mob at the courthouse was in a rage because their prisoners had been freed. These brethren escaped unharmed by heeding this angelic warning.

35:15 The poor and the meek shall have the gospel preached unto them. The experiences of virtually all missionaries show them that wealth brings with it a sense of self- sufficiency. It seems that the more individuals have accumulated of the things of this world, the less likely they will have an interest in the things of another world. Among those who have little of this world's goods, there exists a greater chance for missionaries to find individuals with an interest in the things of an eternal world. During his mission to England in 1840, Brigham Young wrote, "Almost without exception it is the poor that receive the Gospel" (as cited in Smith, History of the Church, 4:126).

35:18 I have given unto him the keys of the mystery of those things which have been sealed. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 28:7.

The Bible Will Be Restored and Israel Will Be Saved

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 35:20-27

35:20 Thou shalt write for him; and the scriptures shall be given. Sidney Rigdon was called of the Lord to be Joseph Smith's scribe for the translation of the Bible. Oliver Cowdery, who had previously served in this capacity, was in Missouri among the Lamanites. Elder Rigdon was the Prophet's scribe when the heavens were opened to them and they saw what we now know as the revelation on the degrees of glory (D&C 76).

Even as they are in mine own bosom. Much in the Old and New Testaments has not come to us as it was originally penned. The promise here is that the spirit of revelation will rest upon the Prophet with sufficient sureness to enable these ancient records to reflect those things that constitute the mind and will of the Lord.

To the salvation of mine own elect. Scripture is of little interest and thus of little worth to those of little faith. The greater our faith in God, the greater attention we give to his word.

35:23 It shall be given unto him to prophesy. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught the truths of the restored gospel by the spirit of prophecy. He had the same Spirit as those prophets who came before him. He was not dependent on the knowledge of past dispensations but received the truths from the author of our salvation.

Prove his words. Sidney Rigdon was to "prove" that the revelations given to Joseph Smith were in harmony and, indeed, came in fulfillment of that which is found in the Bible.

35:24 I will cause the heavens to shake for your good. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 21:6.

Zion shall rejoice upon the hills and flourish. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 49:24.

35:25 By the keys which I have given shall they be led. The house of Israel, including the lost ten tribes, is under the direction of those who hold the keys of the kingdom. "The keys of the kingdom, which belong always unto the Presidency of the High Priesthood" (D&C 81:2), were bestowed on the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by Peter, James, and John. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:13.
