Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 36

DATE: DECEMBER 1830

PLACE: NEAR FAYETTE, NEW YORK

Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge traveled to New York to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith following Sidney's conversion and baptism in Ohio. After his baptism in November 1830, Sidney Rigdon left almost immediately from Kirtland, Ohio, to go to Fayette, New York, to meet Joseph Smith. His traveling companion was a young hat-maker by the name of Edward Partridge, who shared his interest in meeting the Prophet but had not yet been baptized. While the previous revelation (section 35) was given to Sidney Rigdon, this one was given to Edward Partridge.

Regarding the arrival of Edward and Sidney at the Smith home, Lucy Mack Smith wrote: "In December of the same year, Joseph appointed a meeting at our house. While he was preaching, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge came in and seated themselves in the congregation. When Joseph had finished his discourse, he gave all who had any remarks to make the privilege of speaking. Upon this, Mr. Partridge arose, and stated that he had been to Manchester with the view of obtaining further information respecting the doctrine which we preached; but, not finding us, he had made some inquiry of our neighbors concerning our characters, which they stated had been unimpeachable, until Joseph deceived them relative to the Book of Mormon. He also said that he had walked over our farm, and observed the good order and industry which it exhibited; and, having seen what we had sacrificed for the sake of our faith, and having heard that our veracity was not questioned upon any other point than that of our religion, he believed our testimony and was ready to be baptized, 'if,' said he, 'Brother Joseph will baptize me.'

"'You are now,' replied Joseph, 'much fatigued, Brother Partridge, and you had better rest today and be baptized tomorrow.'

"'Just as Brother Joseph thinks best,' replied Mr. Partridge, 'I am ready at any time.'

"He was accordingly baptized the next day" (History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 249-50). Apparently it was soon after his baptism that he asked the Prophet to inquire of the Lord in his behalf, and the revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 36 was received.

Whether by the Hand of the Lord or of His Servants It Is the Same

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 36:1-3

36:2 I will lay my hand upon you by the hand of my servant Sidney Rigdon. Edward Partridge was baptized by the Prophet 11 December 1830 in the Seneca River. He was ordained an elder by Sidney Rigdon.

When the Lord's servants act in his behalf, it is as if the Lord himself has personally acted. Great symbolism is associated with the laying on of hands. The hand is a symbol of power and is associated with the idea of strength, providence, or blessings. Priesthood, keys, ordinations, offices, blessings, and so on are granted by the laying on of hands. This symbolizes the placing of God's hand or power upon the one so blessed. It also provides an orderly, observable, and documented way to convey offices or authority. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:11, "Known to the Church . . . regularly ordained."

The Duty of Every Priesthood Bearer Is to Preach the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 36:4-8

36:5-7 The clear thrust of these verses is that every man who has the Melchizedek Priesthood conferred upon him is obligated to serve as a missionary. President Kimball illustrated this principle when he said, "The question has been often asked, 'Is the mission program one of compulsion?' And the answer, of course, is no. Everyone is given his free agency. The question is asked: Should every young man fill a mission? And the answer of the Church is yes, and the answer of the Lord is yes. Enlarging this answer we say: Certainly every male member of the Church should fill a mission, like he should pay his tithing, like he should attend his meetings, like he should keep his life clean and free from the ugliness of the world and plan a celestial marriage in the temple of the Lord" ("Planning for a Full and Abundant Life," 87). In like manner, Elder A. Theodore Tuttle commented: "I talked with a young man about a mission. He said, 'I don't want to go.' I asked, 'What has that got to do with it? We need you'" (Conference Report, October 1974, 100).

36:6 Come forth out of the fire. This phrase comes from Jude 1:23. The thought it conveys is that in the Day of Judgment every corruptible thing will be consumed (D&C 101:24), and the wicked shall be burned with unquenchable fire (Malachi 4:1). If the erring Saints are to be saved they must be pulled, as it were, from the coming fire, even as God said of Israel: "Ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning" (Amos 4:11).

Hating even the garments spotted with the flesh. Again, the phrase comes from Jude 1:23. To put an end to disease in ancient Israel, clothing spotted by contagious diseases was destroyed by burning (Leviticus 13:47-59; 15:4-17). Here the thought is to liken the dreaded disease to sin. The Saints are to avoid the remotest contact with it; the very garments, as it were, of the sinners are to be burned with fire, meaning that anything which has had contact with the pollutions of the wicked must be shunned, and so also with those yet in the world who are invited to join the kingdom.

36:8 I will suddenly come to my temple. Among the passages of scripture that the angel Moroni quoted in tutoring the Prophet Joseph Smith was Malachi's prophecy that "the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple" (Malachi 3:1). The Lord will make numerous appearances at his temples. The first of these occurred when the Lord appeared to his servants in the Kirtland Temple on 3 April 1836 (see commentary on D&C 110:1-3). There are many temples, and it is, of course, the right of the Savior to appear in any or all of them as often as suits his purposes. Reference is made to his future appearance in the temple yet to be built in the New Jerusalem (D&C 42:35-36). We would understand this to be but the pattern of a host of other such appearances in his temples.
