Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 37

DATE: DECEMBER 1830

PLACE: CANANDAIGUA, NEW YORK

Though this revelation was given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, it was directed to the Church, which consisted of small congregations in Fayette, Manchester, and Colesville. Given in December 1830, it was the last of nineteen revelations received by Joseph Smith that year. It was also the first revelation in this dispensation to direct a gathering of the Saints. Constant harassment in upstate New York, contrasted with the warm reception the missionaries to the Lamanites had received in the Ohio Valley, precipitated the revelation.

The Saints Are Called to Gather at the Ohio

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 37:1-4

37:1 Translate. Joseph Smith was laboring on his translation of the Bible, known to us today as the Joseph Smith Translation.

The Ohio. Reference is to the Ohio Valley and more particularly to the city of Kirtland, where the first missionaries, Oliver Cowdery, Peter Whitmer, Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson, had enjoyed so much success.

37:3 They should assemble together at the Ohio. Though unknown to the Saints at this time, it would be in Kirtland, Ohio, that some of the most important events of this dispensation would take place. Their gathering there was necessary for the construction of a temple and the subsequent appearance of Christto accept that edifice as his houseand then the appearance of Moses, Elias, and Elijah to restore the keys, powers, and majesties they held when on earth. It would be here that the Saints would be "endowed with power from on high" (D&C 38:32). Almost half of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were given in Ohio. It was here that the school of the prophets was formed, the Lectures on Faith given, most of the work on the Joseph Smith Translation completed, and the Abraham papyrus purchased. It was also here that the law of consecration was revealed and revelations relative the establishment of Zion received. No period in the history of the Church equals the Ohio era for the outpouring of divine knowledge. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110.

Oliver Cowdery shall return. The reference is to Oliver's return from his mission to the Lamanites (D&C 28:8).

37:4 Let every man choose for himself. There is no compulsion in the Lord's Church. To sell all that they owned and move from upstate New York to Kirtland, Ohio, a distance of some three hundred miles in the midst of a bitter winter, would be very difficult and required considerable faith. It was necessary that it be their own choice to go, if for no other reason than that the kingdom of God rests upon the foundation of faith. It is the prince of darkness who builds upon the principle of compulsion.
