Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

MOSES 6-7

DATE: DECEMBER 1830

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

Truths restored through Joseph Smith about Enoch and his city of Zion, which was taken up into heaven, greatly interested the early Saints of this dispensation. The Prophet's faithful followers could not help but see in him something of an Enoch figure and likened their situation to that of their ancient counterparts. Moses 6 records the lineage of Enoch, who was the seventh in a chain of patriarchs extending back to Adam (vv. 10-22). Joseph Smith stood at the head of the seventh and final great gospel dispensation. Both men taught the same doctrines and held the same priesthood; both were seers, having had a magnificent vision of future events; both were opposed by great wickedness; both had performed miracles; and both had stood in the presence of God. Each prophet had gathered the faithful for the purpose of building a great temple city, and each of them taught a doctrine that would prepare the faithful to enter into God's presence while yet in the flesh.

Against fierce opposition Enoch converted many to the gospel of Jesus Christ (Moses 7:12-13). In so doing he was granted great power to protect the Lord's people. By his words "the earth trembled, and the mountains fled, . . . and the rivers of water were turned out of their course" (Moses 7:13). Stricken by fear, Enoch's enemies and the giants of the land stood far off, and "the Lord came and dwelt with his people, and they dwelt in righteousness" (Moses 7:16).

With Enoch at their head, the faithful became of one heart and one mind with no poor among them (Moses 7:18). Their lives were based on "the order of him who was without beginning of days or end of years," even Jesus Christ (Moses 6:67), and "after the order of the covenant which God made with Enoch" (JST Genesis 14:27). He and his people built a great city known to us as the "City of Holiness, even Zion" (Moses 7:19). After 365 years of preparation, this city was caught up into heaven (Moses 7:69).

Enoch left a prophetic description of our dispensation, as recorded in Moses 7.

The Restoration in the Latter Days

MOSES 7:62-65

Moses 7:62 Four key events are cited by Enoch in his prophetic description of this the final gospel dispensation. First, righteousness, he said, would come down out of heaven. Previous to this he had spoken of Christ as "the Righteous" (Moses 7:47), which suggests that this text could be an allusion to the First Vision. Certainly Enoch's prophecy embraced that singular event along with the appearance of a host of angels, each to restore their "rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:21). Along with the heavenly messengers spoken of by Enoch came a great outpouring of revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith, much of which finds expression in the volume known to us as the Doctrine and Covenants.

Second, Enoch spoke of truth coming forth from the earth to testify of God's Only Begotten Son, his resurrection from the dead, and the resurrection of all the inhabitants of the earth. The Book of Mormon fits this description perfectly. Thus the testimony of heaven and earth combines in the third event, which is the gathering of the elect from the four quarters of the earth. The message that we are to proclaim, the message that will gather the honest of heart from every nation is to center in Christ as he was known to those of dispensations past. The testimony we are to bear and the truths we are to teach as we go forth to gather Israel are found in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. The fourth prophecy centered in the place to which Israel is to be gathered, a holy city, patterned after that of Enoch's city, a city destined to become a New Jerusalem with a great temple of the Lord standing in its center.

My tabernacle. Reference is to the house of the Lord (Ezekiel 37:27).

Moses 7:63-64 Further revelation is granted on this matter in the Joseph Smith Translation of Genesis 9:21-24. It reads as follows: "And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant, which I made unto thy father Enoch; that, when men should keep all my commandments, Zion should again come on the earth, the city of Enoch which I have caught up unto myself. And this is mine everlasting covenant, that when thy posterity shall embrace the truth, and look upward, then shall Zion look downward, and all the heavens shall shake with gladness, and the earth shall tremble with joy. And the general assembly of the church of the first- born shall come down out of heaven, and possess the earth, and shall have place until the end come. And this is mine everlasting covenant, which I made with thy father Enoch. And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will establish my covenant unto thee, which I have made between me and thee, for every living creature of all flesh that shall be upon the earth."
