Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38

DATE: 2 JANUARY 1831

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

This revelation, given at Fayette, New York, 2 January 1831, is an extension of the revelation given to Joseph Smith about Enoch and the establishment of his city of Zion. It built on the knowledge there and worked to increase the desire of the Saints to establish the New Jerusalem spoken of in the book of Ether. See commentary on Moses 7:62-65, page 273.

The Omniscience of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:1-3

38:1 Great I Am. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:1.

Alpha and Omega. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:1.

Seraphic hosts of heaven, before the world was made. The hosts of heaven referred to here are unembodied spirits yet to be born into mortality (D&C 45:1; Genesis 2:1; Moses 3:1; Abraham 5:1). Seraphim is the plural form of the Hebrew word seraph, which means "burning."

38:2 Knoweth all things. Scripture testifies that all three members of the Godhead have all knowledge past, present, and future. This stands in sharp contrast with the idea held by some that God is forever learning. To suppose this is also to admit that God is forever ignorant. It is the testimony of all the standard works that God meaning the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghostknows all things both in heaven and on earth (Mosiah 4:9). Joseph Smith explained that unless God had all the attributes of godliness in perfection, including knowledge, we could not be expected to exercise faith in him. "Without the idea of the existence of these attributes in the Deity men could not exercise faith in him for life and salvation; seeing that without the knowledge of all things, God would not be able to save any portion of his creatures; for it is by reason of the knowledge which he has of all things, from the beginning to the end, that enables him to give that understanding to his creatures by which they are made partakers of eternal life; and if it were not for the idea existing in the minds of men that God had all knowledge it would be impossible for them to exercise faith in him" (Smith, Lectures on Faith, 4:11). See commentary on Lectures on Faith, 4:11, page 840.

The following are representative of the declaration of scripture:

"Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite" (Psalm 147:5).

"But the Lord knoweth all things from the beginning; wherefore, he prepareth a way to accomplish all his works among the children of men; for behold, he hath all power unto the fulfilling of all his words. Thus it is. Amen" (1 Nephi 9:6).

"O how great the holiness of our God! For he knoweth all things, and there is not anything save he knows it" (2 Nephi 9:20).

"Believe in God; believe that he is, and that he created all things, both in heaven and in earth; believe that he has all wisdom, and all power, both in heaven and in earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend"(Mosiah 4:9).

"Therefore, I would that ye should be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in good works, that Christ, the Lord God Omnipotent, may seal you his, that you may be brought to heaven, that ye may have everlasting salvation and eternal life, through the wisdom, and power, and justice, and mercy of him who created all things, in heaven and in earth, who is God above all. Amen" (Mosiah 5:15).

"He comprehendeth all things, and all things are before him, and all things are round about him; and he is above all things, and in all things, and is through all things, and is round about all things; and all things are by him, and of him, even God, forever and ever" (D&C 88:41).

The omniscience of God troubles some because they suppose it to be in conflict with agency. If God knows that something is going to happen, they argue, we have no power of choice to prevent it. They assume that foreknowledge has a causal effect, reasoning that if God knows we are going to do something wrong, we are predetermined to do it. Were that the case, it would also follow that God's ignorance of future events would have a preventive effect. That is, if God did not know something was going to happen, then it wouldn't happen. If that were true, it would follow that we have agency or freedom of choice in direct proportion to God's ignorance. Thus, rather than rejoice in the knowledge of God, scripture should exult in his ignorance. The whole chain of thought is threadbare. Ignorance about the cause of cancer never prevented it, and knowledge of it never caused it. Our knowledge that one season follows another, that the tides come and go, that the sun rises and sets, has nothing to do with their happening; nor will our ignorance of these events deter them in any way. Our ignorance or knowledge of either the laws of nature or the laws of the gospel is without causal effect. True it is that God has the power to intervene and prevent certain things from happening, but he will not do so to contravene the agency that he himself gave us.

For all things are present before mine eyes. To Moses the Lord said, "All things are present with me, for I know them all" (Moses 1:6). For God past, present, and future are always before him as one. Exalted beings "reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord. The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's" (D&C 130:7-9).

38:3 All things came by me. Under the direction of the Father, Christ has created worlds without number. "By the word of my power, have I created them, which is mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth. And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten" (Moses 1:32-33). When Christ says, "all things came by me," as he does in this text, he is speaking by divine investiture of authority. That is, he is speaking in the first person for his Father. Although the great labor of creation rested with Christ, he is not the father of the spirits of men, nor did he create himself. In the premortal realm Christ was the firstborn of all the spirit children of our eternal Father. In mortality he is the Only Begotten of the Father, meaning the only Son begotten of God in the flesh, or with blood.

Enoch's City of Zion

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:4-6

38:4 The promise in Ether 13 of a New Jerusalem piqued the early Saints' interest in the establishment of that city and of a Zion society. They had undoubtedly inherited a keen interest in establishing such a society from their forebears, who had fled Europe and come to America for the very purpose of establishing a covenant society and reinstating the ancient order of things. It is significant that in this revelation, given just after the announcement that the Lord's people were to gather, reference is made to Enoch's Zion.

I am the same which have taken the Zion of Enoch into mine own bosom. While laboring on the Joseph Smith Translation a few weeks previous to this revelation, the Prophet learned that Enoch, one of the greatest of the Old Testament prophets and yet one for whom the Bible preserves the barest of references (Genesis 5:21-24), established a city of holiness, or Zion. In that revelation we learn that the Lord called his people Zion "because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Moses 7:18). Joseph further learned that "all the days of Zion, in the days of Enoch, were three hundred and sixty- five years. And Enoch and all his people walked with God, and he dwelt in the midst of Zion; and it came to pass that Zion was not, for God received it up into his own bosom; and from thence went forth the saying, Zion Is Fled" (Moses 7:68-69). Our immediate text tells us that those of Enoch's city were taken into heaven because they believed in the name of Christ and because he became their advocate with the Father. These revelations were obviously announcing the principles upon which the Zion of the last days is to be built and to which the city of Enoch will, in a millennial day, yet return.

Bosom. The bosom is naturally associated with the idea of embracing in love and fellowship. In the East it had an extended meaning associated with the manner of dress. Long, flowing garments bound at the waist by a girdle provided a convenient carrying place, like a bag, in the fold of material over the breast. Thus the bosom became a carrying place used by shepherds to carry helpless lambs (Isaiah 40:11).

38:5-6 Those who rejected the testimony of Christ as it was declared to them by Enoch and others of the prophets of that day gave themselves up to such wickedness that the Lord said: "Wherefore, I can stretch forth mine hands and hold all the creations which I have made; and mine eye can pierce them also, and among all the workmanship of mine hands there has not been so great wickedness as among thy brethren. . . . But behold, these which thine eyes are upon shall perish in the floods; and behold, I will shut them up; a prison have I prepared for them. And That which I have chosen hath pled before my face. Wherefore, he suffereth for their sins; inasmuch as they will repent in the day that my Chosen shall return unto me, and until that day they shall be in torment; Wherefore, for this shall the heavens weep, yea, and all the workmanship of mine hands" (Moses 7:36-40).

38:5 The wicked have I kept in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day. Among the things in Enoch's panoramic vision of future dispensations are the events that surrounded the resurrection of Christ. "As many of the spirits as were in prison came forth," he said, "and stood on the right hand of God; and the remainder where reserved in chains of darkness until the judgment of the great day" (Moses 7:57). All are to be resurrected, each in his or her order. That order will be determined by the law by which they lived. The first to come forth from the grave will be those who are to be celestial, only then will those who are to be terrestrial be resurrected, and then those who are telestial, and last of all those who are filthy still, meaning those who are perdition (D&C 88:16-32, 99-104).

The Wicked Will Not Abide the Coming of Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:7-12

38:8 The veil of darkness shall soon be rent. See commentary on Moses 7:62-65, page 274.

He that is not purified shall not abide the day. Reference is to the millennial day in which the earth "will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (Article of Faith 10). Prior to that day, the earth will be cleansed of all that is telestial. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 101:22-41.

38:9 The enemy shall not overcome. Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "He has given to us the kingdom. He has made us the promise that the enemy of the kingdom shall not overcome. We may have trouble. We have had trouble. We may meet with opposition, but that opposition shall fail in its endeavor to destroy the work of God . . .

"The gospel has been restored, and the kingdom given to his saints according to the prophecy of Daniel. It is not again to be removed, destroyed, or given to other people, and in his own way and time he is going to break down all other systems, that his kingdom may prevail and that he may come and reign as Lord of lords and King of kings upon the face of the whole earth . . .

"The Lord has called attention to the fact that he is going to destroy systems and organizations and combinations that are false. And how is he going to do it? By giving their members the truth, if they will receive it; by giving them the privilege of coming out of those organizations to receive the truth and have every opportunity to come into his kingdom, for his hand is outstretched ready to greet them. If they will not come; if they will not receive his message; then, of course, they must fall with their systems. Truth will prevail; truth will stand when all else is removed, and it is destined to cover the face of the earth" (Doctrines of Salvation, 1:241).

Gird up your loins. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:15.

38:10 But not all. Some members of the Church were in need of repentance (D&C 1:30).

38:11 All flesh is corrupted. By its very definition, a universal apostasy, like the darkness of night, leaves nothing unaffected. This is not to say, for instance, that there was no truth or goodness to be found in the Dark Ages or in the churches of the world. It is, however, to say that there was no truth or goodness that was not affected by that darkness. To flourish, the flowering plant requires the light of the sun, without which it will wilt away. Likewise, every good thing needs heaven's light to grow and is hindered by the lack of that light.

The powers of darkness prevail. Describing the establishment of Zion and the latter-day New Jerusalem, Isaiah wrote: "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee" (Isaiah 60:1-2). In this text Isaiah contrasts the light of Zion with the darkness of the world. An epistle written by the elders in Kirtland amplifies the language of Isaiah: "Consider for a moment, brethren, the fulfillment of the words of the prophet; for we behold that darkness covers the earth, and gross darkness the minds of the inhabitants thereofthat crimes of every description are increasing among menvices of great enormity are practicedthe rising generation growing up in the fullness of pride and arrogancethe aged losing every sense of conviction, and seemingly banishing every thought of a day of retributionintemperance, immorality, extravagance, pride, blindness of heart, idolatry, the loss of natural affection; the love of this world, and indifference toward the things of eternity increasing among those who profess a belief in the religion of heaven, and infidelity spreading itself in consequence of the same men giving themselves up to commit acts of the foulest kind, and deeds of the blackest dye, blaspheming, defrauding, blasting the reputation of neighbors, stealing, robbing, murdering; advocating error and opposing the truth, forsaking the covenant of heaven, and denying the faith of Jesus and in the midst of all this, the day of the Lord fast approaching when none except those who have won the wedding garment will be permitted to eat and drink in the presence of the Bridegroom, the Prince of Peace!" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 47).

In the presence of all the hosts of heaven. We have no secrets from the hosts of heaven. They are quite mindful of our doings. "The spirits of the just . . . ," said Joseph Smith, "are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions and are often pained therewith" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 326). Those who are on the Lord's errand do not walk alone. To such he said, "I have given the heavenly hosts and mine angels charge concerning you" (D&C 84:42). "And whoso receiveth you, there I will be also, for I will go before your face. I will be on your right hand and on your left, and my Spirit shall be in your hearts, and mine angels round about you, to bear you up" (D&C 84:88).

38:12 Which causeth silence to reign. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:95.

Angels are waiting . . . to gather the tares that they may be burned. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:1-13.

The Covenant of Gathering

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:13-22

38:13 Repeated attempts had been and yet would be made to destroy Joseph Smith. Of his enemies the Lord said, "Their bounds are set, they cannot pass." To the Prophet he said, "Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:9).

38:17 I have made the earth rich. "The earth is full," the Lord said, "and there is enough and to spare" (D&C 104:17).

Again I will stand upon it. Reference is to the Millennium, when the Lord will again abide upon the earth.

38:18-20 Promised lands are given with a covenant that is everlasting. Those to whom the lands are given will be blessed to enjoy them through time and eternity. The psalmist tells us that the "meek shall inherit the earth" and "dwell therein for ever" (Psalm 37:11, 29, 34). Christ reaffirmed this promise in what is known as the Sermon on the Mount (Matthew 5:5). By revelation Joseph Smith has assured us that the promise was literal not figurative (D&C 88:17-18). Ancient Israel was commanded to honor its fathers and mothers that their days would be long upon the land which the Lord had given them (Exodus 20:12). This does not suggest that Israel would live longer than other people, but rather that throughout the generations she and her posterity would live in peace and prosperity upon the land the Lord had given her and that she would lay claim to that same land in an eternal world. Consider the language of the covenant: "Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land, whither ye go to posses it; and that ye may prolong your days in the land, which the Lord sware unto your fathers to give unto them and to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey" (Deuteronomy 11:8-9). This land, first promised to Abraham, was given as an "everlasting possession" (Genesis 17:8; 48:4; Abraham 2:6). John Taylor explains: "Men have conquered, and taken, bought and sold, the earth without God. But their possessions will perish with them; they may perpetuate them by law for a season to their descendants, but the Saints of God will finally inherit the earth for ever, in time, and in eternity, Abraham held his possessions on a very different footing from the above. The Lord appeared unto him, and made a covenant with him, and said, 'And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession.' [Genesis 17:8.] This covenant was an eternal one; yet Abraham did not possess the land, for Stephen says, 'he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on.' [Acts 7:5.] And Paul says, 'By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise; for he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.' [Hebrews 11:8-10.] Here, then, we find land given to Abraham by promise, a land that he did not possess; but he will do so, 'for he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.' He looked forward to the redemption of his seed, the establishment of the kingdom of God, and the inheritance of those blessings eternally. If any one doubts this, let them read the [31st] chapter of Jeremiah, and the [36th] to [39th] chapters of Ezekiel; wherein it is stated that Israel is to be gathered to their own land, that it is to become as the Garden of Eden, and to be no more desolate. Ezekiel speaks of the resurrection of the dead, and the coming together of the bones, flesh, sinews, and skin, of a living army; of the uniting of the nations of Judah, and Israel, in one; and in consequence of the great development of the powers of God, the heathen would be filled with astonishment; and finally, that God's tabernacle should be planted in their midst for evermore. Then let them read from the [47th] to the last chapter of Ezekiel; and they will find an account, not only of the restoration of the Jews, and ten tribes, but that the land is actually divided to them by inheritance, in their different tribes, according to the promise made thousands of years before to Abraham. In the 13th and 14th verses of the [47th] chapter, he refers to this, and says, 'Thus saith the Lord God, This shall be the border whereby ye shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph shall have two portions. And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another; concerning the which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers; and this land shall fall unto you for an inheritance.' Thus we find that the promise unto Abraham concerning territory will be literally fulfilled" (Taylor, Government of God, 43, 45; emphasis in original).

38:18 No curse when the Lord cometh. The curse placed upon the earth at the time of Adam's fall will be lifted during the millennial day. Of that day, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "Adam in his ancient Eden was denied the privilege of partaking of the fruit of the tree of life, lest doing so he should live forever in his sins. But now, all who are freed from sin through the blood of the Lamb shall partake forever of that fruit of which men eat and never hunger more. 'And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall serve him.' Whereas the earth was cursed so that it brought forth thorns, thistles, briers, and noxious weeds, whereas man was required to eat his bread in the sweat of his face; whereas sorrow and death passed upon all menall this in the beginningnow the ransom has been paid and all things have become new" (Millennial Messiah, 704-5).

38:21-22 The prophetic word declares that with the return of Christ there will be "a full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6), meaning all man- made governments will surrender their authority to the Lord of lords and King of kings, who "will reign personally upon the earth" (Article of Faith 10). Joseph Smith explained that "Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 268). Having lost the glory of David's day, Israel took great solace in the prophecies that such glory would be restored to her. For instance, Zechariah testified, "And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that [millennial] day shall there be one Lord, and his name one" (Zechariah 14:9). Describing that day, Zephaniah wrote: "The Lord hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the king of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more. In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. . . . I will undo all that afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put to shame. At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord" (Zephaniah 3:15-17, 19-20). And again Hosea wrote, "I am the Lord thy God . . . for there is no saviour beside me. . . . I will be thy king: where is any other that may save thee in all thy cities?" (Hosea 13:4, 10).

"When the Lord reigns, how will he do it? John says: 'He shall rule them with a rod of iron.' (Rev. 19:15). What is the rod of iron? Nephi says: 'I beheld that the rod of iron . . . was the word of God, which led to the fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life.' (1 Ne. 11:25). Thus, Christ reigneth in and through and by means of the gospel. There is no other way. Men will be subject to him because they believe the gospel. The gospel is his law. He has no other. And so we read relative to his coming: 'And another trump shall sound, which is the fifth trump, which is the fifth angel who committeth the everlasting gospelflying through the midst of heaven, unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people; and this shall be the sound of his trump, saying to all people, both in heaven and in earth, and that are under the earth for every ear shall hear it, and every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall confess, while they hear the sound of the trump, saying: Fear God, and give glory to him who sitteth upon the throne, forever and ever; for the hour of his judgment is come.' (D&C 88:103-4). Every knee shall bow! The Lord reigneth! He is King over all the earth!" (McConkie, Millennial Messiah, 590-91).

Saints Commanded to Be One and Esteem Each Other

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:23-27

38:23 Teach one another. It has ever been the system in the Lord's kingdom that we "teach one another." In a revelation given a month later the Lord said: "And now, behold, I give unto you a commandment, that when ye are assembled together ye shall instruct and edify each other, that ye may know how to act and direct my church, how to act upon the points of my law and commandments, which I have given" (D&C 43:8).

38:24 Let every man esteem his brother as himself. Teaching this same principle, the apostle James wrote: "For if there come unto your assembly a man with a gold ring, in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; and ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool: are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts? Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him? But ye have despised the poor. Do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are called? If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well: But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgressors" (James 2:2-9).

38:27 Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine. Salvation comes in our obtaining the mind of Christ and thus being one with him (1 Corinthians 2:16). We are saved to the extent that we have learned to believe as he believes, feel as he feels, and act as he acts. This is the sense in which the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are spoken of as being one God. The intent of scripture is not to suggest three manifestations of the same God, but rather three persons who are one in thought and deed. To the extent that we do not believe, feel, or act as Christ would, we are not one with him, and thus the Lord would say of us, "Ye are not mine."

The Wicked Seek the Saints' Lives

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:28-29

38:28 The adversary and his legions have always sought the lives of the Lord's anointed. Elder Joseph F. Smith explained: "It has ever been the desire of the wicked to destroy the people of God. They have never slackened their efforts, nor failed to use all the means in their power, nor hesitated to resort to the most cruel, foul and fiendish acts to accomplish their nefarious purpose. This same cruel enmity, although for the time being, to some extent subdued or held in check by the Almighty, still smoulders and rankles in their hearts, awaiting a favorable opportunity to burst forth as fiercely as at any time during the life of the Prophet Joseph. This is one of the strongest evidences we can have of the divine mission of President Brigham Young. Because of the inspiration of the Almighty and power of God which has rested upon him and accompanied his administrations, he has been the very centre of the target at which all the deadly weapons of the enemy has been aimed ever since the death of the Prophet Joseph. I say this is one of the strongest evidences we can have of this fact, aside from the testimony of the Holy Spirit, which bringeth knowledge. It is unmistakable. The hatred of the wicked always has and always will follow the Priesthood and the Saints. The devil will not lose sight of the power of God vested in man the Holy Priesthood. He fears it, he hates it, and will never cease to stir up the hearts of the debased and corrupt in anger and malice towards those who hold this power, and to persecute the Saints, until he is bound. He delights in apostacy and in apostates, and uses them for his purpose, but what does he or his emissaries care for their organizations? Do they hate them? Is the world moved with anger or malice against them? No. They become a part of the world, fraternize with the people of the world and lose their distinction or identity, as the people of God notwithstanding their claims and pretentions to being believers in the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the Gospel which he was instrumental in restoring to the earth" (Journal of Discourses, 19:24-25).

38:29 Prophetically, this is the earliest allusion to the Civil War. See Doctrine and Covenants 87.

The Saints Are to Be Endowed with Power and Go Forth to All Nations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:30-33

38:32 There I will give unto you my law. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42.

You shall be endowed with power from on high. The endowment is an ordinance of protection and blessing normally given in a temple. A partial endowment was given in the Kirtland Temple, but the full endowment was not revealed until the Saints were in Nauvoo.

The elders of Israellike their ancient counterpartswere not to go to the nations of the earth until they had received this heavenly endowment (Luke 24:49; Acts 1:4, 8; D&C 95:8-9). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 39:15, "And from thence men shall go forth into all nations."

38:33 Israel shall be saved. The Lord made the covenant of salvation with Abraham and his seed, meaning the literal seed of his body. All who receive it must do so at the hands of those who are rightful heirs of that covenant (Abraham 2:9, 11). Those not of the house of Israel who embrace the gospel are adopted into his lineage. The Holy Ghost must "purge out the old blood" from these, Joseph Smith explained, "and make [them] actually of the seed of Abraham" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 150).

No power shall stay my hand. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:5.

Care for the Poor and Seek Riches of Eternity

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 38:34-42

38:34 Appointed by the voice of the church. Those who serve in positions of authority over others in the Church do so only with the consent of those over whom they preside (D&C 26:2; 28:12).

38:38 Endowed with power from on high. See commentary on verse 32.

38:39 Lest ye become as the Nephites of old. After the ministry of Christ among the Nephites, they lived for two hundred years in perfect peace and harmony. "And now, in this two hundred and first year there began to be among them those who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel, and all manner of fine pearls, and of the fine things of the world. And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them. And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ. And it came to pass that when two hundred and ten years had passed away there were many churches in the land; yea, there were many churches which professed to know the Christ, and yet they did deny the more parts of his gospel, insomuch that they did receive all manner of wickedness, and did administer that which was sacred unto him to whom it had been forbidden because of unworthiness. And this church did multiply exceedingly because of iniquity, and because of the power of Satan who did get hold upon their hearts" (4 Nephi 1:24-28).

38:41 Let your preaching be the warning voice. The voice of warning will always be the voice of the true messenger of the Lord. The Lord does not send out his servants to assure the world that the course they are following is acceptable to him. Their purpose is to declare repentance, the need for baptism both for the remission of sins and for entrance into the Church and kingdom of God. Those who reject this message forfeit all the knowledge and blessings that would come to those who have received an inheritance in Zion.

38:42 And go ye out from among the wicked. The Saints are to leave upstate New York and go to Ohio.

Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord. The phrase comes from Isaiah (Isaiah 52:11) and was directed to those who held the priesthood and thus had the responsibility to tend the sacred vessels of the temple. In order to perform their temple duties, the priests cleansed themselves in a three- part ritual. They were washed, anointed, and then clothed in the garment of the priesthood (Leviticus 8). The symbolism of this ritual is instructive. Priesthood holders must first be clean to act in the name of the Lord. Those who are clean can be anointed with oil, which symbolizes the outpouring of the Spirit. When they possess the Spirit, they can then be clothed in the garment of the priesthood, which represents the power and authority of God. This text seems particularly appropriate in the context of the endowment that had been promised the Saints (D&C 38:8).
