Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 39

DATE: 5 JANUARY 1831

PLACE: FAYETTE, NEW YORK

Religious traditions can be a major stumbling block to receiving Jesus Christ and the restoration of his gospel in the latter days. Many doors are closed to missionaries throughout the world in the name of loyalty to another faith or church. What should be our approach in proclaiming the Restoration to members of other Christian churches? In this revelation the Lord addressed a Baptist preacher about entrance into the kingdom of God. The Lord's words and message to this man are an example of how the Lord would have us address sincere members of other Christian faiths. Prefacing this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded, "Not long after this conference of the 2nd of January closed, there was a man came to me by the name of James Covill, who had been a Baptist minister for about forty years, and covenanted with the Lord that he would obey any command that the Lord would give to him through me, as His servant, and I received the following" (History of the Church, 1:143).

The Saints Have Power to Become the Sons of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 39:1-4

39:1-4 Jesus Christ established his gospel during his mortal ministry, and he has come in these latter days to offer salvation to all who will come unto him (John 1:12). By echoing John's testimony, the Lord intimates that those who profess to receive the Lord Jesus Christ as their Savior are in a similar situation to that of the Jews of Jesus' day. Like their Jewish counterparts of the meridian day, they are put to the test of discipleship. In the early Church, those who left the apostate conditions of Judaism and received Jesus Christ were given the power of spiritual rebirth. Those who stubbornly held to false traditions that had developed among the once-vibrant faith of the covenant people remained in darkness.

39:4 Power to become my sons. The sonship here spoken of does not have reference to man's existence as a spirit offspring of the Eternal Father. Rather, through faith and righteousness, men have the power to become (1) the sons of Christ (D&C 39:1-6), and (2) sons of God, meaning the Father, by adoption into the family of Christ.

"Through 'the covenant' of baptism, those who are actually born again become 'the children of Christ, his sons, and his daughters'; they are 'spiritually begotten' by him; their 'hearts are changed through faith on his name'; thus they 'are born of him and have become his sons and his daughters.' (Mosiah 5:7.) Baptism and church membership standing alone do not make men sons of Christ, but through them, as he said, men have 'power to become my sons.' (D&C 39:4; Rev. 21:7.)

"Those who are sons of God (meaning the Father) are persons who, first, receive the gospel, join the true Church, obtain the priesthood, marry for eternity, and walk in obedience to the whole gospel law. They are then adopted into the family of Jesus Christ, become joint-heirs with him, and consequently receive, inherit, and possess equally with him in glorious exaltation in the kingdom of his Father (D&C 76:54-60; 84:33-41; 88:107; 132:15-25; Rom. 8:14-18; Gal. 3:26-29; 4:1-7)" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:73-74).

To Receive the Gospel Is to Receive Christ

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 39:5-6

39:5 He that receiveth my gospel receiveth me. As "the messenger of salvation" (D&C 93:8), Jesus Christ taught the gospel which he received from the Father. The true test of discipleship lies in receiving his message, especially when it entails forsaking former false religious principles. It is self-deception for individuals to say that they have received Jesus into their life if they then reject his gospel. Many ask themselves the question, "If I had lived on the earth at the time of Jesus, would I have been one of his disciples?" The correct and indisputable response is simple. What is our response to the restoration of his gospel in the latter days? How we answer that question is a sure indication of what our response would have been had we dwelt in Judea or Galilee during the lifetime of the Savior.

39:6 This is my gospelrepentance and baptism by water. All who receive the Savior must have "faith unto repentance" (Alma 34:16). They must be willing to be baptized "as a witness before him that ye have entered into a covenant with him, that ye will serve him and keep his commandments" (Mosiah 18:10). Those who confess that the Restoration is the work of God but are unwilling to covenant in the waters of baptism will not receive the blessings of the gift of the Holy Ghost or enter the gate to eternal life.

James Covill Is Commanded to Be Baptized

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 39:7-14

39:10 The days of thy deliverance are come, if thou wilt hearken to my voice. All blessings of the gospel are predicated upon obedience, and deliverance from the captivity of sin and error is dependent upon obedience. Elder Harold B. Lee referred to the Lord's promises to his servants, if they would hearken to his voice: "I sat in a class in Sunday School in my own ward one day, and the teacher was the son of a patriarch. He said he used to take down the blessings of his father, and he noticed that his father gave what he called 'iffy' blessings. He would give a blessing, but it was predicated on 'if you will not do this' or 'if you will cease doing that.' And he said, 'I watched these men to whom my father gave the 'iffy' blessings, and I saw that many of them did not heed the warning that my father as a patriarch had given, and the blessings were never received because they did not comply.

"You know, this started me thinking. I went back into the Doctrine and Covenants and began to read the 'iffy' revelations that have been given to the various brethren in the Church. If you want to have an exercise in something that will startle you, read some of the warnings that were given through the Prophet Joseph Smith to Thomas B. Marsh, Martin Harris, some of the Whitmer brothers, William E. McLellinwarnings which, had they heeded, some would not have fallen by the wayside. But because they did not heed, and they didn't clear up their lives, they fell by the wayside, and some had to be dropped from member ship in the Church" (Conference Report, October 1972, 130).

The blessings offered to James Covill were of great import. Because he returned to his life as a Baptist minister, none of these blessings were secured. Although these blessings were personally directed to James Covill, they are available to all who will receive the fulness of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ.

You shall receive my Spirit. Individuals may enjoy the guidance of the Spirit in their lives and may receive a witness of the Holy Ghost, but the gift of the Holy Ghost is a greater blessing. Alma explained that the blessing given to those who are baptized is that the Lord "may pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon" them (Mosiah 18:10). The Spirit of Christ, which "is given to every man, that he may know good from evil" (Moroni 7:16), was previously available to James Covill. The power of the Holy Ghost surely came upon him as he heard the message of the restored gospel. However, the gift of the Holy Ghost, received by the laying on of hands by one in authority, could not be his unless he acted upon the witness that he received. It is one thing to have the Holy Ghost visit an individual. It is another for an individual to receive the right to have the Holy Ghost as a constant companion. "There is a difference between the Holy Ghost and the gift of the Holy Ghost," taught Joseph Smith. "Cornelius received the Holy Ghost before he was baptized, which was the convincing power of God unto him of the truth of the Gospel, but he could not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost until after he was baptized. Had he not taken this sign or ordinance upon him, the Holy Ghost which convinced him of the truth of God, would have left him" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 199).

A blessing so great as you never have known. See commentary on verse 15, "I have kept in store a blessing."

A Special Blessing Is to Be Given Those Who Go Forth to Preach

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 39:15-21

39:15 Inasmuch as my people shall assemble themselves at the Ohio. "It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was," said Joseph Smith, "that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. . . . Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 308). It was in Ohio that the first temple of this last dispensation would be built.

I have kept in store a blessing. Three days before this revelation was given, the Lord revealed to the Church that in Ohio they would "be endowed with power from on high" (D&C 38:32). Should James Covill choose to assemble with the Saints in Ohio, this endowment, a blessing that had been lost to the world for nearly two millennia, would likewise be available to him. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 38:32; 105:11.

And from thence men shall go forth into all nations. The resurrected Christ instructed the meridian-day apostles to "tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high" and then preach "in his name among all nations" (Luke 24:47, 49). In like manner, modern-day missionaries are not sent to all the world until they have received this same endowment in the house of the Lord.

After the elders received the gift of the Holy Ghost, the Lord began to reveal that he had an endowment in store for the faithful (D&C 38:22; 43:16), "a blessing such as is not known among the children of men" (D&C 39:15.) He said in June 1830, "I gave unto you a commandment that you should build a house, in the which house I design to endow those whom I have chosen with power from on high; for this is the promise of the Father unto you; therefore I command you to tarry, even as mine apostles at Jerusalem"(D&C 95:8-9; 105:11-12, 18, 33).

Servants of the Lord are not fully qualified to go forth to preach the gospel and build up the kingdom unless they have the gift of the Holy Ghost and have been endowed with power from on high, meaning that they have received the knowledge, powers, and blessings normally given only in the temple, the house of the Lord.

39:17-18 See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 43:17-28.

Those Who Receive the Gospel Shall Be Gathered in Time and in Eternity

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 39:22-24

39:22 They shall be gathered unto me in time and in eternity. Joseph Smith wrote: "The main object [of gathering] was to build unto the Lord a house whereby He could reveal unto His people the ordinances of His house and the glories of His kingdom, and teach the people the way of salvation; for there are certain ordinances and principles that, when they are taught and practiced, must be done in a place or house built for that purpose. . . . It is for the same purpose that God gathers together His people in the last days, to build unto the Lord a house to prepare them for the ordinances" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 308).
