Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 41

DATE: 4 FEBRUARY 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 41 is of special importance because it restored the office of bishop in the Church of Christ. Though it would not be until the Church had established itself in the Salt Lake Valley that bishops would function in wards as they do in our day, those holding the office of bishop played an important role in directing temporal affairs in this early period.

This is the first of many revelations that were received in Ohio, where more sections of the Doctrine and Covenants were given than in any other location. Kirtland was designated by the Lord as the first place of gathering for the Saints in this dispensation.

The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "The latter part of January, in company with Brothers Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, I started with my wife for Kirtland, Ohio, where we arrived about the first of February, and were kindly received and welcomed into the house of Brother Newel K. Whitney. My wife and I lived in the family of Brother Whitney several weeks, and received every kindness and attention which could be expected, and especially from Sister Whitney" (History of the Church, 1:145-46).

The Lord Will Bless His Church with His Law

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 41:1-6

41:1 I delight to bless with the greatest of all blessings. It was here in Kirtland that the first temple would be built in this dispensation; the beginning of the endowment would be restored; the keys for gathering Israel would be restored; the keys necessary for eternal marriage would be brought back; and the keys of the sealing power would be committed again to men on the earth. It is out of these events that the promises made to the fathers will find fulfillment and that the fulness of all gospel blessings will be extended to all willing to receive them.

Ye that hear me not will I curse, that have professed my name, with the heaviest of all cursings. The greatest of heaven's blessings are reserved for those who accept Christ and his gospel, and those who choose to walk in other paths can expect only to receive wages of him whom they have chosen to serve. Of note here is Christ's displeasure with those who reject the restored gospel while feigning loyalty to him and his word. Just as those who put Christ to death in the name of loyalty to the law of Moses were condemned by that law, so too will those who reject the message of the Restoration be condemned by that law they profess to represent.

41:2 Assemble yourselves together to agree upon my word. There is no suggestion here that it is the prerogative of the elders of the Church to get together and determine among themselves what is and what is not the gospel. It is the Lord's Church, to which they are members only. He runs it. All gospel principles come from him. In this particular instance, five days after this revelation had been given, Joseph Smith, in company with twelve elders, received a revelation on Church government which included instruction about dealing with transgressions (D&C 42).

41:3 Ye shall receive my law. Reference is to Doctrine and Covenants 42, which is known as "the Law" or "the law of the Church."

41:5 He that receiveth my law and doeth it, the same is my disciple. In historical Christianity, there exists the notion that one can receive Jesus Christ as Savior without receiving him as Lord and Master. These are they who are willing to accept the saving grace of the Son of God but who see no need to conform to any particular discipline or standard of behavior. Within the Protestant world, these individuals refer to themselves as "carnal Christians." No such notion can exist among the true Saints.

This concept is essentially the same as expressed by the Master in the Sermon on the Mount when he said: "Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity" (Matthew 7:21-23).

Shall be cast out from among you. This is the first revelation of the Restoration to teach the Saints that those who will not keep the law of the Lord are to be severed from membership in his Church. Further instructions concerning those who are to be cut off were revealed as part of the law that the Lord promised to give to his Church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:20-26.

The First Bishop of the Restoration Is Called

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 41:7-12

41:7 My servant Joseph Smith, Jun., should have a house built. Lucy Diantha Morley Allen indicated that "the first time the Prophet and his family came to Kirtland they lived with Isaac Morley, Lucy's father. Later 'Father Morley' built a small house for them on his farm." It was at this home that Emma gave birth to twins, both of whom died soon after birth. "Lucy and her elder sister kept house for Emma Smith while she was ill," recovering from the physical and emotional drain of losing the twins ("Joseph Smith, the Prophet," 537).

41:8 Sidney Rigdon should live as seemeth him good. In all but the most unusual instances, the choice of vocation and place of residence is left to the individual. It is not a matter of Church assignment or of revelation. This principle was revealed when Sidney Rigdon lost his employ as a minister because he accepted the restored gospel and was baptized at the hands of Oliver Cowdery.

41:9 The pattern of callings in the Church was reiterated in the restoration of the office of bishop: (1) The Lord extends the call through the presiding authority, one known to the Church, as recognized in the person of the Prophet Joseph Smith. (2) The members of the Church sustain the appointment by their voice. (3) The individual, so called and sustained, is ordained to the office by those in authority. These principles were given to the Church as the Lord's law (D&C 42:11).

Ordained a bishop. The duties of a bishop were not revealed at this time. As the restoration of priesthood offices unfolded, responsibilities and instructions concerning bishops were received. The office to which Edward Partridge was called would be somewhat equivalent to that of presiding bishop of the Church today. The presiding bishop was responsible for overseeing the Lord's storehouses for the poor, a function considered to be full-time employment. In addition he was "appointed to be a judge in Israel, like as it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his children" (D&C 58:17) within the law of consecration. Further, he was to judge members of the Church with the assistance of two counselors. The Lord instructed that Edward Partridge, as the presiding bishop, was to live in Zion, which was later identified as Jackson County, Missouri. He was responsible for the purchase of lands that were given as inheritances to the Saints and for church buildings, specifically the temple. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 68:15-18; 72:9-11; 107:15.

Spend all his time in the labors of the church. Edward Partridge was the second person called to full- time service in the kingdom. Earlier, the Prophet Joseph Smith was called to devote all of his labors in Zion and told that he should receive his support from the Church (D&C 24:3, 7). By appointment Bishop Partridge was to oversee the Lord's storehouse for the poor and "be employed in doing this business" (D&C 51:14). It was by this means that he was to provide for the needs of his own family.

41:11 Like unto Nathanael of old, in whom there is no guile. See John 1:45-47.
