Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42

DATE: 9 FEBRUARY 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

At a conference of the Church held in Fayette, New York, in January 1831, the Lord commanded the Saints to go to "the Ohio," where he would give them his law and where they would be endowed with power from on high (D&C 38:32). In February of the following year, after their arrival in Ohio, this revelation, known as the law or "the law of the Church," was received.

Doctrine and Covenants 42 illustrates the importance of revelation immediate to our day. For example, particular attention is given to correcting misconceptions growing out of the New Testament practice of having "all things common" (Acts 4:32). Some of those baptized in Kirtland, Ohio, had belonged to a system called "common stock," in which all property was held jointly as a community. The experience had not always been a good one. John Whitmer explained: "The disciples had all things common, and were going to destruction very fast as to temporal things; for they considered from reading the scripture that what belonged to a brother, belonged to any of the brethren. Therefore they would take each others clothes and other property and use it without leave which brought on confusion and disappointment, for they did not understand the scripture" ("Book of John Whitmer," 37).

The primary purpose of this revelation was to bring order to the Church. It begins with direction about how the missionaries were to go forth and what they were to teach. It announces the manner in which the missionaries, and all Church officers, were to be called and set apart. It also restores those parts of the gospel that were incorporated in the law of Moses as the Ten Commandments and the principles that determine whether a particular transgression is to be disciplined by the Church or addressed by the civil courts.

Elders Are Authorized to Build Up the Church Abroad

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:1-10

42:1 Assembled yourselves together. In response to the Lord's direction (D&C 41:2), twelve elders met together.

42:2 Obey the law which I shall give unto you. "The law of heaven is presented to man," observed the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and as such guarantees to all who obey it a reward far beyond any earthly consideration; though it does not promise that the believer in every age should be exempt from the afflictions and troubles arising from different sources in consequence of the acts of wicked men on earth. Still in the midst of all this there is a promise predicated upon the fact that it is the law of heaven, which transcends the law of man, as far as eternal life the temporal; and as the blessings which God is able to give, are greater than those which can be given by man. Then, certainly, if the law of man is binding upon man when acknowledged, how much more must the law of heaven be! And as much as the law of heaven is more perfect than the law of man, so much greater must be the reward if obeyed. The law of man promises safety in temporal life; but the law of God promises that life which is eternal, even an inheritance at God's own right hand, secure from all the powers of the wicked one" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 50).

42:4 Go forth in my name, every one of you, excepting my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon. Just as missionaries are necessary to spread the faith, so is leadership necessary among those who have found it. Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon's primary responsibilities were to those who had joined the Church and to the continuation of their work on the translation of the Bible. They were to go forth to declare the word for a short season as directed by the Spirit (v. 5), but returned to give leadership to the body of the Church.

42:6 Two by two. During his mortal ministry, the Savior organized the Twelve and the Seventy to go forth two by two (Mark 6:7 and Luke 10:1). The Lord's wisdom is evident in sending forth missionaries in companionships. Such a system allows that two witnesses bear testimony of the truthfulness of the restored gospel and encourage and protect each other.

Declaring my word like unto angels of God. The commission of missionaries and of angels is one and the same. Both have been called by God to teach the same gospel. Referring to angels and, by implication, to missionaries, Mormon taught: "The office of their ministry is to call men unto repentance, and to fulfil and to do the work of the covenants of the Father, which he hath made unto the children of men, to prepare the way among the children of men, by declaring the word of Christ unto the chosen vessels of the Lord, that they may bear testimony of him. And by so doing, the Lord God prepareth the way that the residue of men may have faith in Christ, that the Holy Ghost may have place in their hearts, according to the power thereof; and after this manner bringeth to pass the Father, the covenants which he hath made unto the children of men" (Moroni 7:31-32).

42:9 The city of the New Jerusalem. This is the first reference in the Doctrine and Covenants to the city of the New Jerusalem. Book of Mormon and biblical references teach that Saints in the latter days will gather to build a city to which the Lord will come. Further, Ether indicated that New Jerusalem should be built up upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph" (Ether 13:6). Two months previous to receiving the law of the Church, while the Prophet Joseph Smith was engaged in the translation of the Bible, the Lord revealed, "Righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem" (Moses 7:62).

In addition the Lord revealed in the Bible translation that Enoch and his people established a city called Zion, based on the principles of righ teousness. This work laid the foundation for the laws of consecration revealed in this section which, in connection with the other laws revealed herein, are the foundation for the city of New Jerusalem. Not long after this revelation had been received, the site of the city of New Jerusalem was designated as Independence, Missouri. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:3, "Independence is the center place."

The Law of Authority and Teaching

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:11-17

42:11 Known to the church . . . regularly ordained. Previous revelation indicated that "no person is to be ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church" (D&C 20:65). It is equally important that the person performing the ordinance be known to the Church to have authority. There are no secret ordinations to offices within the Church, nor are there any secrets as to who has been sent to preach the gospel to the world. Such a system is divine and protects the Saints and investigators of the gospel from deception by self- appointed teachers and leaders. This principle protects the Church against the activities of apostate groups who obviously are without the authority to teach the gospel or administer its ordinances, as are the priests and ministers of other faiths.

42:12 Teach the principles of my gospel, which are in the Bible and the Book of Mormon. Our charge is to teach the principles of the gospel using the scriptures as our primary text. At the time this revelation was given, the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price had not yet been compiled or they would have been included with the Bible and the Book of Mormon. There is a spirit and power in teaching from the scriptures that cannot be found in other sources. In the Church today we have a great dependency on dramatic stories to illustrate principles we design to teach. As popular and helpful as such teaching devices are, they do not have the power to expand the mind and bring additional revelation that is found in the scriptures.

In the which is the fulness of the gospel. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:34, page 20.

42:13 The covenants and church articles. Refers to Doctrine and Covenants 20 and 22, which were known by the title "Articles and Covenants of the Church." See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20 and 22.

42:14 If ye receive not the Spirit ye shall not teach. It is the Spirit that carries the message of the gospel teacher to the hearts of the listener. "For when a man speaketh by the power of the Holy Ghost," Nephi taught, "the power of the Holy Ghost carrieth it unto the hearts of the children of men" (2 Nephi 33:1). It naturally follows that teachers must live the gospel, or they cannot enjoy the companionship of the Spirit. The Lord indicated that those who obtain both his word and his Spirit have "the power of God unto the convincing of men" (D&C 11:21). Illustrating this principle, President Brigham Young said: "You have frequently heard me say that I would rather hear an Elder, either here or in the world, speak only five words accompanied by the power of God, and they would do more good than to hear long sermons without the Spirit. That is true, and we know it" (Journal of Discourses, 5:327). Further, he explained, "When a man rises up to speak in the name of the Lord, and is filled with the light, and the intelligence and power which cometh from God, his countenance alone will convey more, to those who are inspired by the same spirit, than can possibly be conveyed, by the words of any language now used by mankind" (Young, Journal of Discourses, 10:353).

42:15 Until the fulness of my scriptures is given. Refers to the translation of the Bible. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:56-57.

42:17 The Comforter . . . beareth record of the Father and of the Son. See 3 Nephi 11:32-36.

Moral Laws Renewed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:18-29

42:18 I speak unto the church. "Unto whom much is given much is required," the Lord declared; "and he who sins against the greater light shall receive the greater condemnation" (D&C 82:3). Thus, the prin ciples and laws revealed in this revelation have particular application to members of the Church, and not necessarily to those who have not covenanted with God in the waters of baptism to keep his commandments. Regarding those who do not have the law given to them, the Prophet Joseph Smith taught, "The Great Parent of the universe looks upon the whole human family with a fatherly care and paternal regard; He views them as His offspring. . . . He will judge them, 'not according to what they have not, but according to what they have,' those who have lived without law, will be judged without law, and those who have a law, will be judged by that law" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 218).

Thou shalt not kill. The Lord interpreted this commandment as, "Thou shalt do no murder" (Matthew 19:18).

Shall not have forgiveness in this world, nor in the world to come. Cold-blooded murder is sin unto death, meaning that the murderer cannot obtain the glory of the celestial world. Such murderers, after properly suffering for their sins, will eventually find place in the telestial kingdom. They will come forth from the grave in the last resurrection following the Millennium. Although they can never be granted entrance into celestial glory, their sins can be blotted out. They can be pardoned and removed from spirit prison as long as they have not committed the unpardonable sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.

42:19 He that killeth shall die. Sinning against the Holy Ghost, which would make one a son of perdition, is the only sin more grievous than murder (Alma 39:5-6). Murder, according to the law of God, is punishable by death. As noted in verse 79, any who have taken life in such a manner are to be delivered up to and dealt with by the laws of the land. No Church court or disciplinary council would adjudicate such a matter.

It has been a common practice in anti-Mormon literature to accuse the Church of "blood atonement," meaning taking the life of apostates and transgressors. Addressing this accusation, Elder Bruce R. McConkie wrote: "There simply is no such thing among us as a doctrine of blood atonement that grants a remission of sins or confers any other benefit upon a person because his own blood is shed for sins. Let me say categori cally and unequivocally that this doctrine can only operate in a day when there is no separation of Church and State and when the power to take life is vested in the ruling theocracy as was the case in the day of Moses. From the day of Joseph Smith to the present there has been no single instance of so-called blood atonement under any pretext" (letter to Mr. Thomas B. McAffee, 18 October 1978). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:79.

42:20 Shall be cast out. To be cast out is to be excommunicated. See commentary on verses 23, 24, and 26.

42:22 And none else. President Spencer W. Kimball explained: "The words none else eliminate everyone and everything. The spouse then becomes pre- eminent in the life of the husband or wife and neither social life nor occupational life nor political life nor any other interest nor person nor thing shall ever take precedence over the companion spouse" (Miracle of Forgiveness, 250).

Likewise, Paul wrote that men should "love their wives as their own bodies" (Ephesians 5:28).

42:23 Shall deny the faith, and shall not have the Spirit. The Spirit cannot dwell with adulterers. Without exception, those who commit adultery will lose the Spirit and the witness and testimony which it brings. George A. Smith stated: "I believe, if you will take the whole circle of the history of apostates from this Church, that in ninety- nine cases out of every hundred you will find that the spirit of adultery or covetousness was the original cause.

"There was a man named John Smith came into the Church, and was somewhat prominent in the State of Indiana. He preached some little, and was considered quite zealous; but he said he had proved that the Book of Doctrine and Covenants was not true; 'For it says,' said he, 'that if a man shall commit adultery, and not repent of it, he shall lose the Spirit of God, and shall deny the faith. Now, I have done it, and have not denied the faith; and so I have proved that the revelation in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants is not from God.' The spirit of blindness had so taken possession of him that he could not see that when he was proclaiming that the revelations were not true, he was denying the faith. That spirit has such an effect over the human mind as totally to blind them in relation to their own acts and the spirit that governs them" (Journal of Discourses, 7:114).

42:26 If he doeth it again, he shall not be forgiven, but shall be cast out. As stated in the previous verses of this revelation, unrepentant adulterers are to be excommunicated from the Church (vv. 22-24). There is the possibility that a member of the Church may be repentant and forsake adultery for a time and then commit the sin again. Such a person is likely to be cast out, which may be done by either excommunication or disfellowshipment from the Church.

This verse has caused some concern in connection with Joseph Smith's instructions, given 25 November 1843, on the occasion of a Brother Harrison Sagers's disciplinary court before the high council of Nauvoo. Charged with seduction, he said Joseph Smith had approved his course. The Prophet said: "I was present with several of the Twelve, and gave an address tending to do away with every evil, and exhorting them to practice virtue and holiness before the Lord; told them that the Church had not received any permission from me to commit fornication, adultery, or any corrupt action; but my every word and action has been to the contrary. If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom. I did think that the many examples that have been made manifest, such as John C. Bennett's and others, were sufficient to show the fallacy of such a course of conduct" (Smith, History of the Church, 6:81).

Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "The Prophet Joseph Smith in these words is addressing himself to those, and those only, whose calling and election has been made sure. The words do not refer to any others, either in or out of the Church. Having received the added light and knowledge that come in being sealed up unto eternal life, those whose calling and election has been made sure are subject to greater penalties if they transgress. Adulterers, as many scriptures attest and as the practice of the Church confirms, can repent and gain full salvation" (New Witness, 231).

Laws Governing Consecration

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:30-39

42:30-39 The Savior commanded the Saints to become one and to be "united according to the union required by the law of the celestial kingdom" (D&C 105:4). "For if ye are not equal in earthly things," the Lord declared, "ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things" (D&C 78:6). Such equality and unity lead to becoming one with God and Christ. Those who live the law of consecration learn to esteem others as themselves. Consecrating temporal property is an outward manifestation of the innermost feelings of one's heart toward others. It tutors the soul in consecrating stores of spiritual knowledge to the building up of Zion and bringing "to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Similarly, the Saints of Alma's day "did walk uprightly before God, imparting to one another both temporally and spiritually according to their needs and their wants" (Mosiah 18:29).

The portion of the law of consecration revealed and restored at this time was limited to consecrating personal property. Like the Saints in the days of Enoch, Melchizedek, Peter, and Nephi after the visit of the risen Lord to the Americas, the Saints of the latter days were commanded to have all things in common and to see that there were no poor among them (Moses 7:18; JST Genesis 14:33-40; Acts 2:44-45; 4:34-5:11; 4 Nephi 1:3; D&C 38:24-27). The laws regarding consecration and stewardship of property were revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith, line upon line.

The Saints of God in all ages consecrate their time, talents, strength, properties, and monies to establish the Lord's work and kingdom in their days. As circumstances require, these Saints are called to serve missions, colonize, build temples, and magnify their callings in a host of different ways.

42:30 Consecrate of thy properties. To consecrate property is to set it aside or devote it for sacred purposes. In this case the sacred work is to provide for the poor. Consecration of property teaches the Saints that they are stewards over the earth for the Lord. The foundational principle upon which this law rests is recognition that the Lord is the creator of the earth and, therefore, all property is his. "Behold, the Lord hath created the earth that it should be inhabited," Nephi explained; "and he hath created his children that they should possess it" (1 Nephi 17:36). All worldly wealth, whether it be lands or gold, is provided for the benefit of God's children during their mortal sojourn. In commanding his Saints to consecrate their temporal earthly goods to the building up of his kingdom, the Lord is not interested in real estate, precious ores, jewels, or houses. Rather, consecration is a godly activity, and those who devote their property, time, and talents to blessing others become more godlike.

With a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken. To dramatize the seriousness of breaking this covenant the Lord said, "It had been better for him that he had been drowned in the depth of the sea" (D&C 54:5). The deed was a legally binding document, written and signed by both the member consecrating his property and by the bishop who received the property as the Lord's authorized agent. Thus, the covenant was binding according to both the laws of God and the laws of the land.

42:32 A steward over his own property. After consecrating his properties the member received another legal, signed document from the bishop listing the lands, furniture, tools, and so on that were being deeded to him as his personal property. This property was held as a stewardship for the Master, Jesus Christ, Lord of the earth. This arrangement recognized that we are but stewards for the Lord and are accountable to him for the use of our talents to bless the lives of others.

Sufficient for himself and family. The personal property deeded to the member was to be adequate to enable him to provide for his family according to the number of children and other dependents in the household. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 51:3.

42:34 The residue shall be kept in my storehouse. Anciently, the Lord declared, "Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house" (Malachi 3:10). The keeping of the Lord's storehouse to provide for the poor was restored with this revelation. One of the most sacred trusts that is placed in the bishop's hands is that of providing for the poor and needy. In this law the bishop uses the property or goods that are surplus to provide for the needs of the members. Although sometimes referred to as a "bishop's storehouse," the bishop is but a servant of the Lord in distributing goods from the Lord's storehouse. These storehouses containing food and wares are part of the Church welfare program. In addition, much of the burden of providing for the poor rests with the fast offering monies collected as a free-will offering from the Saints each fast day. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:3-4.

42:35 Building up of the New Jerusalem. In time the land will be purchased and the city of the New Jerusalem will be built, from which the Lord will reign on earth.

42:36 My covenant people. The Lord's people have always been a covenant people. Their covenants are both individual and communal. There is no implication in the plan of salvation that we are saved separately and singly. We are not saved alone. Salvation is a community affair, as is the redemption of Zion or the building of a temple. The covenants we make with God on an individual basis require that we also be a part of a covenant community.

Anciently, Israel was chosen to be a covenant people, a holy nation, and a royal priesthood (Exodus 19:5-6). Likewise, the law of consecration is not simply a covenant made by an individual with God. Rather, it includes a covenant people or, in this case, a church whose members have covenanted to bring to pass the care of the poor and the establishment of Zion. Zion can be built up only by a community of Saints who are "of one heart and one mind, and [dwell] in righteousness; and there [is] no poor among them" (Moses 7:18).

42:39 One fulfillment of this verse is manifest in the work of building chapels and temples throughout Latin America. The Lord has proceeded to take the riches of the Gentiles (as defined by Book of Mormon writers) in the United States and Canada and consecrated them for the blessing of those whose circumstances are more humble.

Laws Governing Clothing and Work

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:40-42

42:40 Let all thy garments be plain. The true saint does not chase after the fashions of the world. The statement that their "garments be plain" does not preclude their wearing things that are richly colored but rather suggests an appropriate standard of modesty. The Nephite prophets repeatedly identified the wearing of costly clothing with apostasy and failure to live gospel standards (Jacob 2:13; Alma 1:6, 32; 4:6; 5:53; 31:27-28; 4 Nephi 24; Mormon 8:36-37). Jacob warned, "Because some of you have obtained [riches] more abundantly than that of your brethren ye are lifted up in the pride of your hearts, and wear stiff necks and high heads because of the costliness of your apparel, and persecute your brethren because ye suppose that ye are better than they" (Jacob 2:13).

42:42 He that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the laborer. This principle has been a guiding light in the restored gospel. The welfare program, for which the Church is renowned, is based on the dignity of working for what is received. Heber J. Grant read a message from the First Presidency that stated: "Our primary purpose was to set up in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership" (Conference Report, October 1936, 3). J. Reuben Clark testified, "From the foundation of the Church until now, idleness has been condemned as unworthy of Church members, as destructive of character, as violative of the true Christian life, as contrary to the command given to Adam as the law of this world 'In the sweat of thy brow, thou shalt eat bread'" (Conference Report, October 1936, 2-3).

The Sick and Those That Die

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:43-52

42:43 In the early 1800s herbs were the common means by which physicians ministered to the sick. Rather than being an admonition against the medicines found in nature, this revelation finds a place for both the skillful administration of herbs and the healing blessing at the hands of the priesthood. Being ill and unable to raise his head from his pillow, the Prophet Joseph Smith, on 14 June 1837, recorded: "I continued to grow worse and worse until my sufferings were excruciating, and although in the midst of it all I felt to rejoice in the salvation of Israel's God, yet I found it expedient to call to my assistance those means which a kind Providence had provided for the restoration of the sick, in connection with the ordinances; and Dr. Levi Richards, at my request, administered to me herbs and mild food, and nursed me with all tenderness and attention; and my heavenly Father blessed his administrations to the easing and comforting of my system, for I began to amend in a short time, and in a few days I was able to resume my usual labors.

"This is one of the many instances in which I have suddenly been brought from a state of health, to the borders of the grave, and as suddenly restored, for which my heart swells with gratitude to my heavenly Father, and I feel renewedly to dedicate myself and all my powers to His service.

"While I was thus afflicted, the enemy of all righteousness was suggesting, apostates reporting, and the doubtful believing that my afflictions were sent upon me, because I was in transgression, and had taught the Church things contrary to godliness; but of this the Lord judge between me and them, while I pray my Father to forgive them the wrong they do" (History of the Church, 2:493).

The Book of Mormon speaks "of the excellent qualities of the many plants and roots which God had prepared to remove the cause of diseases" (Alma 46:40). In the Times and Seasons the question was asked, "Who is to administer those herbs?" The answer: "We presume that nine tenths of the human family, neither understand the physiology of the human system, the nature and effects of disease, nor the medicinal properties of herbs; and under such circumstances would not be competent to administer at all. Herbs are to be used, and mild food; but those herbs are to be used by skillful hands. . . . We should judge, then, from the above, that a person who is acquainted with the physiology of the human system, and the nature and medicinal properties of herbs, is more competent to judge of those things, and to administer with judgment and skill, than the one who is ignorant, both of the organization of the human system, of the medicinal properties of herbs, and of the nature and effects of disease.

"It is also evident that, if there is any danger, or wrong, in the administration of herbs, it is from their being in the hands of unskillful men, and particularly in the hands of an enemy.

"On reviewing the whole subject, we cannot but regret that, as saints, we have not all faith, either to be healed, or to cast ourselves into the hands of God, and 'whether we live, live unto God, or whether we die, die unto the Lord.' Butinasmuch as all have not faith, those that are strong ought not to condemn the weak, inasmuch as they make a judicious means of those things which the Lord, in his mercy, has been pleased to provide, and appoint for the infirmities and diseases of human nature.

"We are aware that this community have been a good deal imposed upon by quacks; that nostrums of all kinds have been administered by injudicious hands, producing the most deleterious effects; and that many have slept in the dust, who, if they had been let alone, would still have been in the land of the living" (Times and Seasons, 4:325-26).

42:44 Elders of the church . . . shall pray for and lay their hands upon them in my name. The practice of healing by the laying on of hands has been given by the Lord as one of the signs that would follow them that believe. During the Savior's mortal ministry "all they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them" (Luke 4:40). The apostle James instructed the meridian-day Saints, asking, "Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord" (James 5:14).

Administrations have two parts: anointings and sealings; both are accompanied by the laying on of hands.

It is the practice of the Church that administering to the sick be done at the request of the sick or someone closely involved with the sick person, so that it will be done in answer to faith. Those called on to perform the ordinance should encourage the sick person to rely on the Lord's promise, "Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you" (Moroni 7:26). The sick person may be encouraged to keep the commandments so that he or she can have faith and be entitled to the blessings of the Lord.

In performing the administration, one elder anoints the sick person with oil on or near the crown of the head for the restoration of health. Pure olive oil which has been consecrated for that purpose should be used. Taking consecrated oil internally, or using it for anointing or rubbing afflicted parts of the body, is not part of the ordinance of administering to the sick.

After the anointing two or more elders lay their hands on the head of the sick person. One of them acts as voice to seal the anointing. The one speaking offers prayers, pronounces blessings, or gives promises as the Spirit directs.

42:46 Shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them. Joseph Fielding Smith explained: "To some members of the Church the saying that those who die in the Lord shall not taste of death has been a hard saying. They have seen good faithful men and women suffer days and at times for months before they were taken. But here the Lord does not say they shall not suffer pain of body, but that they shall be free from the anguish and torment of soul which will be partaken of by the wicked, and although they may suffer in body, yet death to them will be sweet in that they will realize that they are worthy before the Lord. The Savior said to Martha: 'And whosoever liveth and believe in me shall never die.' That is to say, they shall never die the second death and feel the torment of the wicked when they come face to face with eternity" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:186).

With reference to this phrase, Spencer W. Kimball added: "I think that means they are not going into the other world feeling resentment and reticence. After they get past a certain point they go with happiness, peace and contentment" (Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, 38). The Prophet Joseph Smith demonstrated such a view of imminent death. Apostle John Taylor recorded, "When Joseph went to Carthage to deliver himself up to the pretended requirements of the law, two or three days previous to his assassination, he said: 'I am going like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I have a conscience void of offense towards God, and towards all men'" (D&C 135:4).

The greatest example of meeting death with sweetness amidst excruciating pain and agony is the Savior Jesus Christ. We sense in him, as he approached the hour of greatest suffering attendant to his crucifixion, a peace and calmness. He did not fear death for he knew it to be a prelude to triumph over the grave. Those who have received a testimony of the truthfulness of the restored gospel know death to be part of the plan of an all- knowing, wise, and loving God. They look forward to reunion with loved ones in the spirit world and to embrace family and friends in the flesh following the resurrection. Moreover, at the moment of death the anticipated reunion may begin as evidenced in the accounts of those who have been greeted by angels. For example, referring to his brother Alvin, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote, "He was one of the soberest of men, and when he died the angel of the Lord visited him in his last moments" (History of the Church, 5:127).

With reference to the death of Heber C. Kimball, George Q. Cannon described how death is pleasant: "It was sweet with him. There was nothing repulsive, nothing dreadful or terrible in it, but on the contrary it was calm, peaceful and sweet. There were heavenly influences there, as though angels were there, and no doubt they were, prepared to escort him hence to the society of those whom he loved and who loved him dearly. I thought of the joy there would be in the spirit land, when Joseph, and Hyrum, and David, and Willard, and Jededia, and Parley would welcome him to their midst, and the thousands of others who have gone before, and like them have been faithful. What a welcome to their midst will brother Heber receive! to labor and toil with them in the spirit world in the great work in which we are engaged" (Journal of Discourses, 12:184).

Alma the younger testified, "Behold, it has been made known unto me by an angel, that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life. And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow" (Alma 40:11-12).

42:48 Faith in me to be healed. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 46:19-20.

Not appointed unto death. We labor in this life according to divine appointment, some for great lengths of time and others for shorter periods. While in jail at Liberty after repeated attempts had been made to take his life, the Prophet Joseph Smith was told by the Lord, "Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever" (D&C 122:9).

Our faith exercised to extend the lives of loved ones is always subject to the overriding will of the Lord. If he wills to take one of his children from this life to the next, then his will prevails.

The principle that men are appointed to die does not necessarily mean that each individual has a predestined moment in mortality when death is to occur. Neither does it mean that God will intervene to prevent all accidents, carelessness, or wicked choices that bring sorrow and death. The Lord indicated that death for many of his children is on a flexible time schedule. "There is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall be" (D&C 121:25). President Wilford Woodruff elaborated on the means by which the righteous might be appointed unto death: "The Prophet Joseph Smith held the keys of this dispensation on this side of the vail, and he will hold them throughout the countless ages of eternity. He went into the spirit world to unlock the prison doors and to preach the Gospel to the millions of spirits who are in darkness, and every Apostle, every Seventy, every Elder, etc., who has died in the faith as soon as he passes to the other side of the vail, enters into the work of the ministry, and there is a thousand times more to preach there than there is here. I have felt of late as if our brethren on the other side of the vail had held a council, and that they had said to this one, and that one, 'Cease thy work on earth, come hence, we need help,' and they have called this man and that man. It has appeared so to me in seeing the many men who have been called from our midst lately. Perhaps I may be permitted to relate a circumstance with which I am acquainted in relation to Bishop Roskelley, of Smithfield, Cache Valley. On one occasion he was suddenly taken very sicknear to death's door. While he lay in this condition, President Peter Maughan, who was dead, came to him and said: 'Brother Roskelley, we held a council on the other side of the vail. I have had a great deal to do, and I have the privilege of coming here to appoint one man to come and help. I have had three names given to me in council, and you are one of them. I want to inquire into your circumstances.' The Bishop told him what he had to do, and they conversed together as one man would converse with another. President Maughan then said to him: 'I think I will not call you. I think you are wanted here more than perhaps one of the others.' Bishop Roskelley got well from that hour. Very soon after, the second man was taken sick, but not being able to exercise sufficient faith, Brother Roskelley did not go to him. By and by this man recovered, and on meeting Brother Roskelley he said: 'Brother Maughan came to me the other night and told me he was sent to call one man from the ward,' and he named two men as had been done to Brother Roskelley. A few days afterwards the third man was taken sick and died. Now, I name this to show a principle. They have work on the other side of the vail; and they want men, and they call them. And that was my view in regard to Brother George A. Smith. When he was almost at death's door, Brother Cannon administered to him, and in thirty minutes he was up and ate breakfast with his family. We labored with him in this way, but ultimately, as you know, he died. But it taught me a lesson. I felt that man was wanted behind the vail. We labored also with Brother Pratt; he, too, was wanted behind the vail" (Journal of Discourses, 22:333-34).

42:52 They who have not faith to do these things, but believe in me, have power to become my sons. To be blind, deaf, or lame is not evidence that an individual does not have faith unto salvation. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 34:1-4.

Clarifications Regarding the Law of Consecration

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:53-55

42:53 Stand in the place of thy stewardship. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:32.

42:54 Fellowship with the Saints does not give leave to take advantage of another's goodness. "There were some of the disciples," wrote John Whitmer, "who were flattered into the Church because they thought that all things were to be common, therefore they thought to glut themselves upon the labors of others" ("Book of John Whitmer," 42). Within the covenant community of the law of consecration material goods were not communal property. Each individual received a deed to his own personal property and did not have claim on another's property for his personal use. This aberration of the true law of God was practiced by a group of Sidney Rigdon's followers who were living on the property of Isaac Morley. Soon after joining the Church in the winter of 1831, Levi Hancock traveled to Kirtland to gather with the Saints. He wrote: "The next morning brother Harvey Redfield took us to Brother Isaac Morleys who was a cooper by trade and one of the most honest patient men I ever saw. The company he maintained looked large enough to bring on a famine. I do not know if they lived on him all the time or not.

"While I was in the room at 'Father Morleys' as we all called him, this same Hermon Bassett came to me and took my watch out of my pocket and walked off as though it was his. I thought he would bring it back soon but was disappointed as he sold it. I asked him what he meant by selling my watch.

"'Oh, said he, I thought it was all in the family.' I told him I did not like such family doings and I would not bear it" (Autobiography of Levi Ward Hancock, 42).

Scriptures of the Restoration to Govern the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:56-61

42:56 Thou shalt ask. Many revelations of the Restoration came in answer to questions by members of the infant Church. Real life situations were the seedbed of revelation. Thus, the restored gospel as revealed in the latter days is a practicable application of the principles of salvation and the building up of the kingdom of God on earth as needed during mortality. Mankind seeks for instruction to guide them through this world and for enlightenment to understand the purposes of mortality in relation to that which came before and that which will follow in the eternities. In addition to the real- life situations from which the revelations came forth, the Lord appointed the Prophet Joseph Smith to translate the Bible, which work restored the truths and wisdom of all past dispensations. As Joseph sought to understand the biblical record, the Lord "[poured] down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33) in accordance with the promises found in these verses.

42:56 My scriptures shall be given as I have appointed. The Lord determined that the Restoration would include the dispensing of new scripture and of perfecting scripture already available to mankind.

"Question: How and in what way is the new knowledge being restored?

"Answer: By revelation. Our doctrine is not handed down, in the sectarian sense; it is revealed. It is revealed directly as in the case of the Doctrine and Covenants; or by the process of translation, as in the case of the Book of Mormon; or by the process of perfecting ancient scriptures, as in the case of the Joseph Smith Translation. . . .

"Question: What are the vehicles of the restoration?

"Answer: First, the Book of Mormon, which was translated by the gift and power of God; second, the Doctrine and Covenants, whose contents are revealed, coupled with such inspired utterances as the King Follett Sermon; and, third, the so- called Translations, which include the book of Abraham, the book of Moses (itself part of the Inspired Version), and the whole Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible.

"None of these vehicles have given us their full load. We have only about a third of the Book of Mormon; the field of revelation is without bounds or limits; and the Bible restoration has scarcely been commenced.

"Question: When will we receive more of the mind and will of the Lord, and when will the great doctrinal restoration be completed?

"We have a revealed answer as to when we shall receive the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon. What we have so far received is to test our faith. When we repent of all our iniquity and become clean before the Lord, and when we exercise faith in him like unto the brother of Jared, then the sealed portion of the ancient word will be translated and read from the housetops.

"The same is certainly true of the brass plates and the lost portions of the Bible. What we have received so far is to test our faith. Why should the Lord give us more of the biblical word if we are indifferent to what he has already revealed? Does anyone think the Lord should give us the words of Zenos when we are ignoring the words of Isaiah?

"There are revelations without end that are available to the faithful at any time they are prepared to receive them.

"As a matter of practical reality, however, the great doctrinal restoration is to be Millennial. Of that day Nephi said: Then 'the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. Wherefore, the things of all nations shall be made known; yea, all things shall be made known unto the children of men. There is nothing which is secret save it shall be revealed; there is no work of darkness save it shall be made mani fest in the light; and there is nothing which is sealed upon the earth save it shall be loosed. Wherefore, all things which have been revealed unto the children of men shall at that day be revealed; and Satan shall have power over the hearts of the children of men no more, for a long time.' (2 Nephi 30:15-18)" (McConkie, "Doctrinal Restoration," 20-21).

They shall be preserved in safety. During the six-month period that the Prophet was held at Liberty Jail, his papers (among which was the New Translation of the Bible, which we call the Joseph Smith Translation) were left in the hands of his secretary, James Mulholland. Mulholland and his family discussed in private what might happen if the mob were to obtain the manuscript. They feared that Mulholland might be attacked by a mob, and that the mob would destroy the papers he possessed just for the sake of ruining them. The family also felt the manuscript would not be safe in Far West.

Knowing that the life of Mulholland was in constant danger and out of concern for the safety of the papers that were left in his care, it was decided that Mulholland's sister-in-law, Ann Scott, should take care of the materials. She has written of this event in Far West as follows:

"[The mob] frequently searched my father's house, and were very insulting in their deportment. They also searched other houses of the saints, including that of President Joseph Smith, who at the time was confined in Liberty Jail. Joseph's confinement in jail, coupled with the ruthless invasions of the mob, caused his scribe, Elder James Mulholland, to seek a place of safety for important church papers in his possession. Among the papers in Mulholland's keeping was the manuscript of the Inspired Translation of the Bible, the revelation on the rebellion [D&C 87], etc., etc. Brother Mulholland requested me to take charge of the papers, as he thought they would be more secure with me, because I was a woman, and the mob would not be likely to search my person. Immediately on taking possession of the papers, I made two cotton bags of sufficient size to contain them, sewing a band around the top ends of sufficient length to button around my waist; and I carried those papers on my person in the day-time, when the mob was around, and slept with them under my pillow at night. I cannot remember the exact length of time I had those papers in my possession; but I gave them to sister Emma Smith, the prophet's wife, on the evening of her departure for Commerce" (as cited in Matthews, Plainer Translation, 99).

"Emma Smith left Far West, en route to Commerce, Illinois, on February 15, 1839, and according to the report, she 'wore the bags just as Ann Scott had done'" (Matthews, Plainer Translation, 100).

42:57 Not teach them until ye have received them in full. This commandment refers to the translation of the Bible. Similar counsel was given to the Prophet Joseph Smith at other times during the translation process. Some confusion concerning the appropriate use of the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible has arisen due to this passage. The question is, "Did the Prophet Joseph Smith ever finish the revelatory translation of the Bible?" The difficulty in answering this question is that none of the standard works are completed in their fulness. For example, there is much more to come forth from the Nephite records from which we received the abridged edition of Mormon's writings. A large portion of the plates upon which the Book of Mormon was written is sealed, and there are books of the Bible that were lost. Not all revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith have been placed in the Doctrine and Covenants. The Pearl of Great Price has undergone additions and deletions since it compilation and publication in the nineteenth century. Yet we consider these scriptural texts to be complete enough for publication. The translation of the Bible may be considered as complete as the other books of scripture within the Restoration.

In addition we have the Lord's word that the inspired translation of the Bible was deemed completed to the degree that he commanded that it be published. William Law, as a member of the First Presidency of the Church, was commanded to "publish the new translation of my holy word unto the inhabitants of the earth" (D&C 124:89). The opportunity to publish the translation was lost with the failure of William Law to abide in the covenant. After the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith, his wife, Emma, retained the manuscripts of the translation, which went to the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints through the Smith family.

The Location of the New Jerusalem and Mysteries of the Kingdom to Be Revealed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:62-69

42:62 Where the New Jerusalem shall be built. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:2-3.

42:64 Teach them that shall be converted to flee to the west. The point of reference to this command is that the Saints should gather to Ohio, which at this time was considered the west to the many who were in the eastern regions of the United States. The movement of the Saints, as a gathered body of people, was in a general western direction throughout the early history of the Church. Each such removal to another place of gathering was "for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm" (D&C 115:6) of persecution and evil designs of the Saint's enemies.

42:69 The kingdom, or in other words, the keys of the church. Where the keys are, there the kingdom is. The doctrine of priesthood keys separates the true Church of God from all other claimants to that title. The Prophet Joseph Smith received keys of the Church, the power delegated from God to direct the work of the kingdom, from heavenly messengers. John the Baptist restored the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, and Peter, James, and John restored the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, consisting of the keys of the kingdom. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:12-13.

Church Officers Are to Be Supported from Consecrated Properties

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:70-73

42:70-73 Reference to the bishop and his counselors in this passage refers to the presiding bishopric. This is the first mention of counselors to assist the bishop and surely restores that which existed anciently. On 4 February 1831 Edward Partridge was called to the office of bishop, being the first so called in this dispensation. On 6 June 1831 Isaac Morley and John Corrill were set apart as counselors to Bishop Partridge.

Justification for full-time employees of the Church being remunerated for their labor is found in this verse. Earlier, the Lord revealed that the Prophet Joseph Smith should be supported in his temporal needs by the Church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 24:3; 43:13, "Provide for him food and raiment."

Laws for Dealing with Adulterers

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:74-93

42:74-93 The fundamental laws of the Church, as recorded in the first 73 verses of Doctrine and Covenants 42, were revealed on 9 February 1831. Undoubtedly, concerns arose as to what steps should be taken if members transgressed the revealed laws. As a result, two weeks later the Lord revealed the remainder of this section on 23 February, as recorded in verses 74 through 93. The latter portion of the law makes known the proper way to deal with transgressors.

42:74 Put away their companions. Reference is to obtaining a divorce. In the case referred to the innocent spouse should not bear any shame or discipline on the part of the Church.

42:75 Left their companions for the sake of adultery. Reference is to individuals who leave their husbands or wives because they themselves are committing adultery and wish to live with the adulterous companion.

And their companions are living. Adulterers who abandon their wives for an adulterous alliance are not dealt with in the same manner as those who remain with their wives and family, repenting and seeking forgiveness as previously explained in this revelation. "He that has committed adultery and repents with all his heart, and forsaketh it, and doeth it no more, thou shalt forgive" (D&C 42:25). In contrast, the man or woman who leaves a spouse to live with the companion in sin has placed himself or herself in a more serious situationcomplicating the ability to repent "with all his heart" and to forsake adultery. In such cases the Lord indicates that such individuals are to be excommunicated, losing their membership in the Church of Jesus Christ.

42:76 Be watchful and careful, with all inquiry, that ye receive none such among you if they are married. The Church must be clean, like a virtuous bride, to be acceptable to the bridegroom, Jesus Christ. The general law of the Church is that any couple, whose union was initiated by an adulterous relationship, is not to be sealed in the house of the Lord for time and eternity. The proper beginning to marriage is not abandonment of a previous marriage because of adultery. Any exceptions to this law need to be addressed directly by the First Presidency of the Church. Because adulterers are also liars and, thus, will cover their iniquity with all manner of deception, the Church is commanded to carefully examine the reasons for forsaking marriage. Time and careful inquiry will reveal the true offenders within the marriage covenant.

Nearly ten years after this law was revealed, the importance of these instructions evidenced itself in the case of John C. Bennett. Mr. Bennett came to Nauvoo, Illinois, and was extended a cordial welcome by the Prophet Joseph Smith. In the course of time it was learned that he had left a wife and three children in the East and was a man of gross sexual immorality. Following the revelation of his true character, John C. Bennett was excommunicated from the Church.

Laws for Dealing with Murderers and Adulterers Contrasted

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:78-83

42:79 If any persons among you shall kill they shall be delivered up and dealt with according to the laws of the land. The Lord commanded that his Saints maintain the separation of church and state according to the laws of the land. Already set forth in the law is that murderers shall be cast out of the Church. However, that does not end the responsibility of the Church. Neither known nor accused murderers should be harbored in their crimes by claiming religious privileges of providing sanctuary for criminals. Indeed, just the opposite is the case. The Church should deliver murderers up to be dealt with by civil authorities according to the law of the land in which the Church members reside.

42:80 Tried before two elders of the church, or more. The priesthood presides at disciplinary councils for Saints whose membership in the Church is in jeopardy. In these early days of the Restoration the organization of wards and stakes was not yet revealed. In time the Lord revealed the disciplinary council system in which bishops and stake presidents preside in administering the laws revealed herein. See Doctrine and Covenants 102.

By two witnesses. This command restored and clarified appropriate application of the law given to Israel anciently that the Saints were to be condemned "at the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses [to] . . . put the evil away from among you" (Deuteronomy 17:6-7).

42:82 It is necessary that the bishop be present. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 107:77-84.

Laws for Dealing with Thieves and Liars

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:84-87

42:84-87 The robber, the thief, and the liar are to be delivered up to the law of the land, whereas those who commit iniquity are to be tried by a Church disciplinary council. In this way the Church sustains the government and its laws designed to protect itself and its citizens. As to matters of improper behavior, immorality, and apostasy, these constitute an offence against the Church and its members and are thus the prerogative of a Church council to decide. In doing so the Church does not, and has not, inflicted corporeal punishment or confiscated property. The only penalties the Church can impose are loss of fellowship or loss of the privileges that accompany members in good standing.

42:87 He or she shall be delivered up unto the law, even that of God. President James E. Faust instructed priesthood leaders concerning the seriousness of carrying out the Lord's law to discipline those Saints who commit serious transgressions: "Those who have keys, which include the judicial or disciplinary authority, have the responsibility for keeping the Church cleansed from all iniquity (D&C 20:54; 43:11). Bishops, stake presidents, mission presidents, and others who have the responsibility of keeping the Church pure must perform this labor in a spirit of love and kindness. It should not be done in a spirit of punishment, but rather of helping. However, it is of no kindness to a brother or sister in transgression for their presiding officers to look the other way. Some words on this subject come from President John Taylor:

"'Furthermore, I have heard of some Bishops who have been seeking to cover up the iniquities of men; I tell them, in the name of God, they will have to bear . . . that iniquity, and if any of you want to partake of the sins of men, or uphold them, you will have to bear them. Do you hear it, you Bishops and you Presidents? God will require it at your hands. You are not placed in a position to tamper with the principles of righteousness, nor to cover up the infamies and corruptions of men' (Conference Report, April 1880, 78).

"On this matter, we urge you presiding brethren to seek the Spirit of God, to study and be guided by the scriptures and the General Handbook of Instructions. Church discipline is not limited to sexual sins but includes other acts such as murder, abortions, burglary, theft, fraud, and other dishonesty, deliberate disobedience to the rules and regulations of the Church, advocating or practicing polygamy, apostasy, or any other unchristianlike conduct, including defiance or ridicule of the Lord's anointed, contrary to the law of the Lord and the order of the Church" ("Keeping Covenants," 37).

Laws for Dealing with Private and Public Offenses

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 42:88-93

42:89 Not before the world. Church disciplinary councils are conducted in private chambers. Everything that takes place in these councils is regarded with the strictest confidence. The sanctity of these councils is recognized by civil authority, and those involved are granted priest- penitent privilege, meaning that they cannot be required to divulge what took place even in a court of law. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 102.
