Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43

DATE: FEBRUARY 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

No truth of salvation stands unopposed. When the Lord calls a prophet, false prophets arise. In New York, Satan deceived Hiram Page and the Whitmer family with a counterfeit seer stone. Similarly, in Ohio, Lucifer temporarily misled new converts into accepting his imitation of a prophet. Therefore, the lessons previously learned in New York regarding false spirits needed to be taught again. See introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 28.

The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded that soon after the law of the Church (D&C 42) was received, "a woman came making pretensions of revealing commandments, laws and other curious matters" (History of the Church, 1:154). John Whitmer identified the intruder as "a woman by the name of Hubble who professed to be a prophetess of the Lord and professed to have many revelations, and knew the Book of Mormon was true, and that she should become a teacher in the Church of Christ. She appeared to be very sanctimonious and deceived some who were not able to detect her in her hypocracy: others however had the spirit of discernment, and her follies and abominations were made manifest" ("Book of John Whitmer," 42). Mrs. Hubble's sanctimonious conduct added to the difficulty of dealing with the errors introduced at this time. Ezra Booth, an early member and eventual apostate, stated as part of his attack on the Church that Mrs. Hubble, "professing to be a prophetess, made her appearance in Kirtland, and so ingratiated herself into the esteem and favor of some of the Elders that they received her as a person commissioned to act a conspicuous part in Mormonizing the world. [Sidney] Rigdon, and some others, gave her the right hand of fellowship, and literally saluted her with what they called the 'kiss' of charity. But [Joseph] Smith . . . declared her an imposter, and she returned to the place from whence she came. Her visit, however, made a deep impression on the minds of many, and the barbed arrow which she left in the hearts of some, is not as yet eradicated" (in Cook, Revelations, 61-62).

We face similar ploys today, and it is essential that every member of the Church has the power of discernment and knows the spiritual laws by which spiritual counterfeiters are detected. Unlike true messengers who always focus on the need for repentancethese self- ordained prophets and prophetesses come to tell us that all that really matters is that we love one another, thus subverting the discipline of true discipleship. These deceivers disguise false doctrine by dipping it in honey. The errors they introduce are difficult to confront because these counterfeiters promote themselves as being more accepting and loving than those who defend the kingdom against such false intruders.

The masks and costumes of false prophets may change, but the doctrine of the kingdom as reiterated in this revelation remains enduring and true. If followed, the simple guidelines revealed herein protect the Saints from deceivers, false revelators, and false spirits.

Revelations and Commandments Come Only through the One Appointed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43:1-7

43:2 Ye have received a commandment for a law unto my church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:11.

43:3 None other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations. The words "none other" exclude any pretenders or deceivers that might seek to lead the Saints astray. The Lord avoids confusion in his kingdom by appointing one individual, the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints, to receive revelations and commandments for the Church. Even though other members of the First Presidency and the Quorum of Twelve Apostles are sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators, they are under the direction of the president of the Church. In his instructions on the priesthood, Joseph Smith explained, "And again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses" (D&C 107:91), who was the spokesman for God to ancient Israel. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 28:2.

43:4 He shall not have power except to appoint another. At this early date in the Restoration, the Lord made provision to protect his little flock from the deception of false prophets in the event that even Joseph Smith fell into transgression. The law remains that there is but one on the earth who receives commandments and revelations for the Church. Had the responsibility of being the Lord's mouthpiece been taken from the Prophet Joseph Smith, the last authorized act he would be called on to perform would have been to confer the keys of the kingdom on another. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 90:3.

43:6 That you may not be deceived. During his mortal ministry the Savior warned his disciples: "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves" (Matthew 7:15). The sanctimonious cloak of "the kiss of charity" hid the true intentions of Mrs. Hubble. Likewise, over the many years since this revelation was given, others have clothed themselves in apparel of various deceptive colors and styles. Some wear the claim of special manifestations or commissions that authorize them to perpetuate plural marriage. Others attire themselves in beguiling raiment of a commission from Enoch to set up the united order; power to translate the sealed portion of the Book of Mormon; scholarly insight to tell the "true Mormon history;" visions that reveal the feminine identity of the Holy Ghost; keys to gather the Saints to Zion; near- death experiences that make known the previously unrevealed mysteries of the post- mortal spirit world; and a host of other distractions to the true issue at hand. The Lord warned of their deception. Let this simple truth ring in the ears of all Saints: They are deceivers and are not authorized to give commandments or revelations to the Church nor to any individual member who seeks to follow the truth of the restored gospel!

This warning is of special importance to those that live in the latter days. "For in those days there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that, if possible, they shall deceive the very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:22). Deception can be avoided by following this law as revealed by the Lord to the Church, for "whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:37).

43:7 He that is ordained of me shall come in at the gate. "He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold," the Savior taught, "but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep" (John 10:1-2). True servants of the Lord will always be known to the Church, having been called, sustained by the voice of the Church, and properly ordained. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:11.

Saints Assemble to Instruct and Edify Each Other

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43:8-10

43:8 Edify each other. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 50:23.

That ye may know how to act and direct my church. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the Lord's Church, and he leads it. We seek our instruction from him. Tremendous energy is expended in the kingdom of God to instruct the Saints in the discharge of their duties. Regular councils and training meetings are held to aid each of us in keeping our covenants and magnifying the offices and callings that are ours.

43:10 Inasmuch as ye do it not, it shall be taken, even that which ye have received. Saints who stop attending or who are lax in attending Church meetings lose the Spirit. Attaining and retaining spiritual knowledge is governed by eternal law. We must continue to receive line upon line in the manner that the Lord directs, or we will fall prey to that spirit which robs us of testimony and faith. "He that will harden his heart," Alma explained, "the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full. And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning his mysteries; and then they are taken captive by the devil, and led by his will down to destruction. Now this is what is meant by the chains of hell" (Alma 12:10-11).

Saints Are to Provide Financial Assistance for the Work of the Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43:11-14

43:13 The mysteries of the kingdom. Mysteries are those principles and doctrines that can be understood only by revelation.

Provide for him food and raiment. The Master could have chosen another way to provide for his servant. He might have rained manna from heaven, sent quail to his doorstep, or commanded Joseph to let his nets down to capture a school of fish, as occurred on other occasions. In this instance he chose to do as had been done before with the prophet Elijah. During a famine the Lord sent Elijah to a widow woman in Zarephath. She and her son prepared for Elijah their last handful of meal and a little cruse of oil with which to make a cake. Elijah stayed with these two faithful souls for the duration of the famine, in which the Lord provided that neither the meal nor the oil ran out (1 Kings 17:8-23). Similarly, the Saints were to provide Joseph with life's temporal necessities so that he might continue to do the work of the kingdom. The work of the Restoration required all of the Prophet's attention at this time. Without the assistance of the Saints, he would have been unable to do the work of restoring the gospel of Jesus Christ to the earth. That work will bless the lives of all who embrace the gospel in this dispensation and will, in turn, aid them in blessing the lives of their progenitors who lived before the gospel was restored. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 24:3, "They shall support thee," and commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 41:7.

Missionaries Are to Teach, Not Be Taught

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43:15-16

43:15 Ye are not sent forth to be taught. In teaching the gospel we are to follow the example of Christ. Of him we read, "He served under his father, and he spake not as other men, neither could he be taught; for he needed not that any man should teach him" (JST Matthew 3:25). The text is not suggesting that Joseph, Jesus' earthly father, could not teach him, but rather that his understanding must be rooted in the revelation of heaven, not the wisdom of men. The same principle was to be true of all who went forth in Jesus' name. Teaching this principle to those of the meridian church, John the Revelator said, "The anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him" (1 John 2:27).

43:16 Ye are to be taught from on high. Distinct from academic knowledge imparted in earthly schools, the Lord imparts knowledge of eternal verities by his Spirit and confirms the truthfulness of the Restoration. Paul illustrated this principle perfectly when he said: "And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God" (1 Corinthians 2:1-5). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 50:10-20.

43:16 Endowed with power. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:74-75.

Elders Are to Warn and Prepare Men for the Great Day of the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43:17-28

43:17-28 The message of this dispensation is that the Savior will return to the earth and that all must repent in preparation for that event. The Lord has commissioned his servants to call upon the people. These servants have been accepted by some and rejected and hated by others. After the testimony of the Lord's servants "cometh wrath and indignation upon the people" (D&C 88:88). The voices of men may be ignored and the Lord's servants cast aside by many of the earth's inhabitants without temporal consequence. Doors can be closed in the faces of missionaries and their message left unheard. No door, however, can be closed to the voice of thunders, the flashes of lightning, tempests, earthquakes, hailstorms, famines, and pestilence. Such messages cannot go unheard. Men are powerless to hide from the wrath of God, and the time will come when the elements shall testify against them.

43:17 The great day of the Lord. The day of Satan's power is limited and will soon end, for the "the great day of the Lord" will come, Satan will be bound, and righteousness will rule and reign.

Millennial Conditions Revealed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 43:29-35

43:29 "It has been the design of Jehovah," taught the Prophet Joseph Smith, "from the commencement of the world, and is His purpose now, to regulate the affairs of the world in His own time, to stand as head of the universe, and take the reins of government in His own hand. When that is done, judgment will be administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed, and 'nations will learn war no more'" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 250).

My people shall be redeemed and shall reign with me on earth. "Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years," the Prophet Joseph Smith explained. "They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 268). It will be a glorious time to be instructed more perfectly in the government of God by Adam, Enoch, Moses, King Benjamin, Captain Moroni, Brigham Young, the Prophet Joseph Smith, and others.

43:31 For Satan shall be bound. Nephi taught that Satan will be bound because the wicked will be destroyed and Christ will come to rule and reign. "For behold, saith the prophet, the time cometh speedily that Satan shall have no more power over the hearts of the children of men; for the day soon cometh that all the proud and they who do wickedly shall be as stubble; and the day cometh that they must be burned. . . . And because of the righteousness of his people, Satan has no power; wherefore, he cannot be loosed for the space of many years; for he hath no power over the hearts of the people, for they dwell in righteousness, and the Holy One of Israel reigneth" (1 Nephi 22:15, 26). Thus we see that in the Savior's millennial kingdom Satan will be bound by the power of God and thereafter kept in check by the righteousness of the Lord's people.

When he is loosed again he shall only reign for a little season. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:22.

Then cometh the end of the earth. It is at this time that "the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth" (D&C 29:23). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:26.

43:32 Changed in the twinkling of an eye. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 101:31.

43:33 Unquenchable fire. This is a metaphor for the anguish of soul to be suffered by the wicked. King Benjamin tells us that their torment "is as a lake of fire and brimstone" (Mosiah 3:27).

43:35 Be sober. Similarly, Alma instructed his son Corianton, a missionary, to "declare the word with truth and soberness," that souls might be brought to repentance and the plan of mercy have claim upon them" (Alma 42:31). Again the missionaries of our day have been charged to "remain steadfast in your minds in solemnity and the spirit of prayer, in bearing testimony to all the world of those things which are communicated unto you" (D&C 84:61).
