Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION GENESIS 14:26-40

DATE: BETWEEN DECEMBER 1830 AND MARCH 1831

In this priceless restoration of an ancient text, which is in itself worth all the effort associated with the Joseph Smith Translation, we learn of the man Melchizedek and of the nature of the higher or holy priesthood as it functioned from the days of Adam to Abraham.

Few events in earth's history match in importance the restoration of the Aaronic and Melchizedek Priesthoods to the Prophet Joseph Smith and his companion, Oliver Cowdery. Simply stated, without priesthood there is no salvation. All the faith and goodness in the world cannot substitute for the necessary power and authority to perform the ordinances necessary to return to the presence of God. Without it sins cannot be remitted, the gospel taught, or the kingdom of the adversary held in check. "The Melchizedek Priesthood," Joseph Smith said, "is the channel through which all knowledge, doctrine, the plan of salvation and every important matter is revealed from heaven" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 166-67). Given the importance of this priesthood that bears the name Melchizedek, there has to be some surprise on the part of the student of the Bible to discover that all that the Bible has to say about this man whose name is synonymous with the powers of heaven can be read orally in two minutes (Genesis 14:18; Psalm 110:4; Hebrews 5:6-10; 7:1-4, 10, 15-21).

Melchizedek, Man of Faith

JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION GENESIS 14:26-29

JST Genesis 14:26-29 Melchizedek is an enigma to both the Jewish and the Christian worlds. Without introduction or explanation he appears on the scene in the Valley of Shaveh (Kidron) when Abram is returning from rescuing his nephew, Lot, from the four kings who had carried him off. He brings with him bread and wine, blesses Abram, and receives tithes from him. The text refers to him as the king of Salem (Jerusalem) and as the priest of the most high God (Genesis 14:18-20). Yet for a thousand years no mention of his name is found on the pages of holy writ. Then he appears as suddenly as he disappeared, and we find mention of him in a single psalm of David's. "The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek" (Psalm 110:4). It appears that both David and Melchizedek as priest- kings are figures of the promised Messiah possessing the same order or priesthood that would belong to him. Again the scriptures fall silent for a period of a thousand years in which no reference is found to the name Melchizedek. Then Paul in his epistle to Hebrews tells us that Christ received the Melchizedek Priesthood and was ordained to the office of high priest. His purpose being to sustain the fact that Christ held a priesthood that was superior to that of Aaron and the Levites (Hebrews 5-7).

Scriptural silence provides a fertile field for legends. From books with discolored pages and covers that flake like piecrust we learn that ancient writers thought Melchizedek to be the patriarch Shem, his brother Ham, or Enoch, whose city was taken into heaven. Others have held that he was an angel, the Holy Ghost, the Messiah, or the Son of God (Smith's Bible Dictionary, 3:1876). The matter becomes more confused, for the book of Hebrews declares him to be "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually" (Hebrews 7:3).

If, as prophecy assures us, the apostasy was to be universal, we could not expect other than that the knowledge and understanding of the priesthood would be lost along with all other saving truths. And so it was. The restoration of the priesthood requires the enigma of Melchizedek to be erased and a knowledge of this great preacher of righteousness to be restored. Such also has been the case. From the Book of Mormon we learn that "Melchizedek was a king over the land of Salem; and his people had waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea, they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of wickedness; But Melchizedek having exercised mighty faith, and received the office of the high priesthood according to the holy order of God, did preach repentance unto his people. And behold, they did repent; and Melchizedek did establish peace in the land in his days; therefore he was called the prince of peace, for he was the king of Salem; and he did reign under his father. Now, there were many before him, and also there were many afterwards, but none were greater; therefore, of him they have more particularly made mention" (Alma 13:17-19).

In the current text we learn that, from his childhood, Melchizedek had been faithful and righteous and that he had been blessed and preserved by the power of the priesthood. By that power he had defended himself from both lions and fire. We also learn that it is the priesthood that is without father, mother, or end of days, not Melchizedek, as suggested in Hebrews 7:3.

The Power of the Priesthood

JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION GENESIS 14:30-32

JST Genesis 14:30-32 Nowhere in holy writ do we find a more graphic description of the power of God as possessed by those who have been called and chosen to stand in his stead than in these verses. Mighty men of God in ancient days have caused mountains to flee and rivers of water to turn out of their course; they have called a land to come up out of the sea and caused armies to flee (Moses 7:13-14); they have divided the earth into various continents (Genesis 10:25) and parted the waters (Moses 1:25); they have sealed the heavens that there would be no rain and opened them again (James 5:17-18). Such was the faith and power known to them. As Nephi said, "If God had commanded me to do all things I could do them. If he should command me that I should say unto this water, be thou earth, it should be earth; and if I should say it, it would be done" (1 Nephi 17:50). Further, we have been promised that "this same Priesthood, which was in the beginning, shall be in the end of the world also" (Moses 6:7).

Melchizedek and His City Were Taken into Heaven

JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION GENESIS 14:33-34

JST Genesis 14:33 Melchizedek is a classic type for Christ, that is, his life was a prophetic foreshadowing of that of the Savior's. He was both priest and king. He taught repentance and ruled in righteousness. He brought peace to a once wicked people who were then caught up into heaven, and as Alma tells us he served under his father (Alma 13:18).

JST Genesis 14:34 Here we are told that Melchizedek's people sought for the city of Enoch and were taken into heaven. The inhabitants of Enoch's city were translated beings. It would be hard to understand this text as saying anything other than that Melchizedek translated the inhabitants of his city as Enoch had translated those of his city. The one went up from the place of the New Jerusalem; the other, from the place of the Jerusalem of old. Knowing that Enoch's city will return during the millennial day to join the New Jerusalem, we are left to wonder if Melchizedek and his people might in like manner return to join the inhabitants of the Jerusalem of old.

Abraham Was Blessed by Melchizedek

JOSEPH SMITH TRANSLATION GENESIS 14:35-40

JST Genesis 14:37 Abraham received great blessings at the hands of Melchizedek.

JST Genesis 14:40 According to the covenant which he had made. For the covenant God made with Abraham, see Abraham 2:9-11.
