Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 44

DATE: LATTER PART OF FEBRUARY 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation, calling for a conference of the elders of the Church, led to the expansion of missionary work. It was also at this conference that the office of high priest was restored. It would be the fourth conference of the Church since its organization a little more than one year earlier in upstate New York and the first conference in Ohio.

In obedience to the Lord's command, the elders met in Kirtland on 3 through 6 June 1831. At the end of the conference, Doctrine and Covenants 52 was received, directing the elders to travel to Missouri, where they were to gather for yet another conference. The effort and sacrifice in making such a journey emphasizes the importance of the spirit and power that come when the Saints gather together.

After the missionaries' arrival in Missouri, sections 57 through 59 were received, which give instructions concerning the site of the temple in the New Jerusalem and the building up of Zion.

The Lord Pours Out His Spirit on Assemblies of the Saints

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 44:1-3

44:1-3 Since the time of this command to gather in Kirtland, Ohio, for a Church conference, thousands of conferences have been held in the Church. Whether they are conferences of the general membership or are held on regional, mission, stake, or ward levels, the promise of receiving an outpouring of the Spirit remains the same.

More Converts Are Needed to Organize According to God's Law

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 44:4-6

44:4-6 Until there was a sufficient number of Saints it would not be possible to implement the laws of consecration and stewardship that the Lord revealed. Funds were needed for legal deeds that would give the Saints lawful claim to the lands that were settled. These laws were not to be carried individually but rather as communities of covenant people.

44:6 Ye must visit the poor and the needy. Less fortunate members were not to be neglected until such time as living the laws of consecration could provide surplus from the bishop's storehouse to provide for them. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:30.
