Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45; JOSEPH SMITH-MATTHEW

DATE: 7 MARCH 1831 AND BETWEEN 7 APRIL AND 19 JUNE 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

The arrival of the Prophet in Kirtland, Ohio, marked the beginning of a period of rapid growth in the young Church. By June of 1831 its membership numbered more than two thousand. As was to be expected, this growth excited a great deal of opposition. Civic leaders, ministers, newspaper editors, and others labored to put a stop to the progress of the Church. Joseph Smith recorded that "many false reports, lies, and foolish stories, were published in the newspapers, and circulated in every direction, to prevent people from investigating the work, or embracing the faith" (History of the Church, 1:158).

During these times of slander and abuse the Lord rewarded the Saints with light and knowledge far beyond the understanding of the historical Christian world. Doctrine and Covenants 45 and Joseph Smith-Matthew are prime examples of this. These two revelations dealing with the signs of the times reach back to the instruction given by the Savior to his disciples on the Mount of Olives during the last week of his public ministry.

Christ Is Our Advocate with the Father

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:1-9

45:1 All the hosts thereof. Scripture speaks of Christ as the creator of all things (Moses 1:32-33; D&C 93:10). Such statements emphasize his role in the Creation and his unity and oneness with the Father. In the literal sense he is not the creator of humankind. Like us, he too is the Father's offspring. Yet in and through his atoning sacrifice, Christ becomes savior to us all and thus the father of our hope for eternal life.

45:2 Lest death shall overtake you; in an hour when ye think not. "Take heed, and beware of covetousness:" warned the Savior, "for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth. And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God" (Luke 12:15-21).

This revelation was addressed to members of the Church to whom has been given sufficient truth to obtain eternal life, which pursuit must not be allowed to suffer at the expense of temporal concerns.

45:3 Advocate with the Father. Christ is the advocate with the Father, meaning that he pleads the cause of the righteous in the courts of heaven.

45:6 While it is called today. "Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man" (D&C 64:23).

45:9 Mine everlasting covenant . . . to be a standard for my people. The restoration of the fulness of the gospel constitutes the everlasting covenant (D&C 133:57). When the standard, or in Isaiah's words, the "ensign," is lifted, the house of Israelmeaning those of believing blood gathers to it. An ensign is a banner or flag that serves to rally armies in battle. It identifies the place of gathering. "The Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people," prophesied Isaiah, "And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth" (Isaiah 11:11-12). The Lord speaks from the heavens anew in the dispensation of the fulness of times, and his voice and words are as a standard to which his people gather.

Enoch's City Will Return in the Millennium

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:10-14

45:10-14 All the holy prophets since the world began have prophesied of the second coming of Christ when he will establish the "times of refreshing" (Acts 3:19), or millennial rule. First among their number was father Adam, who "predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation" (D&C 107:56). Enoch also "saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righ teousness for the space of a thousand years; but before that day he saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked. And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world; and he saw the day of the righteous, the hour of their redemption, and received a fulness of joy" (Moses 7:65-67).

45:12 Reserved until a day of righteousness. The Lord promised Enoch that as part of the Restoration in the last days a holy city would be built upon the earth. "It shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem. And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other; And there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest" (Moses 7:62-64). See commentary on Joseph Smith Translation Genesis 14:34, page 333.

45:13 Strangers and pilgrims on the earth. Among the faithful in Old Testament times were those who were translated and separated from the earth. Chief among these were those of the city of Enoch (Moses 7:21). After that city had been translated, others who sought to emulate their faith and righteousness were also caught up into heaven (Moses 7:27). Still others confessing themselves to be "strangers and pilgrims" on the earth meaning that their hearts and minds were set upon the things of a better worldsought like privilege but did not obtain that blessing while in mortality.

The Lord Reveals Anew the Olivet Discourse

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:15-17; JOSEPH SMITH-MATTHEW 1:1-4

45:15 As unto men in days of old. The scope of prophecies concerning tribulations to precede Christ's second coming were not first revealed in this dispensation or during the generation of the meridian-day apostles. Indeed, prophets such as Enoch were shown in vision that following great tribulation the Lord would return upon the earth to reign in righteousness. It appears that the prelude to this revelation concerning the tribulations to precede the Savior's return and the establishment of the city of Zion, or the New Jerusalem, was the inspired translation of the record of Enoch as recorded in Moses 7:60-67: "And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance, to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of Noah; And the day shall come that the earth shall rest, but before that day the heavens shall be darkened, and a veil of darkness shall cover the earth; and the heavens shall shake, and also the earth; and great tribulations shall be among the children of men, but my people will I preserve; And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men; and righteousness and truth will I cause to sweep the earth as with a flood, to gather out mine elect from the four quarters of the earth, unto a place which I shall prepare, an Holy City, that my people may gird up their loins, and be looking forth for the time of my coming; for there shall be my tabernacle, and it shall be called Zion, a New Jerusalem. . . . And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righ teousness for the space of a thousand years; But before that day he saw great tribulations among the wicked; and he also saw the sea, that it was troubled, and men's hearts failing them, looking forth with fear for the judgments of the Almighty God, which should come upon the wicked. And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even unto the end of the world; and he saw the day of the righteous, the hour of their redemption, and received a fulness of joy."

45:16 As I showed it unto my disciples. On Tuesday of the Passion Week, Jesus took his disciples apart to teach them privately. He chose as his setting the hillside east of Jerusalem known as the Mount of Olives. This location gave the title "Olivet Discourse" to the Savior's teachings on the destruction of Jerusalem and the signs of his second coming. There are several accounts of this discussion in the scriptures. Matthew, Mark, and Luke each included portions of the Olivet Discourse in their testimonies, or Gospels, of the Lord. Today, in addition to the accounts recorded in the Gospels, we are privileged to have this discourse included in section 45 and in the inspired translations of Matthew, Mark, and Luke.

The revelation recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 45 led the Prophet Joseph Smith to set aside the translation of the Old Testament, in which he was engaged at the time, and begin the translation of the New Testament. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:60-61.

45:17 Ye have looked upon the long absence of your spirits from your bodies to be a bondage. See Doctrine and Covenants 93:33-34.

The day of redemption. To be redeemed is to be freed from the dominion and power of the adversary. Such will be the case for those who live during that period in which Satan is bound, the period known to us as the Millennium.

The restoration of the scattered Israel. The ancient kingdom of Israel will be reestablished again. Both the Northern Kingdom and the kingdom of Judah were destroyed and their citizens scattered among all of the nations of the earth. The Lord promised the house of Israel that he would not forsake them but would gather and restore them as a nation in the last days. The priesthood is to preside over this gathering, which will first bring hearts and souls to Christ and then lead the house of Israel to promised lands of inheritance. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 110:11.

JST-M 1:1-4 Joseph Smith's translation of Matthew 24 is our most helpful commentary on the Savior's discourse on the signs of the times. It was the receipt of this revelation (D&C 45) that stimulated the Prophet to leave his translation of the Old Testament and move to a consideration of Matthew 24. Because these two revelations are so closely related in time and content we will consider them together in this work. While Matthew's account intertwines and combines events surrounding the destruction of Jerusalem with the signs of the last days, the Joseph Smith Translation separates the two. As clarified in the Joseph Smith Translation, the Savior first addressed the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish nation. He then answered his disciples' questions regarding the signs of his coming, which will usher in the Millennium and the restoration of the house of Israel. Thus we see how the events of the one are a prophetic prefigure of the other. The disciples apparently understood that the restoration of the Jewish nation, along with the house of Israel, was associated with the end of the world, or the destruction of the wicked at the second coming of Jesus Christ. Therefore, it was natural that they would unite these two events in the questions that they posed to the Lord.

The Destruction of Jerusalem Foretold

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:18-23; JOSEPH SMITH-MATTHEW 1:5-20

45:18 This temple which is in Jerusalem, which ye call the house of God. The temple in Jerusalem had become "a den of thieves." On two occasions Christ had cleansed its sacred precincts of money- changers and those who would make it a house of merchandise (John 2:13-17; Matthew 21:12-13). He said, "Ye call [it] the house of God," but God would hardly regard it as such.

45:19 Desolation shall come upon this generation. The Savior referred to this as "the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem" (Joseph Smith- Matthew 1:12). The destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish nation came, as had their earlier destruction by the Babylonians, because of wickedness that reigned among the people. Less than forty years from the time that the Savior foretold the destruction of that generation, a Roman army led by Titus laid siege to the walled city of Jerusalem. Hunger within the city exceeded human endurance and, as Moses had prophesied, in the severity of the siege mothers ate their own children (Deuteronomy 28:57). Within the city itself, warring factions of thieves and murderers sought to rule the citizenry and rob them of food and anything they thought of value. The temple and city caught fire in the fight over the desecrated mount upon which Herod had built a house of the Lord to win favor with the Jews. During the ensuing slaughternumbered in the hundreds of thousands blood literally flowed in the streets in adequate measure to dowse the flames. The remnant of the Jews not destroyed in this desolation were scattered to all nations. Jerusalem was ploughed under and rebuilt as a Roman city devoid of true worship.

45:20 Not be left one stone upon another. The desecrated house of God, Jesus declared, would not be allowed to stand in mocking hypocrisy. In literal fulfillment of the Lord's prophecy, Roman soldiers under the command of Titus dismantled the buildings associated with the temple, stone by stone, following the siege of Jerusalem in A.D. 70. The temple was left a heap of rubble. During the late twentieth century archaeologists uncovered the ancient road that ran at the base of the retaining wall built by Herod when he extended the original platform of the temples built under the direction of Solomon and Zerubbabel. They discovered that the massive stones of the temple had been pushed over the precipice of the temple mount down onto the road below. Huge ashlars, or hand- dressed stones, were broken on the road and revealed in the excavations. Today an archaeological garden stands as a witness to the Savior's words.

Symbolically, the announcement that not one stone would be left standing on another meant that the house of Israel would be scattered among those of every nation, kindred, and tongue, that no two families would be left side by side when the end of their nation came. Conversely, in the last days, the gathering of Israelfamily by familywill token God's favor resting upon them once again, the crowning event of that latter-day gathering being the restoration of their temple and their nation.

45:21 Every desolation which I have told you concerning them shall come to pass. Joseph Smith-Matthew delineates this desolation in verses 5 through 20.

JS-M 1:5-20 "I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held: And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellowservants also and their brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled" (Revelation 6:9-11).

Not only did the wicked slay the apostles and righteous Saints but they also fought against the doctrine of Christ as taught by the apostles. "And the multitude of the earth was gathered together," wrote Nephi of his vision concerning this time period. "And I beheld that they were in a large and spacious building, like unto the building which my father saw. And the angel of the Lord spake unto me again, saying: Behold the world and the wisdom thereof; yea, behold the house of Israel hath gathered together to fight against the twelve apostles of the Lamb. And it came to pass that I saw and bear record, that the great and spacious building was the pride of the world" (1 Nephi 11:35-36). See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:19, page 11.

JS-M 1:12 Stand in the holy place. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "The counsel that the saints should then 'stand in the holy place' means that they should assemble together where they could receive prophetic guidance that would preserve them from the deso lations of the day. The place of their assembly became holy because of the righteousness of the holy ones who comprised the Lord's congregation. . . . And when that day came, the true saints, guided as true saints always are by the spirit of revelation, fled to Pella in Perea and were spared" (Mortal Messiah, 3:430).

45:22 The heavens and the earth shall pass away. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:23.

Apostasy to Intervene between the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Second Coming

JOSEPH SMITH-MATTHEW 1:21-26

JS-M 1:21-22 After the tribulation of those days . . . there shall also arise false Christs, and false prophets. The era that followed the destruction of Jerusalem was rife with false Christs and false prophets that sought to lead the meridian- day Saints. Apostasy enveloped the church. In verse 5 Christ warned his apostles not to be deceived by false Christs. It is hard to suppose that these men who knew Christ, traveled with him, and in some cases, were related to him, would be deceived by impersonators. The thrust of this warning centers in false representations of what Christ, and those who come in his name, teach. Isaiah said of the Savior that "his visage was so marred more than any man" (Isaiah 52:14). We can suppose that Isaiah was telling us that his image, person, and purpose would be distorted or misused more than any other man in earth's history. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:19, page 11.

JS-M 1:22 The very elect, who are the elect according to the covenant. Those who enter into the covenants of salvation become the Lord's elect, or chosen. It will be to them that he turns to act as his agents, bear his priesthood, and lead his people. Even before they were born, these people developed spiritual sensitivities to discern between truth and error. These elect will have the ability to discern the false doctrines attributed to Christ from those that are true. However, the signs and wonders that are brought forth by Lucifer and those he has overcome are of such a nature that even the elect must take care or they will be deceived. Many of those through whom coursed the blood of Israel, the covenant people of the Lord, were deceived. Christianity was engulfed in a flood of apostasy that spread across the earth and drowned the truths taught by Christ and his apostles.

JS-M 1:23 You also shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars. The followers of Christ found it necessary to flee the sword. Apostate Christianity took up the sword as the persecuted became the persecutors. It was Constantine who forged the union of the Bible and the sword when he adopted apostate Christianity as the official religion of the realm. The wrestle between Rome and Constantinople over which was to be the chief city brought with it the threat of war between these two cities, both of which aptly fit the Revelator's description of the woman (city) built upon seven mountains (Revelation 17:9). The followers of Mohammed spread the Islamic faith by the sword, which in time was met by equally ferocious means of conversion by Christians. Banners emblazoned with the cross led armies into battle. Europe was set aflame with religious fervor to defend Jerusalem from the infidel as rumor and false prophets led ill- prepared Christians to war against the Muslim world. Europe divided into nations, and each warred against the other through the succeeding centuries.

But the end is not yet. The events of the era of apostasy are not the signs concerning which the disciples inquired of the Lord regarding his return and the end of the world. Those signs will yet follow in the Savior's discourse.

JS-M 1:25 The path of seclusion does not bring souls to Christ. Qualities of love, patience, temperance, virtue and godliness are attained by serving others. Reading this inspired verse, one cannot help but sorrow over the many devout Christians who through the ages mistakenly sought the Lord in secluded chambers or desert monasteries.

JS-M 1:26 So shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. Jesus Christ will return in as glorious a manner as the rising sun. When the Savior makes his public appearance to the world, it will be universally known. In addition, as the light of the morning sun shines from the east to the west across the expanse of the earth, there will be many hours of visitation to the world until all nations have received their rightful king. Indicative of this metaphor describing his second coming, Christ identified that he would come to various locations: Mount Zion, or the city of the New Jerusalem, the Mount of Olives, the islands of the sea, and upon the land of Zion (D&C 133:18-20).

Signs That the Times of the Gentiles Are Fulfilled

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:24-33; JOSEPH SMITH-MATTHEW 1:27-32

45:25 They [the Jews] shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. The gathering of the Jews to Jerusalem is one of the most easily identifiable signs of the times. It signals the fulfillment of the "times of the Gentiles," the present era in which we live. The gathering to Jerusalem foreshadows the period in which the times of the Jews will begin. In that era the Jews will begin to accept the gospel and enjoy the blessings that flow therefrom.

The gospel has been given at various times to different peoples on a priority basis. The Savior's mortal mission was not to the Gentiles "but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel" (Matthew 15:24). He foretold that the time would come when the gospel covenant and knowledge of the true Messiah would be taken from the Jews and given to another people (Matthew 21:33-22:14). In fulfillment of the Lord's words, Peter received a vision indicating that the times of the Gentiles had commenced (Acts 10:9-11:18).

As the Jews who were dispersed throughout the Roman Empire increasingly rejected the gospel of Jesus Christ, greater emphasis was placed on taking the gospel to the Gentiles. The apostle Paul was in the forefront of this marvelous work. He and Barnabas explained to a congregation of Jews gathered to hear them in a synagogue at Antioch of Pisidia, "It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles" (Acts 13:46).

The Lord indicated that in the latter days the restored gospel would "go forth unto the ends of the earth, unto the Gentiles first, and then, behold, and lo, they shall turn unto the Jews" (D&C 90:9). The Second Coming ushers in the time when the Jewish nation will once again receive opportunity to hear the gospel and enter into the covenant of God on a priority basis. When the emphasis changes, and the fulness of the gospel is brought to the Jews instead of to the Gentile nations, it may be said that the times of the Gentiles is fulfilled. Before that change in emphasis occurs, the Savior prophesied, the Jews will again gather in preparation to receive their King. "Judah must return," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith, "Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple, and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple, &c.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286).

Luke's account of the Olivet Discourse indicates that "Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" (Luke 21:24). After centuries of non- Jewish domination of the holy city, war brought Jerusalem under Jewish control in 1967. The Six-day War, which began 5 June 1967, was a turning point in history. The holy city was annexed, and shortly thereafter the state of Israel declared Jerusalem to be its capital.

The miracle of the rebuilding of Jerusalem by the Jews has been under the direction of the Almighty. The Prophet Joseph Smith directed Orson Hyde to travel to Jerusalem to dedicate the land for the return of the Jews. Elder Hyde knelt on the Mount of Olives and fulfilled this assignment 24 October 1841. Since that time Jews have been stirred in spirit to return to the land of their forefathers. This is not to say that the Lord condones the bloodshed that has occurred in the Jewish redemption of the land of Palestine. Applicable to the Jewish nation are the words of the Lord to the Saints concerning the establishment of Zion in Jackson County, Missouri: "Wherefore, the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you. And if by purchase, behold you are blessed; and if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance" (D&C 63:29-31).

The events cited have transpired over a number of years. There is yet more to take place. The fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles is not to be measured in a particular moment; rather it will take place naturally and gradually over an extended period of time, the dawn of which is not far from us.

JS-M 1:30; D&C 45:27 Because iniquity shall abound, the love of men shall wax cold. The deluge of divorce, abuse, and abandoned wives and children is the result of wickedness engulfing the world. Today, sins of immorality have led to legalization and increase in abortions. Pornography, sexual perversions, and abundant adulteries have paved the way to broken hearts and homes. And often, through it all, the wicked parties are past feeling. Their hearts are cold in solid indifference to the sorrow they cause and the judgments of God they bring upon themselves. Iniquity and coldness form a vicious circle in which one feeds off the other until the wicked of the earth are ripened in their corruption. As a result, the Lord will come out in his wrath to destroy the hardened wicked from off the face of the earth at his coming.

45:28 Moroni referred to the times of the Gentiles coming in as "the fulness of the Gentiles" (Joseph Smith-History 1:41). The restoration of the fulness of the gospel was foreordained to occur during the era of the times of the Gentiles. The condemnation of the Gentile nations occurs "because that which was from the beginning is plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light" (D&C 93:31). The times of the Gentiles will be fulfilled, or come to an end, in the generation in which they reject the restoration of the gospel. See commentary on Joseph Smith-History 1:41, page 25.

45:31 For a desolating sickness shall cover the land. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:17; 5:19.

45:32 My disciples shall stand in holy places. Where are the holy places in which Christ intended his disciples to stand? In this dispensation the Lord has directed the Saints to gather to Zion. He indicates in Doctrine and Covenants 57 that the site of the city of the New Jerusalem is in the area of Independence, Missouri.

Will all of the Saints gather to Missouri? "Behold, there is none other place appointed," explained the Lord, "than that which I have appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that which I have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saintsUntil the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion. Behold, it is my will, that all they who call on my name, and worship me according to mine everlasting gospel, should gather together, and stand in holy places; And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together" (D&C 101:20-23).

Clearly, the Lord ordained the stakes of Zion to be the holy places in which the Saints will stand in preparation for the Second Coming. The Lord gave further direction "that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth" (D&C 115:6).

There is strength in the organization of a stake. Stake presidents and bishops are ordained and set apart with keys to guide the Saints in righ teousness. Further, members of the Church are organized into quorums and Relief Societies, in which they better learn the doctrines of the kingdom and their individual duties. Zion is built up one stake at a time. As members are sanctified and receive the blessings of the temple, Zion puts on her beautiful garments. Thus, each stake in Zion may become a holy place for a defense against wickedness and tribulations of the latter days. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:67.

JS-M 1:27 The gathering of Israel commences before the Second Coming. The carcass to which Israel gathers symbolizes the restored Church of Christ. Israel is attracted to the truths of the Restoration as eagles are drawn to a carcass.

JS-M 1:28-29 "The coming of the Son of Man never will benever can be till the judgments spoken of for this hour are poured out: which judgments are commenced" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286).

JS-M 1:31 This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world. "The time was at hand that the Gospel in all its fullness must be preached in power, unto all nations," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith, "that a people might be prepared for the Millennial reign" (History of the Church, 4:537).

JS-M 1:32 That which took place in the destruction of Jerusalem anciently will occur again in the latter days. Zechariah revealed in further detail that "the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity" (Zechariah 14:2). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:19, 47.

Be Not Troubled, but Look Forth for the Great Day of the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:34-42; JOSEPH SMITH-MATTHEW 1:33-40

45:35 Be not troubled. The signs of the times herald glorious days to come. The second coming of the Lord will usher in the Millennium of one thousand years of peace and righteousness. Appropriate are the words of the Savior, "Ye are little children, and ye have not as yet understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and prepared for you; and ye cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will lead you along" (D&C 78:17-18).

45:36 The light shall begin to break forth. The reference is to the restoration of the fulness of the gospel.

45:39 Shall be looking forth for the great day. "I will prophesy," stated the Prophet Joseph Smith on 2 July 1839, "that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things, and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors. If our souls and our bodies are not looking forth for the coming of the Son of Man; and after we are dead, if we are not looking forth, we shall be among those who are calling for the rocks to fall upon them" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 160).

45:42; JS-M 1:33 Elder Bruce R. McConkie observed: "We learn that the signs promised . . . are to occur after the abomination of desolation sweeps Jerusalem for the second time. They will thus come almost at the very hour of the Second Coming. From other scriptural accounts of these same signs we learn that 'the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man' (D. & C. 88:87), and 'shall remove out of her place' (Isa. 13:10-13); that 'the islands shall become one land' (D. & C. 133:23); and that 'the stars shall be hurled from their places.' (D. & C. 133:49). Thus it would seem, when the Lord makes his appearance and the earth is restored to its paradisiacal state, that there will be great physical changes. When the continents become one land and the earth reels to and fro, with all that then occurs, it will surely appear unto men as though the very stars of heaven were being hurled from their places, and so they will be as far as their relationship to the earth is concerned. That there may be other heavenly bodies, having the appearance of stars, that shall fall on the earth may also well be. Truly the scriptures testify of many signs and wonders in the heavens above (D. & C. 29:14; Joel 2:31; Rev. 6:12-17)" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:678).

JS-M 1:36 The sign of the Son of Man. At the April 1843 conference of the Church the Prophet Joseph Smith testified: "There will be wars and rumors of wars, signs in the heavens above and on the earth beneath, the sun turned into darkness and the moon to blood, earthquakes in divers places, the seas heaving beyond their bounds; then will appear one grand sign of the Son of Man in heaven. But what will the world do? They will say it is a planet, a comet, etc. But the Son of Man will come as the sign of the coming of the Son of Man, which will be as the light of the morning cometh out of the east" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 286-87).

JS-M 1:37 Whoso treasureth up my word, shall not be deceived. The prophetic word is for our salvation. It is not enough to simply read the scriptures. An occasional listening ear in meetings of the Church will not provide the necessary weapons against the adversary in the last days. The words of the scriptures must be esteemed in the vaults of the heart like priceless jewels. The Spirit must impress upon the soul the meaning and import of the words written.

It is the rod of iron, or the word of God, that leads to the tree of life. Nephi observed that "whoso would hearken unto the word of God, and would hold fast unto it, they would never perish; neither could the temptations and the fiery darts of the adversary overpower them unto blindness, to lead them away to destruction" (1 Nephi 15:24).

The scriptures are our best source for avoiding deception. This is especially true of nonscriptural expositions that fill the soul with opinions and wild assertions. "There are among us many loose writings predicting the calamities which are about to overtake us," counseled President Harold B. Lee. "Some of these have been publicized as though they were necessary to wake up the world to the horrors about to overtake us. Many of these are from sources upon which there cannot be unquestioned reliance.

"Are you priesthood bearers aware of the fact that we need no such publications to be forewarned, if we were only conversant with what the scriptures have already spoken to us in plainness?

"Let me give you the sure word of prophecy on which you should rely for your guide instead of these strange sources which may have great political implications.

"Read the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthewparticularly that inspired version as contained in the Pearl of Great Price (Joseph Smith-Matthew).

"Then read the forty-fifth section of the Doctrine and Covenants where the Lord, not man, has documented the signs of the times.

"Now turn to section 101 and section 133 of the Doctrine and Covenants and hear the step-by-step recounting of events leading up to the coming of the Savior.

"Finally, turn to the promises the Lord makes to those who keep the commandments when these judgments descend upon the wicked, as set forth in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 38.

"Brethren, these are some of the writings with which you should concern yourselves, rather than commentaries that may come from those whose information may not be the most reliable and whose motives may be subject to question. And may I say, parenthetically, most of such writers are not handicapped by having any authentic information on their writings" (Teachings of Harold B. Lee, 399). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 43:3, 6.

JS-M 1:37 He shall send his angels before him . . . and they shall gather together the remainder of his elect. In the last days missionaries will comb the earth to fulfill their commission to gather Israel. They will not be alone in this great labor. Those on the other side of the veil will aid them in finding their scattered kin and in preparing their hearts and minds to receive the fulness of the gospel.

JS-M 1:39 Mine elect, when they shall see all these things, they shall know. Faithful Saints, the children of light, will not be taken by surprise at the Second Coming. It is abundantly evident to those with eyes to see and ears to hear that the signs are appearing. "The coming of the Lord draweth nigh, and it overtaketh the world as a thief in the night" (D&C 106:4). The world will focus on the temporal concerns of the day: "For it shall be with them, as it was in the days which were before the flood; for until the day that Noah entered into the ark they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. Then shall be fulfilled that which is written, that in the last days, two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left; Two shall be grinding at the mill, the one shall be taken, and the other left" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:42-45).

JS-M 1:40 That day, and hour, no one knoweth. See Doctrine and Covenants 130:14-17.

The Resurrection Attends the Second Coming

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:43-46

45:43 The Jewish nation shall gather to Jerusalem. See commentary on verse 25.

45:45 The resurrection of the just will begin before the destruction of the wicked takes place. "For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then they who are alive, shall be caught up together into the clouds with them who remain [the dead], to meet the Lord in the air" (JST 1 Thessalonians 4:16). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:96-98.

An angel shall sound his trump. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 29:26.

Christ Shall Stand on the Mount of Olives; Jews Shall See the Wounds in His Hands and Feet

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:47-53

45:47-53 Among the more mysterious passages of the Old Testament are the writings of the prophet Zechariah. For reasons unknown, the Savior's illumination of Zechariah's prophecies is not found in the New Testament accounts of the Olivet Discourse. The clarity of Doctrine and Covenants 45, then, is of immense value to understanding the conversion of the Jewish remnant spoken of in Zechariah. Indeed, once individuals study this revelation they might bear testimony, "Our minds being now enlightened, we began to have the scriptures laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before had thought of" (Joseph Smith-History 1:74).

45:47 Those who fight against the gathered Jewish remnant in Jerusalem will be destroyed at the Lord's coming. "Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people round about," revealed the Lord, "when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. . . . And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem. . . . And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth" (Zechariah 12:2-3, 9; 14:12).

45:48 Then shall the Lord set his foot upon this mount. The Savior shall descend "upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south" (Zechariah 14:4).

45:51-53 This is the great day when the Savior will reclaim the outcasts of Judah and accomplish his glorious plan for their redemption. It is his Spirit that now prompts many to gather to their ancient homeland. And it is the spirit of the devil that inspires the wicked to assemble against Jerusalem to destroy the gathered Jewish remnant. The spirit of messianic anticipation will once again fill the hearts of the persecuted and hopeful nation. In glory and great power the Lord will descend to save them from destruction at the hands of their enemies. And, undoubtedly, they will see the unexpected wounds in the Messiah's hands, feet, and side, and ask, in fulfillment of Zechariah's words, "What are these wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends" (Zechariah 13:6). "Then the Jews who have only partly believed in Christ and who have not been willing to accept him as their Redeemer, will be converted and forgiven on their repentance and a nation will be born in a day" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:197).

Isaiah gloried in the day of Jewish redemption, when finally the scales of tradition will fall from their eyes allowing them to be enlightened. "Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies. Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children" (Isaiah 66:5-8).

In that day the righteous Jews will be as their ancient counterpart, Saul of Tarsus, when the Lord appeared to him on the road to Damascus. They too will turn from the traditions of their fathers by which means "that wicked one cometh and taketh away light and truth" (D&C 93:39). The Lord promised: "And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. . . . In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness" (Zechariah 12:10; 13:1).

The Lord Shall Reign during the Millennium

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:54-59

45:54 The heathen nations be redeemed. The heathen nations are those which, in general, are neither Jewish nor Christian. The righteous Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist, agnostic, and those righteous of any other class or persuasion will be spared in the destruction of the wicked and dwell upon the earth in its paradisiacal state. "To say that the heathens would be damned because they did not believe the Gospel would be preposterous," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and to say that the Jews would all be damned that do not believe in Jesus would be equally absurd; for 'how can they believe on him of whom they have not heard, and how can they hear without a preacher, and how can he preach except he be sent;' consequently neither Jew nor heathen can be cul pable for rejecting the conflicting opinions of sectarianism, nor for rejecting any testimony but that which is sent of God, for as the preacher cannot preach except he be sent, so the hearer cannot believe without he hear a 'sent' preacher, and cannot be condemned for what he has not heard, and being without law, will have to be judged without law" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 221).

Freedom of worship will be enjoyed by all in that great millennial day. Agency will be prized by all who love and seek the truth. There will be those who cling to false notions and retain their loyalty to false churches. Missionary work and the teaching of the gospel will of necessity continue until all shall know the Lord (Jeremiah 31:34).

Not all wickedness will cease at the beginning of the Millennium. Some will reject the testimony of Jesus Christ and his divine mission. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that "there will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 268-69). Those who knew no law or sinned in ignorance because of the traditions of their fathers will be given opportunity to receive the testimony of Jesus and be numbered among the Saints.

45:55 Satan shall be bound. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 43:31.

45:59 He will be their king and their lawgiver. "The Lord has at various times commenced this kind of government," the Prophet Joseph Smith explained, "and tendered His services to the human family. . . . When the children of Israel were chosen with Moses at their head, they were to be a peculiar people, among whom God should place His name; their motto was: 'the Lord is our lawgiver; the Lord is our Judge; the Lord is our King; and He shall reign over us.' While in this state they might truly say, 'Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord.' Their government was a theocracy; they had God to make their laws, and men chosen by Him to administer them; He was their God, and they were His people. Moses received the word of the Lord from God Himself; he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron taught the people, in both civil and ecclesiastical affairs; they were both one, there was no distinction; so will it be when the purposes of God shall be accomplished: when 'the Lord shall be King over the whole earth' and 'Jerusalem His throne.' 'The law shall go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.'

"This is the only thing that can bring about the 'restitution of all things spoken of by all the holy Prophets since the world was''the dispensation of the fullness of times, when God shall gather together all things in one.' Other attempts to promote universal peace and happiness in the human family have proved abortive; every effort has failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground; it needs the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God to accomplish this. The world has had a fair trial for six thousand years; the Lord will try the seventh thousand Himself; 'He whose right it is, will possess the kingdom, and reign until He has put all things under His feet;' iniquity will hide its hoary head, Satan will be bound, and the works of darkness destroyed; righteousness will be put to the line, and judgment to the plummet, and 'he that fears the Lord will alone be exalted in that day'" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 251-52).

The Prophet to Begin the Translation of the New Testament

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:60-62

45:60-62 The translation of the book of Matthew in the New Testament commenced while Genesis was still being translated. The day following the reception of these instructions, 8 March 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith began the translation of Matthew. In time the work of translation arrived at Matthew 24, in which the restored truths examined in this section of commentary were revealed. Thus, the Lord's promise to the Saints was fulfilled. In addition, other truths of the Restoration were revealed during the work of the translation of the New Testament and had profound influence on the revelations received and compiled in the Doctrine and Covenants. Of particular influence and interest are sections 74, 76, 77, 86, 88, and 93.

The Saints Are to Gather and Build the New Jerusalem, to Which People from All Nations Will Come

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 45:63-75

45:63 Wars in your own lands. The Lord knows the hearts of men and knew beforehand the eventual carnage that would result due to the Civil War. Two years following this revelation, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "I am prepared to say by the authority of Jesus Christ, that not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the history of our nation" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 17). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 38:29; 87:1.

45:65-75 The early Saints were unable to live according to the laws and principles upon which Zion must be built. The promises and blessings offered by the Lord were not bestowed in that day due to wickedness. The timetable of the Lord in fulfillment of the promises given is somewhat dependent on us. This principle was reflected in a discourse that the Prophet Joseph Smith gave to the Relief Society sisters assembled in Nauvoo, Illinois: "I now deliver it as a prophecy, if the inhabitants of this state, with the people of the surrounding country, will turn unto the Lord with all their hearts, ten years will not roll around before the kings and queens of the earth will come unto Zion, and pay their respects to the leaders of this people; they shall come with their millions, and shall contribute of their abundance for the relief of the poor, and the building up and beautifying of Zion" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 227).

Until the time arrives that we, the covenant people of the Lord, increase in numbers and are able to abide the laws of the celestial kingdom as a community, we will not see the fulfillment of these verses. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:3-5.

45:65 With one heart and with one mind. The Saints are given the opportunity to establish Zion on the earth, even as the righteous people of Enoch's day were: "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them. And Enoch continued his preaching in righteousness unto the people of God. And it came to pass in his days, that he built a city that was called the City of Holiness, even Zion" (Moses 7:18-19).

45:66 The New Jerusalem. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:9; 57:2.

45:67 It shall be called Zion. Zion is not limited to one city or land. Although the concept of Zion may be understood in its infant state as a city, Isaiah prophesied that Zion "shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left" (Isaiah 54:3). "You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion," taught the Prophet Joseph Smith, "where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 362).

When the early Saints "first heard the fullness of the Gospel preached by the first Elders," explained Elder Erastus Snow, "and read the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith, our ideas of Zion were very limited. But as our minds began to grow and expand, why we began to look upon Zion as a great people, and the Stakes of Zion as numerous. . . . We ceased to set bounds to Zion and her Stakes" (Journal of Discourses, 25:30-31).

45:68 Take his sword against his neighbor. The wicked have no respect for life. Those who thirst for the shedding of blood create scenes incomprehensible to the minds of most Saints. Mormon lamented the fallen conditions and depravity of his people in the last battles between the Nephites and the Lamanites. The wicked of the last days will surpass the iniquity of the Book of Mormon peoples who fought in large national armies. The prophet Ezekiel wrote that among the armies of the wicked in the wars of the last days, even the battle of Gog and Magog, "every man's sword shall be against his brother" (Ezekiel 38:21).

In the revelation under consideration, the Savior continued to expound upon the words of Zechariah. During the siege of Jerusalem that precedes the Lord's appearance to the Jews on the Mount of Olives the wicked will turn upon one another. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the Lord shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour" (Zechariah 14:13).

Flee unto Zion for safety. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:32.

45:71 The righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations. There are good people among all nations. In time the Lord will seek out each of his children, and they will be given the blessings of knowing the fulness of the gospel. In the dedicatory prayer of the Kirtland Temple, the Prophet Joseph Smith plead with God: "And whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city receive their testimony, let thy peace and thy salvation be upon that city; that they may gather out of that city the righteous, that they may come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment, with songs of everlasting joy; and until this be accomplished, let not thy judgments fall upon that city" (D&C 109:39-40).

In particular, the gathering of the righteous seeks to find and save the house of Israel scattered among all nations. The Savior also referred to this work as gathering the wheat from among the tares before the field is burned. Thus, before the destruction of the wicked, the gospel "[must] be preached in all the world" (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:31).
