Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 46

DATE: 8 MARCH 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation was given through the Prophet Joseph at Kirtland, Ohio, 8 March 1831. It addresses two matters of considerable importance to the infant Church. First, the matter of who, if any, should be excluded from meetings. Second, the discerning of spirits so that the Saints might avoid the host of spiritual counterfeits common in the world. Its doctrinal significance, however, reaches far beyond these two issues in that it restores to the earth the doctrine of spiritual gifts.

By the second half of the second century a noticeable change had taken place in the Church organized by Christ and his apostles. Spiritual gifts were no longer to be found. As one sympathetic church historian observed, "The church was no longer a place where the Spirit of prophecy could be heard. More and more people were joining the churches, but the distinction between church and world was fading. The church was becoming secularized; it was coming to terms with heathen thought and culture and philosophy" (Shelley, Church History in Plain Language, 64-65). Thus as the Holy Ghost quietly withdrew from the ancient church the voice of the philosopher boisterously took its place. Nephi aptly described what would follow. Priests, he said, teaching with their own learning, will contend one with another while denying the power of God, the spirit of revelation, and the working of miracles. Such things, they will say, have been done away with (2 Nephi 28:4-6). It follows as a great evidence of the Restoration that these giftswhich were so much a part of the faith of the Saints in dispensations pastwould once again find their rightful place in the Church of Christ.

Truth Seekers Not to Be Excluded from Public Meetings

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 46:1-6

46:1-6 In these early days, when the order of the Church was new to everyone, the practice of excluding nonbelievers from sacrament and confirmation meetings developed. This caused some discussion because the Book of Mormon directed the Nephite Twelve not to exclude those unworthy to partake of the sacrament from sacrament meetings (3 Nephi 18:28-32). The correctness of that principle is confirmed in this revelation in its announcement that truth seekers are welcome in all public meetings held by the Church.

Moroni informs us that, among his people, meetings were conducted "after the manner of the workings of the Spirit, and by the power of the Holy Ghost; for as the power of the Holy Ghost led them whether to preach, or to exhort, or to pray, or to supplicate, or to sing, even so it was done" (Moroni 6:9). This same instruction found expression in the direction given to the restored Church (D&C 20:45) and is repeated again in the present text.

46:2 Notwithstanding those things which are written. In the context of this revelation, this phrase means "in accordance with that which has been written." The text is occasionally used to sustain the idea that immediate revelation supersedes written policy. Though this does not reflect the original purpose or meaning of this text, it is a correct principle (D&C 52:9; 68:4; 121:33).

Ask of God and Seek the Gifts of the Spirit

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 46:7-12

46:7 Ye are commanded in all things to ask of God. There is nothing optional here. It is a command that we "ask of God," and that we do so "in all things." When blessings are needed, we are to "ask of God." Where understanding is required, we are to "ask of God." When testimony or confirmation is needed, we are to "ask of God." If false spirits need detecting, we are to "ask of God." In matters both temporal and spiritual we are to importune the heavens and align ourselves with their direction. This is not to suggest that we can move neither to the right nor to the left without divine command. It is, however, to say that the spirit of "prayer and thanksgiving" be a part of all that we do. "Whatsoever thing ye shall ask the Father in my name, which is good, in faith believing that ye shall receive, behold, it shall be done unto you" (Moroni 7:26). "Counsel with the Lord in all thy doings," Alma directed his son Helaman, with the appended promise that "he will direct thee for good; yea, when thou liest down at night lie down unto the Lord, that he may watch over you in your sleep; and when thou risest in the morning let thy heart be full of thanks unto God; and if ye do these things, ye shall be lifted up at the last day" (Alma 37:37).

That which the Spirit testifies unto you even so I would that ye should do. The specific context of this direction pertains to the manner in which meetings are conducted in the name of the Lord (v. 2). In principle it applies to all that is done in his name. As the Spirit directs, so we should respond. For instance, the Lord said, "Speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts, and you shall not be confounded before men; for it shall be given you in the very hour, yea, in the very moment, what ye shall say" (D&C 100:5-6). If we choose to ignore such prompting, we will quickly find that the Spirit will in like manner choose to ignore us.

Considering the end of your salvation. In all of our choices and decisions we might well ask, Is this in harmony with the covenants I have made, does this lead me closer to God? If our answer is in the affirmative, we have, in the language of this revelation, considered the end of our salvation.

Doing all things with prayer and thanksgiving. As we have been directed to counsel with the Lord in all things, so we have been directed to render thanks for all that we have been given. In a subsequent revelation the Prophet was told, "In nothing doth man offend God, or against none is his wrath kindled, save those who confess not his hand in all things, and obey not his commandments" (D&C 59:21).

Doctrines of devils, or the commandments of men. It is a sad commentary that the "doctrines of devils" and the "commandments of men" have so often paraded as the principles of salvation taking refuge in the churches of the world. Such doctrines have been used to support murder, tyranny, and oppression. In his vision of the Middle Ages, Nephi saw and described the formation of a church which he said would slay the Saints of God, torture them, and bind them down with a yoke of iron. "I beheld," he said, "this great and abominable church; and I saw the devil that he was the founder of it. And I also saw gold, and silver, and silks, and scarlets, and fine-twined linen, and all manner of precious clothing; and I saw many harlots. And the angel [Nephi's guide and mentor during the vision] spake unto me, saying: Behold the gold, and the silver, and silks, and the scarlets, and the fine- twined linen, and the precious clothing, and the harlots, are the desires of this great and abominable church. And also for the praise of the world do they destroy the saints of God, and bring them down into captivity" (1 Nephi 13:6-9). It was to escape that captivity that many of our forefathers left Europe and came to the New World. We cannot in wisdom suppose that the prince of darkness was the father of but one such church. Describing the churches that would oppose the restored gospel in the last days, Nephi said: "Yea, and there shall be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die; and it shall be well with us. And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless, fear God he will justify in committing a little sin; yea, lie a little, take advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the kingdom of God. Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, . . . their churches have become corrupted, and their churches are lifted up; because of pride they are puffed up. They rob the poor because of their fine sanctuaries; they rob the poor because of their fine clothing; and they persecute the meek and the poor in heart, because in their pride they are puffed up" (2 Nephi 28:7-9, 12-13). Joseph Smith described the creeds of these churches as "the very mainspring of all corruption," and as the "handcuffs, and chains, and shackles, and fetters of hell" (D&C 123:7-8).

Though the doctrines of devils will always be found parading as the truths of salvation, we would be both foolish and naïve to suppose that the adversary limits his proselytizing to the sphere of religion. As the darkness of night knows no bounds, so the influence of the adversary reigns wherever the light of the gospel has been forced to flee. Politics, academics, and entertainment are among the fields that have reaped a rich harvest for the father of all lies. While one man may lose his soul in the quest for power, another will choose to worship at the shrine of his own intellect, and still another will surrender all that is decent in the quest for pleasure. Each will have devils at his side parroting the litanies of hell, their chief doctrines centering in the right of individuals to do as they pleaseeither because they are above the law or because there is no lawand the promise of an all-loving and nonjudgmental god whose unconditional love assures salvation to all.

As to the commandments of men, it need only be observed that if one's faith is perfectly in line with the wisdom of the day it will be out of line with the wisdom of tomorrow. Surely a faith that does not reach beyond the wisdom of this world will be of little benefit in the worlds to come.

46:8 Seek ye earnestly the best gifts. Well might it be asked, Of all the gifts of the Spirit which are the "best" or the ones most to be desired? To which we readily answer, The gift or gifts most needed in your circumstances and situation. The best gift is the gift best suited to enable you to bless those with whom you have been called to labor. To the young mother, it may be patience, love, and understanding; to the aged woman, the ability to endure; to the newly called missionary, the gift of tongues; to the bishop, the gift of discernment; to the teacher, knowledge; to the priesthood leader, the gift of administration, and so forth.

46:9 And him that seeketh so to do. Who has rightful claim to the gifts of the Spirit? The Lord teaches us that it is those who love him and keep all of his commandments. The difficulty here is that none of us keep all of the commandments; at least we do not keep them perfectly. Attesting to the mercy and grace of heaven comes this phrase, which extends hope to all: "And him [or her] that seeketh so to do." Each of heaven's gifts is within our grasp, if we will but reach.

Not for a sign that they may consume it upon their lusts. There are no private gifts, each is given that we might aid and serve others. To seek gifts for self-gratification is contrary to the Spirit from which they come and the purpose for which they have been ordained. Similarly, Joseph F. Smith said: "Show me Latter- day Saints who have to feed upon miracles, signs and visions in order to keep them steadfast in the Church, and I will show you members of the Church who are not in good standing before God, and who are walking in slippery paths. It is not by marvelous mani festations unto us that we shall be established in the truth, but it is by humility and faithful obedience to the commandments and laws of God" (Conference Report, April 1900, 40).

46:10-12 Spiritual gifts are given by the Holy Ghost to those who have rightful claim upon his companionship through the waters of baptism and by the laying on of hands. Thus they are the exclusive providence of members of the Church (v. 10). These are spiritual talents given to bless those of the household of faith and to aid in the declaration of the gospel. They find their manifestation in service to others. By contrast, the myriad of talents with which the generality of humankind have been blessed can be used in a host of ways and for a great variety of purposes. Talents can be used in any cause, be it good or evil.

Spiritual gifts are talents given and consecrated for the Lord's purpose. All spiritual gifts edify the soul and testify of Christ. The talents of men may or may not be used for such purposes. In the world, artists, musicians, and writers labor for different masters and for different rewards. Whereas righteousness and obedience are requisites for the use of spiritual gifts, this is not always the case with other talents. Talents may find expression without the attendant aid of the Spirit, and even in opposition to it. Certainly, there are gifted artists in many fields outside of the Church who have responded to the light of Christ and to revelation from the Holy Ghost. We would liken the expression of such gifts to the labors of the great reformers who paved the way for the Restoration. We can only suppose that their offering will find acceptance by the God of heaven. We would further suppose that such gifts, as marvelous as they may be, will in a future day be enhanced by the greater light and power that the fulness of the gospel brings with it.

Gifts of the Spirit Enumerated

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 46:13-26

46:13-14 Every member of the Church is expected to have a personal assurance or testimony that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. Such a testimony comes only by the spirit of revelation; and thus when shared with others in company with the Spirit by which it came it may have a very electrifying effect. Nevertheless, there are those who are specially gifted in the bearing of testimony, who, like the soloists in a great choir, thrill our souls and raise the level of our faith beyond that which others can do.

In like manner, to some it has been given to testify with special power of the mission and ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith, of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon, or of some particular gospel principle in such a manner that it has a more powerful effect upon our souls than that which we normally experience when others bear like testimony.

46:14 To others it is given to believe on their words. Some are granted the privilege of penning scripture, while the generality of humankind are given the gift to "believe on their words." Virtually everyone has been edified by the words of others and has edified others with their own expressions. To some has been granted the gift of expression and to others has been given the ability to believe on their words.

46:15 The differences of administration. There is much to administer and govern in a great kingdom. So it is that if the house of the Lord is to be a house of order the labor of many officers and servants is required. In the kingdom of God there are of necessity "differences of administration," meaning a great variety of services that must be rendered.

46:16 The diversities of operations. The diversity of gifts found in the community of Saints suggests that there are a host of tasks that need doing and a variety of ways in which they can be done. It is expected that all faithful Saints will labor in their callings, using the gifts that God has given them. For this reason people are called to serve in various capacities for a time when their gift or gifts are particularly needed. We find the apostle Paul saying, "I have planted, Apollos watered" (1 Corinthians 3:6), to which it might be added, another pruned, and still another harvested, each doing that for which he was best suited. Surely, this has been true with those men called to stand at the head of the Church. Each has been endowed with the particular gifts needed during the time of his administration. The Prophet Joseph laid the foundation of this dispensation as no other man could. Yet, perhaps he would not have been Brigham's match in leading the Saints across the plains and colonizing the Great Basin. And so it has been with one prophet after another, each specially prepared to meet the challenges of that time for which he was called.

The "diversity of operations" could also be understood to embrace different ways particular gifts are manifest. The gift of healing, for instance, finds expression in one person's ability to administer healing herbs, the ability of another to heal through a priesthood blessing, and in still another the power to say, "Rise up and walk" (Acts 3:6). Indeed, we read of one who was healed by simply touching the hem of the Master's garment (Matthew 9:20-23).

46:17 The word of wisdom. Some have been blessed not just with wisdom but also with the ability to articulate the same in such a manner that it impresses itself upon those in need of it.

46:18 The question has often been asked, Are teachers born, or are they made? Some are born to teach just as others are born to a thousand other things: some to sing, others to write, still others to lead, to heal, to build, to nurture, and so on, each with talents enhanced by good training but not originating in that training. Gifts do not originate in books or in classes. True it is that such efforts may well improve a particular person's ability to do one thing or another, but they cannot grant them that ability in the first place. So it is in the realm of spiritual things. Teaching is a spiritual gift and, as this revelation suggests, some have received it and others have not. Teaching this principle, Moroni said, "For behold, to one is given by the Spirit of God, that he may teach the word of wisdom; and to another, that he may teach the word of knowledge by the same Spirit" (Moroni 10:9-10). Similarly, we might say to one it is given to teach children of Primary age, to another to teach teenagers, and to yet another to teach adults. What then happens when we are called to labor in an assignment in which we have no gift? We can but respond that if the call came from the Lordand such calls doand if we thrust in our sickle with all our might, he will sustain us and bless our efforts so that his purposes will be accomplished.

46:19-20 It is expected that every member of the Church have sufficient faith to be healed and that every holder of the Melchizedek Priesthood have sufficient faith to utilize the power of that priesthood to heal those who are sick. To say that some have the gift to be healed and others the gift to heal is to say that they have power beyond that known to the generality of faithful Saints. It is supposed among some that the higher the office one holds in the priesthood the greater the blessing they can give. This is simply not the case. To illustrate this principle Brigham Young said that he was hounded constantly by people asking if he would come and give a blessing; "I only go occasionally, because it is the privilege of every father, who is an Elder in Israel, to have faith to heal his family, . . . and if he does not do it he is not living up to his privilege. It is just as reasonable for him to ask me to cut his wood and maintain his family, for if he had faith himself he would save me the trouble of leaving other duties to attend to his request" (Journal of Discourses, 3:46).

It is not expected that the faithful Saint will be relieved from every illness or the effects of every injury. Christ did not heal every sick or infirm soul in Israel, even within the household of faith. The elders of Israel do not wander through hospitals seeking the opportunity to give blessings. The faithful are always entitled to a blessing though that blessing may not always be the restoration of health and strength. As it takes faith to be healed, it also takes faith to accept the fact that it is not the intent or design of heaven that every sick soul be raised from its bed of affliction. Sooner or later all must die and, as the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "The only difference between the old and young dying is, one lives longer in heaven and eternal light and glory than the other, and is freed a little sooner from this miserable wicked world" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 197). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:43-48.

46:23 The discerning of spirits. "Nothing is a greater injury to the children of men," said Joseph Smith, "than to be under the influence of a false spirit when they think they have the Spirit of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 205). A bishop is called to be "a judge" in Israel (D&C 64:40) and thus by virtue of his office has a special right to importune the heavens for this gift in order that he judge wisely and not be deceived by counterfeit gifts.

46:24-25 The gift of tongues is given for the purpose of testifying of Christ and teaching the gospel. The interpretation of tongues is given in order that language will not be a barrier to hearing and understanding the heaven-sent message. Joseph F. Smith said: "There is perhaps no gift of the spirit of God more easily imitated by the devil than the gift of tongues. Where two men or women exercise the gift of tongues by the inspiration of the spirit of God, there are a dozen perhaps who do it by the inspiration of the devil. . . .

"I believe in the gifts of the Holy Spirit unto men, but I do not want the gift of tongues, except when I need it. . . .

"So far as I am concerned, if the Lord will give me ability to teach the people in my native tongue, or in their own language to the understanding of those who hear me, that will be sufficient gift of tongues to me. Yet if the Lord gives you the gift of tongues, do not despise it, do not reject it. For if it comes from the Spirit of God, it will come to those who are worthy to receive it, and it is all right" (Conference Report, April 1900, 41).

46:24 To speak with tongues. "Be not so curious about tongues," the Prophet Joseph Smith counseled, "do not speak in tongues except there be an interpreter present; the ultimate design of tongues is to speak to foreigners, and if persons are very anxious to display their intelligence, let them speak to such in their own tongues. The gifts of God are all useful in their place, but when they are applied to that which God does not intend, they prove an injury, a snare and a curse instead of a blessing" (History of the Church, 5:31-32).

46:20-26 The working of miracles, prophecy, the discernment of spirits, and speaking in tongues are here listed as illustrations of spiritual gifts. It is not to be supposed that these, with the other gifts mentioned in this revelation, constitute an exhaustive list of the gifts that God has chosen to give his children. That is not the design or purpose of the reve lation. The gifts of God are as diverse as are those to whom they have been given. Like fingerprints, they are individual and distinctive. The genius of this is that it binds us together as a community of Saints, everyone having something to contribute that no one else can do as well. Each of us is in a position to bless and to be blessed. For this reason we have been commanded to "meet together often" that we might succor and strengthen each other. It is not intended in the gospel plan that we be saved separate and singly. Salvation is in many respects a community affair.

Directing the Use of Spiritual Gifts

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 46:27-33

46:27 Unto the bishop of the church. This revelation was given some years before the development of wards and stakes. The bishop referred to would be the equivalent of the presiding bishop today. In like manner, the reference to elders would be to those holding positions of presidency. The idea is that those in positions of presidency must be able to discern the legitimate gifts of God from counterfeit gifts common to false religion and to discipline and direct the proper use of the gifts given of God to the Saints.

46:29 The president of the Church not only presides over all of its members but also over all of the gifts given them of God to aid in the building of his earthly kingdom. Under the direction of the prophet countless calls are made to utilize those gifts in sharing the gospel with all the nations and peoples of the earth and in teaching and strengthening those already in the Church.

46:30-32 When we are in tune with the Spirit so that it gives direction to our heavenly petitions, we may also have the perfect assurance that our prayers will be answered. By contrast the Lord has said, "If ye ask anything that is not expedient for you, it shall turn unto your condemnation" (D&C 88:65).

46:33 Practice virtue and holiness. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 121:45-46.
