Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 47

DATE: 8 MARCH 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

The Lord had charged Joseph Smith to keep an accurate history of the Church. Accordingly, Oliver Cowdery acted as Church historian and recorder. When Oliver was called to serve as a missionary among the Lamanites (D&C 28:8; 30:5; 32:2), John Whitmer was called to replace him in these assignments. John was reluctant to accept this assignment but agreed to do as the Lord directed. This revelation, given 8 March 1831, came in response to his request that the call be manifest through the Prophet.

John Whitmer Called to Serve as Historian and Scribe

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 47:1-4

47:1-4 John Whitmer was Church historian for about seven years. Then on 10 March 1838, he lost his membership in the Church. At that time he was serving as a counselor to his brother David in the Missouri presidency. "Because he and W. W. Phelps, the other counselor, had taken personal title to the gathering site of Far West, the resentment of the Missouri members resulted in criticism and then formal suspension of that presidency from office. Declining to be called to account economically or to personally appear at high council trials," they were excommunicated (Anderson, Investigating, 127). When he left the Church, John Whitmer refused to surrender the history he had written. Later, when the brethren were compiling the history of the Church in Nauvoo he advised them that his history could be acquired "at a fair price." He was advised that they could get along quite well without it. In 1893, some years after his death, the Church obtained a copy of his history. His writings, which included revelations given by Joseph Smith during that seven-year period, were only eighty-five pages in length.

47:1 Keep a regular history. Joseph Smith in a meeting with the Twelve some years after this revelation spoke as follows about the importance of accurate records and the writing of the history of the Church:

"If I now had in my possession, every decision which had been had upon important items of doctrine and duties since the commencement of this work, I would not part with them for any sum of money; but we have neglected to take minutes of such things, thinking, perhaps, that they would never benefit us afterwards; which, if we had them now, would decide almost every point of doctrine which might be agitated. But this has been neglected, and now we cannot bear record to the Church and to the world, of the great and glorious manifestations which have been made to us with that degree of power and authority we otherwise could, if we now had these things to publish abroad.

"Since the Twelve are now chosen, I wish to tell them a course which they may pursue, and be benefited thereafter, in a point of light of which they are not now aware. If they will, every time they assemble, appoint a person to preside over them during the meeting, and one or more to keep a record of their proceedings, and on the decision of every question or item, be it what it may, let such decision be written, and such decision will forever remain upon record, and appear an item of covenant or doctrine. An item thus decided may appear, at the time, of little or no worth, but should it be published, and one of you lay hands on it after, you will find it of infinite worth, not only to your brethren, but it will be a feast to your own souls.

"Here is another important item. If you assemble from time to time, and proceed to discuss important questions, and pass decisions upon the same, and fail to note them down, by and by you will be driven to straits from which you will not be able to extricate yourselves, because you may be in a situation not to bring your faith to bear with sufficient perfection or power to obtain the desired information; or, perhaps, for neglecting to write these things when God had revealed them, not esteeming them of sufficient worth, the Spirit may withdraw and God may be angry; and there is, or was, a vast knowledge, of infinite importance, which is now lost. What was the cause of this? It came in consequence of slothfulness, or a neglect to appoint a man to occupy a few moments in writing all these decisions.

"Here let me prophesy. The time will come, when, if you neglect to do this thing, you will fall by the hands of unrighteous men. Were you to be brought before the authorities, and be accused of any crime or mis demeanor, and be as innocent as the angels of God, unless you can prove yourselves to have been somewhere else, your enemies will prevail against you; but if you can bring twelve men to testify that you were in a certain place, at that time, you will escape their hand. Now, if you will be careful to keep minutes of these things, as I have said, it will be one of the most important records ever seen; for all such decisions will ever after remain as items of doctrine and covenants" (History of the Church, 2:198-99).
