Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49

DATE: MARCH 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

About fifteen miles from Kirtland, Ohio, where the body of the Church resided, was a community of Shaking Quakers, or Shakers. They were called Shaking Quakers because their dress resembled that of the Society of Friends, or Quakers, and because their system of worship included shaking and physical contortions. One of their number, Leman Copley, joined the Church though he still held to some of his former beliefs which he persisted in teaching. In this revelation, given 7 March 1831, he along with Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt were directed to take the message of the Restoration to the Shakers. Some months previously, Elder Pratt had spent two days with them and left them seven copies of the Book of Mormon. This revelation, which Sidney Rigdon read in its entirety to the Shakers, was given so that the missionaries might respond by the spirit of revelation to the matters of particular interest to the Shakers. Those beliefs included the idea that Christ had already returned, doing so in the form of a woman, Ann Lee, who had died in 1784. They held that baptism and the Lord's Supper ceased with the apostolic age, that there was no vicarious atonement, nor was there to be a bodily resurrection. The eating of pork was rejected, and some of their number rejected the eating of any meat at all. They also felt that a celibate life was superior to marriage and that having children reduced their standing with God.

Although this revelation (D&C 49) was rejected by the Shakers, its doctrinal announcements remain important. Also of importance is the pattern it established for missionary work. The elders did not engage the Shakers in a doctrinal debate over the peculiar tenets of their faith but invited them to hear the word of the Lord as it was given to them. It was then for them to choose whether they would accept that word as it came to them through a living prophet or reject it. Sadly, they rejected it.

How the Gospel Is to Be Declared

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49:1-4

49:1 The missionaries sent to the Shakers are directed to declare the message of the Restoration even as they received it. That is, they are to testify that Joseph Smith is a prophet and that the gospel in its pristine purity has been restored again to the earth through him. As evidence of his prophetic call, they are to read this revelation in which the Lord responds to their key doctrinal concerns.

49:2 Like many with whom our missionaries share the message of the gospel, the Shakers reveled in certain truths while rejecting those requiring change and repentance on their part.

49:3 Leman Copley, a recent convert from the Shakers, is cautioned not to reason with his former colleagues on their ground. His commission now is to declare the message of the Restoration. If he is true to the message he has been given he is assured success; if he fails to follow this counsel he is told that he will not prosper. The principle is applicable to all missionary work. Our commission is to declare the message of the Restoration from the revelations of the Restoration. Such a course is consistently rewarded with a marvelous outpouring of the Spirit and a rich harvest of souls. Those insisting on giving credence to the restored gospel by "proving" it, as it were, from Old and New Testament texts or arguing for its credibility in some other way do not enjoy the same outpouring of the Spirit or the same power of conversion.

The Day and Hour of Christ's Return Is Unknown

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49:5-7

49:5-6 There is some measurable power associated with these verses. In them we have the testimony of the Father that Christ is, indeed, his Only Begotten Son and that he is the Redeemer of mankind. Relative to this testimony, there is no middle ground; in the great day of judgment all will be called upon to either accept or reject it, which they do at the peril of their eternal lives. To the Shakers, this revelation affirms that Christ reigns in the heavens and has done so since his resurrection. Thus, it refutes the false doctrine that he dwelt upon the earth as a woman, Ann Lee, founder of the Shaker faith. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 49:22.

49:7 Though it is the duty of the Saints to be prepared for and to know the approximate time of Christ's return, none, not even the angels of heaven, will be trusted with the knowledge of the day and hour in which he will come. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 130:14-17.

Salvation Comes Only through Obedience

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49:8-14

49:8 All men shall repent. Just as all men must exercise faith, so they must repent. "For all have sinned," said the apostle Paul, "and come short of the glory of God" (Romans 3:23).

Holy men that ye know not of. During his mortal ministry Christ said, "Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" (Matthew 16:28; Mark 9:1; Luke 9:27). Commenting on this verse, Bruce R. McConkie said: "It is apparent that on a previous occasion, of which we have no present scriptural record, Jesus taught his disciples the truths about the doctrine of translation and promised that some of them would continue to live on earth until his Second Coming. John the Beloved is the only known one of these disciples who has continued to live without tasting death (John 21:20-24). Until the identity of any others is revealed, we have no way of knowing who they are or what mission they have been able to perform because of their translation" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:396-97).

Similarly, we read that in the New World Christ empowered three of the Nephites so they might continue their earthly ministries until the time of his second coming (3 Nephi 28:4-12). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 7.

49:9 Joseph Smith restored the "new and everlasting covenant" (D&C 132:6). That is to say, the covenant he restored was new to those of his day, yet it had been everlastingly the same.

49:10 The nations of the earth shall bow to it. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 87:6.

49:12 Believe on the name of the Lord. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 112.

Marriage and Posterity Are Ordained of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49:15-17

49:15 Whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God. Paul in his epistle to Timothy identified "forbidding to marry" as a sign of apostasy and a doctrine of the devil (1 Timothy 4:3). Marriage, we are assured in this text, is ordained of God. In a proclamation to the world, issued in 1995, the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve asserted that "marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children" ("Family: A Proclamation to the World").

49:16-17 Here we are told that the very reason that God created the earth was so that we, his children, might come to it and marry and then as couples become "one flesh." Subsequent revelation would bring an understanding of the eternal nature of the marriage covenant and of the family unit.

God Sanctions Eating Meat

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49:18-21

49:18-19 Another of the distinctive characteristics of the Shakers was that they were vegetarians. Here the Lord asserts that no authorized servant of his has ever been directed to command that we abstain from the use of meat. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 59:15-21.

49:20 Of the Zion society established by Enoch we read, "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them" (Moses 7:18).

49:21 The killing of animals for sport finds no justification in scripture. "Surely, blood shall not be shed," the Lord told those in ancient days, "only for meat, to save your lives; and the blood of every beast will I require at your hands" (JST Genesis 9:11).

Zion to Flourish and the Lamanites to Blossom as a Rose

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 49:22-28

49:22 Not in the form of a woman. Shakers believed that Ann Lee, the founder of their faith, was the second embodiment of Christ's spirit. In "Mother Ann," as they called her, God's spirit had been incarnated in female form as they believed Jesus was God's spirit incarnated in male form (Foster, "Lee, Ann," Encyclopedia of Religion, 8:491).

49:23 The Shakers' notion that the Second Coming had taken place overlooked the prophetic promise that his coming was to be preceded by all manner of signs in the heavens (Joel 2:28-32; Matthew 24:29-30). The prophetic word also promises great physical changes on the earth. For example, the mountains are to be made low and the rough places are to be made smooth (Isaiah 40:4; JST Luke 3:10).

49:24 Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. The physical gathering alluded to is the assembling of the Latter-day Saints in the tops of the mountains in western America. There Zion shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains. The "wilderness" included areas that were colonized under the direction of Brigham Young. The day when the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose has scarcely commenced. They are only beginning to be the pure and delightsome people they will yet become.

49:25 The place which I have appointed. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:1-3; 101:21.

49:28 I come quickly. The reference is to the manner of his coming, not the time of his coming.
