Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50

DATE: 9 MAY 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

In the spring of 1831 several individuals in and around Kirtland, Ohio, claimed revelations for the guidance of the infant Church. Confusion was the result. Parley P. Pratt and other elders called on Joseph Smith to find out how members of the Church were to discern such spirits. This revelation came in response to that request.

Describing these events, Parley P. Pratt said: "As I went forth among the different branches, some very strange spiritual operations were manifested, which were disgusting, rather than edifying. Some persons would seem to swoon away, and make unseemly gestures, and be drawn or disfigured in their countenances. Others would fall into ecstacies, and be drawn into contortions, cramp, fits, etc. Others would seem to have visions and revelations, which were not edifying, and which were not congenial to the doctrine and spirit of the Gospel. In short, a false and lying spirit seemed to be creeping into the Church.

"All these things were new and strange to me, and had originated in the Church during our absence, and previous to the arrival of President Joseph Smith from New York.

"Feeling our weakness and inexperience, and lest we should err in judgment concerning these spiritual phenomena, myself, John Murdock, and several other Elders, went to Joseph Smith, and asked him to inquire of the Lord concerning these spirits or manifestations.

"After we had joined in prayer in his translating room, he dictated in our presence the following revelation" (Autobiography, 48).

Many False Spirits Are Abroad in the Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:1-5

50:2 The April 1842 edition of the Times and Seasons contained an article written by the Prophet titled "Try the Spirits." Among other things, the Prophet said: "It is evident from the Apostles' writings, that many false spirits existed in their day, and had 'gone forth into the world,' and that it needed intelligence which God alone could impart to detect false spirits, and to prove what spirits were of God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 202). The world is ignorant of such things, he said, because they are known only by the Spirit.

"The Egyptians were not able to discover the difference between the miracles of Moses and those of the magicians until they came to be tested together; and if Moses had not appeared in their midst, they would unquestionably have thought that the miracles of the magicians were performed through the mighty power of God, for they were great miracles that were performed by thema supernatural agency was developed, and great power manifested. . . .

"There always did, in every age, seem to be a lack of intelligence pertaining to this subject. Spirits of all kinds have been manifested, in every age, and almost among all people. If we go among the pagans, they have their spirits; the Mohammedans, the Jews, the Christians, the Indians all have their spirits, all have a supernatural agency, and all contend that their spirits are of God. Who shall solve the mystery? 'Try the spirits,' says John. . . .

" . . . But no one can try his own, and what is the reason? Because they have not a key to unlock, no rule wherewith to measure, and no criterion whereby they can test it. Could any one tell the length, breadth or height of a building without a rule? Test the quality of metals without a criterion, or point out the movements of the planetary systems, without a knowledge of astronomy? Certainly not; and if such ignorance as this is manifested about a spirit of this kind, who can describe an angel of light? If Satan should appear as one in glory, who can tell his color, his signs, his appearance, his glory, or what is the manner of his manifestation?" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 202-4). In answer to this question, the Prophet said it could not be done without the priesthood and a knowledge of the laws by which spirits are governed.

50:4 Abominations in the church. In addition to Parley P. Pratt's description of the false spirits that had deceived some few of the Saints, as given in the introduction to this section, John Whitmer recorded as follows: "Some had visions and could not tell what they saw. Some would fancy to themselves that they had the sword of Laban, and would wield it as expert as a light dragoon, some would act like an Indian in the act of scalping, some would slide or scoot on the floor, with the rapidity of a serpent, which [they] termed sailing in the boat to the Lamanites, preaching the gospel. And many other vain and foolish manoevers that are unmeaning and unprofitable to mention" ("Book of John Whitmer," 62).

Hypocrites Warned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:6-9

50:6-9 As Latter- day Saints we make no pretense of being a perfect people. There are those among our number who know nothing of the things of the Spirit; there are others in whose lives the gospel once burned as fire and now is but an ember; there are others who are embarrassed by one gospel principle or another and who sneer and speak evil of the Lord's anointed; there are still others hiding behind the cloak of piety who privately violate virtually every commandment the Lord has given. Of a certainty there are hypocrites among us! To all these we say: Come share our fellowship, know of our love, and worship with us. In that process it is hoped that the desire will be found to improve, to repent, and to live like a Latter- day Saint ought to. Hypocrisy, whatever its form, always blocks the light of heaven and gives the spirit of the evil one a place to fester and grow. In some cases the innocent or unaware will be deceived by the hypocrite. The Lord freely forgives such of their innocent or foolish errors. This, however, will not be the case with hypocrites, whom the Lord will hold fully accountable for their deliberate and practiced deception.

The Gospel Must Be Taught by the Spirit

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:10-20

50:10-20 It is the Spirit that gives life and meaning to all gospel principles. Thus the gospel must be both taught and learned by the Spirit. Anything less than this, however well intended it may be, is not of God. Scripture, in order to be scripture, must be read and interpreted by the Spirit. Of the revelations of the Restoration the Lord said, "It is my voice which speaketh them unto you; for they are given by my Spirit unto you, and by my power you can read them one to another; and save it were by my power you could not have them; wherefore, you can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words" (D&C 18:35-36). The same words when read by of those devoid of the Spirit may well be received as nothing but the voice of delusion or a pious fraud. Even the well intended may misuse the revelations of heaven when they fail to read and understand them by the light of heaven. Again, scripture is scripture only when it is attended by the Spirit through which it came. Many an evil design has been cloaked in scripture. Devils and false prophets draw freely upon the words of holy writ to sustain and justify their purposes. The words of the Savior in the parable of the great supper, "Compel them to come in" (Luke 14:23), were used to justify the ruthless acts of the Inquisition against those accused of heresy, as the expulsion of Adam and Eve from the Garden of Eden was used to justify the confiscation of property and wealth.

If scripture cannot be read and understood without the light of heaven, then certainly the principles that grow out of its fertile soil must be equally dependent on that light to produce good fruits. Does it not, therefore, seem strange that we seek to give credibility to the word of God by quoting those who have not embraced it? That some expend more time and energy seeking external evidences to support the revelations of heaven than they do to gain an understanding of them? That we seek to sustain eternal principles with logic that reaches no higher than the tower of Babel? If we are to lay a foundation upon which we can build the temple of our understanding so that it does indeed reach to heaven, it cannot be done upon any other principle than the principle of revelation. Of any substitutes for that principle the word of the Lord states, "It is not of God."

50:13 Unto what were ye ordained? The mistakes of youth were not uncommon to the infant Church. Much instruction was necessary to protect the purity of the restored gospel from spiritual counterfeits common to the unsophisticated Christianity of the American frontier. Levi Hancock reported that while engaged in preaching the gospel three young missionaries, Heman Basset, age sixteen (D&C 52:37); Edson Fuller, age twenty-one (D&C 52:28); and Burr Riggs, age twenty (D&C 75:17), purported to receive revelations and see angels and would fall down frothing at the mouth. "One of them who acted the worst was Burr Riggs, I have seen him jump up from the floor, strike his head against the joist in the Baldwins new house and swing some minutes, then fall like he was dead. After an hour or two he would come to, he would prophesy and tell what he had seen. At other times he appeared to be so honest and sincere I was led to believe all he said, but concluded that all could not be blessed and perhaps I was not as pure as those young men . . .

"Edson Fuller would fall and turn black in the face. Heman Bassett would behave like a baboon. He said he had a revelation he had received in Kirtland from the hand of an angel, he would read it and show pictures of a course of angels declared to be Gods, then would testify of the truth of the work and I believed it all, like a fool.

"I dare not come out against any thing that an Elder should say for fear I should speak against the Holy Ghost" (Autobiography of Levi Ward Hancock, 41).

The gospel must be taught with a dignity and decorum appropriate to the kingdom of heaven. To teach it in any other way, as this revelation states, is "not of God." In like manner, an understanding of the gospel must be obtained according to that same Spirit. The testimony of the truths of heaven cannot be obtained nor nourished by any means other than the spirit of truth.

That Which Does Not Edify Is Not of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:21-25

50:21-22 The truths of heaven cannot be taught by a teacher who does not stand in the light of heaven, nor can they be learned by a student who does not bask in that same light. Standing together in that light, both are edified and rejoice together.

50:23 Anciently, the verb "to edify" meant to build sacred edifices such as temples. Through the years the word edify has come to describe the process of improving character or building spirituality. All that is of God edifiesthat is, it lifts, builds, and improves; conversely, to edify is to eschew that which demeans, belittles, or excuses. To edify is to make the body and soul of man a holy tabernacle, a temple to God. If a doctrine does not offer the opportunity to reach, to build, or to improve, it is not of God.

50:24 Many in the religious world of our day profess to having been saved as a result of a particular religious experience. Their assumption is that because someone once stood in the light they will always stand in the light. This does not always prove to be the case. The greater flaw in such reasoning, however, is found in the assumption that whatever light they stood in constitutes the fulness of the light of heaven. Such an assumption would at best be foolish. Even then, to bask in gospel light is one thing; to follow the light of the gospel quite another. For those choosing to follow the light it becomes "brighter and brighter until the perfect day." Thus salvation becomes a journey rather than an event. The journey requires us to advance from grace to grace and refuses us the right to say that any religious experience is of itself sufficient. It was Nephi who wisely warned that from them that say, "We have enough . . . shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30).

The Faithful Will Possess All Things

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:26-27

50:26 The servant of all. In every gospel dispensation there have been those who have falsely claimed to be called of God. Often they betray themselves in their desire to be served rather than to serve. Responding to this problem in the early days of Christianity, the following direction is given in a work known as The Didache. "Welcome every apostle on arriving, as if he were the Lord. But he must not stay beyond one day. In case of necessity, however, the next day too. If he stays three days, he is a false prophet. On departing, an apostle must not accept anything save sufficient food to carry him till his next lodging. If he asks for money, he is a false prophet" (Ehrman, New Testament, 316).

50:27 Possessor of all things. When a man is properly sent forth in the name of the Lord it is to be expected that the fulness of God's power stands in readiness to sustain and aid him in accomplishing the task to which he has been called (JST Genesis 14). Those who obtain the glory of the celestial world are "they into whose hands the Father has given all things they are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; . . . all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's" (D&C 76:55-59).

The Pure to Obtain Divine Answers

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:28-36

50:28-29 No unclean thing can enter the presence of God, nor can any unclean thing receive the fulness of the Father. To possess all things, one must "be purified and cleansed from all sin." Hence the command to all who would be servants of God: "Prepare yourselves, and sanctify yourselves; yea, purify your hearts, and cleanse your hands and your feet before me, that I may make you clean; that I may testify unto your Father, and your God, and my God, that you are clean from the blood of this wicked generation" (D&C 88:74-75). Christ alone can make us clean. In the full and proper sense, according to the order he has established, those of our day are invited to go to the temple where the ritual here described is performed. Those professing to possess all things by virtue of their acceptance of Christ but who refuse to honor the priesthood he has restored cannot be sanctified and thus are not endowed with power from on high (D&C 43:16). It is in the house of the Lord that those so endowed learn the order whereby answers are obtained.

50:29 Ye shall ask whatsoever you will in the name of Jesus and it shall be done. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 46:30-32.

50:30 When the Lord places individuals in a position of presidency, he also endows them with the capacity to discern spirits so that they do not lead astray those who sustain them in faith.

50:31 Any spirit emanating from the God of heaven is subject to confirmation by both those in a position of leadership and those who have placed themselves under covenant to follow that leader. If no confirmation is obtained the spirit does not come from God.

50:32-33 We cannot fight darkness with darkness, evil with evil, or that which is petty with pettiness, for by so doing we concede the victory to the very influence that we oppose. Teaching this principle, Jude tells that "Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee" (Jude 1:9). In this story we find Michael, the commanding general in the army of the Lord, standing face to face with the prince of darkness to contend over the soul of Moses. Apparently, Satan claimed Moses to be under his dominion because he had killed an Egyptian taskmaster, while Michael claimed him a citizen of the kingdom of God as a great prophet and prototype of Christ. In this confrontation, Michael sets the example for all who fight in the army of the Lord by refusing to respond to the adversary in his own spirit.

50:33 Boasting nor rejoicing. Luke records that the Seventy returned from their missionary labors rejoicing, having discovered that they had power over serpents, scorpions, and evil spirits. To their surprise Christ directed that rather than glory in such things they should rejoice that their names were written in heaven (Luke 10:17-20). Similarly, in our dispensation, having described the power that would be given "them that believe," the Lord said, "A commandment I give unto them, that they shall not boast themselves of these things, neither speak them before the world; for these things are given unto you for your profit and for salvation" (D&C 84:73). As the Spirit is offended when we bring a "railing accusation" against the adversary, so it is offended when we boast in what we have accomplished in the name of the Lord or when we glory in the power that is ours over the kingdom of darkness. We cannot "rail" and retain the Spirit, nor can we boast or rejoice exceedingly over that which we have been able to accomplish in the name of the Lord. Such labors are not done to be seen of men.

50:35 The servants of the Lord have been given power over all that stands in opposition to the kingdom of the Father. "They shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded them" (D&C 1:5). Thus by the power of his Spirit they can discern those spirits that are for them and those that are against them.

50:36 To receive the voice of the Lord always brings its attendant blessings, which include the remission of sins (D&C 62:3; 84:61; 108:1; 132:50, 56).

Strength Is Found in the Word

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:37-42

50:37 Joseph Wakefield, in whom I am well pleased. Shortly after this statement was made, Joseph Wakefield was called on a mission with Solomon Humphrey. On this mission they baptized George A. Smith, who would become the youngest apostle to be called in this dispensation. Thereafter, Wakefield became critical of the Prophet, having seen him leave his sacred studies and play with some children. Feeling that this was incompatible with the prophetic office, Wakefield left the Church.

Among the churches. Reference is to the various branches of the Church. This was before the creation of wards and stakes.

Strengthen them by the word of exhortation. The vitality of the gospel is in its doctrines. "Faith comes," Joseph Smith said, "by hearing the word of God," (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 148). Faith cannot be exercised in a God of whom we have not heard or in doctrines that we have not been taught anymore than strength can be found in food we have not eaten or in renewal from rest we did not receive. Spiritual strength comes through learning and teaching of the saving principles of the gospel. There is no acceptable substitute for such exhortation.

50:38 John Corrill. Here John Corrill is called to labor in the Lord's vineyard. A month after this he was called to travel to Missouri with Lyman Wight (D&C 52:7). Prominent in the affairs of the Church, Corrill faltered during the Missouri persecutions and was excommunicated in 1839.

50:39 Edward Partridge is not justified; . . . let him repent. Apparently Edward Partridge was doing or had done something to interfere with the elders filling the missions to which they had been called.

50:40 When the Church was first organized and its doctrines and practices were new to everyone, it was necessary for the Lord to use men who, like unseasoned timber, had not obtained the kind of spiritual maturity common to those offices where it has now existed for generations. Like seeds cast on rich but shallow soil, the Joseph Wakefields and John Corrills sprouted up with a burst of energy only to wither in the first storm or on the first scorching day. Time and experience are as necessary to spiri tual growth as they are to the growth of the mind or the body. Thus the Lord speaks of the newly baptized as little children whom he will nurture and protect if they will stay close to him.

50:41-42 "My sheep hear my voice," Christ said in the meridian day, "and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand" (John 10:27-28). How is it then that some who were faithful cease to be so? It is true that no power can "pluck them out" of the hand of the Savior, but it is equally true that he will not prevent them from leaving should they choose to do so. While the commitment of the Father never wavers in the blessing and sustaining of his children, the commitment of his children often falters in their loyalty to him.

Those Who Have Built upon the Rock Are Promised That They Will See the Savior

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 50:43-46

50:43 The unity between the Father and the Son is perfect. Our salvation consists in becoming one with them. Here we are told that to the extent that our hearts and minds have become one with them they are in our midst.

50:45 You shall hear my voice and see me. As subsequent revelation will affirm, the promise to hear the voice of the Lord and to see him is literal not figurative (D&C 67:13; 76:117-18; 84:20-22; 88:68; 93:1; 107:19).
