Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 51

DATE: MAY 1831

PLACE: THOMPSON, OHIO

In response to the Lord's earlier command for the Church to move to Ohio, approximately two hundred Saints living in New York sold their properties and made the move west (D&C 37). Their arrival called attention to the need for further instructions to implement the law of consecration and stewardship as previously revealed (D&C 42:30-37). In preparation, an earlier revelation had directed the Saints to purchase lands in the region near Kirtland (D&C 48:3). In Thompson, Ohio, a new convert, Leman Copley, owned a large tract of land, some 759 acres, which he consecrated for the settlement of the newly arrived Saints. Bishop Edward Partridge was responsible for dividing this property among the Saints. Consequently, he requested the Prophet Joseph Smith to inquire of the Lord for direction on the matter.

This section was not included in the Book of Commandments. However, it is recorded in a manuscript containing forty-one revelations entitled "Kirtland Revelation Book." Verse five appears to be an inspired addition, which clarified the earlier written revelation. This revelation was first published in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Edward Partridge Is Appointed to Regulate Stewardships and Properties

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 51:1-8

51:2 They will be cut off. That is, they will be excommunicated, or lose their membership in the Church.

51:3 Let my servant Edward Partridge . . . appoint unto this people their portions. It was the responsibility of the bishop to give each family its stewardship. Instructing the bishop in the principles that would direct his decision, the Prophet explained in a letter to Bishop Partridge: "To condescend to particulars, I will tell you that every man must be his own judge how much he should receive and how much he should suffer to remain in the hands of the Bishop. I speak of those who consecrate more than they need for the support of themselves and their families.

"The matter of consecration must be done by the mutual consent of both parties; for to give the Bishop power to say how much every man shall have, and he be obliged to comply with the Bishop's judgment, is giving to the Bishop more power than a king has; and upon the other hand, to let every man say how much he needs, and the Bishop be obliged to comply with his judgment, is to throw Zion into confusion, and make a slave of the Bishop. The fact is, there must be a balance or equilibrium of power, between the Bishop and the people, and thus harmony and good will may be preserved among you.

"Therefore, those persons consecrating property to the Bishop in Zion, and then receiving an inheritance back, must reasonably show to the Bishop that they need as much as they claim. But in case the two parties cannot come to a mutual agreement, the Bishop is to have nothing to do about receiving such consecrations; and the case must be laid before a council of twelve High Priests, the Bishop not being one of the council, but he is to lay the case before them" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:364-65).

Those whom he has chosen. Bishop Partridge had chosen Isaac Morley and John Corrill to serve as his counselors. They were set apart on 6 June 1831.

Every man equal according to his family. No two families have exactly the same needs. In the division of properties, the number of children in a family, as well as the ages and abilities of the children, are taken into consideration. A farmer would receive farm land as his stewardship; a printer, a printing office; a tanner, a tannery; and a businessman, a mercantile establishment (D&C 57:8, 11; 104:19-42). "And all this," reads a later revelation, "for the benefit of the church of the living God, that every man may improve upon his talent, that every man may gain other talents" (D&C 82:18). In this manner the needs of the poor were provided for and individuals were placed in a position in which they could supply their own wants and aid others in doing the same thing.

51:4 Give unto him a writing. A few of these writings have survived to our day. Most deeds which consisted of both printed and hand-written textgranted property, on the left-hand side, to "Edward Partridge, bishop of the Church." A description of the consecrated property followed in hand- written form. The deed stipulated that this transaction was "for the purpose of purchasing lands, and building up the New Jerusalem, even Zion, and for relieving the wants of the poor and needy." Where the name of the individual was written, it stated that they covenanted and bound themselves and their heirs forever, "to release all" their "right and interest in the above described property" (photocopy in Arrington, Building the City of God, 28).

The right-hand side of the document read, "Be it known that I, (Edward Partridge [name written by hand]) Of Jackson county, and state of Missouri, bishop of the church of Christ, organized according to law, and established by revelations of the Lord, on the 6th day of April, 1830, have leased, and by these present do lease unto [individual's name written by hand] of Jackson county, and state of Missouri, a member of said church, the following described piece or parcel of land . . . [description of property written by hand] to have and to hold the above property . . . And it is agreed by the parties that this lease and loan shall be binding during the life of the said [individual's name written by hand] unless he transgresses, and is not deemed worthy by the authority of the church, according to its laws, to belong to the church. And in that case I the said [individual's name written by hand] do acknowledge that I forfeit all claim to the above described leased and loaned property, and hereby bind myself to give back the leased, and also pay an equivalent for the loaned, for the benefit of said church" (photocopy in Arrington, Building the City of God, 29). Thus, the member leased the land and material goods as an individual stewardship, recognizing that the Church retained ownership of the property. Therefore, should an individual leave the Church, the Church held right to the leased land and loaned property.

51:5 Revelation is subject to clarification and adaptation to meet the needs of the Saints. For example, this verse reads differently in the Doctrine and Covenants than it does in the "Kirtland Revelation Book." Joseph Smith revised the original revelation in order to clarify the principles of the law of consecration. In the original text, Bishop Partridge was instructed to retain deeds for the Church to property consecrated by its members. It read thus:

"Wherefore let my servant Edward receive the properties of this people which have covenanted with me to obey the laws which I have given and let my servant Edward receive the money as it shall be laid before him according to the covenant and go and obtain a deed or article of this land unto himself of him who holdeth it 'if he harden not his heart for I have appointed him' to receive these things and thus through him the properties of the church shall be consecrated unto me" ("Kirtland Revelation Book", 87-88).

Accordingly, Edward Partridge, as bishop of the Church, was appointed the Lord's representative to receive property and money from the Saints that was to be used in purchasing land. Further, he divided inheritances among the Saints in Missouri by lending and leasing property to them. That is, Bishop Partridge held title to the land for the Church, but members received the leased land as a stewardship. If an individual left the Church after receiving property as a stewardship, the inheritance reverted back to the hands of the Church (v. 4). It was determined, however, that this practice did not accord with the law because individuals could not be deprived of property by a religious organization. Hence, the Prophet changed the instructions concerning the implementing of the deeded land.

"This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted," explained the Prophet, "by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 256). Consequently, principles of consecration were adapted to meet the circumstances of the Saints. In a letter to the Saints in Zion the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote, "On the subject of giving deeds, and receiving contributions from the brethren, I have nothing further to say on the subject than to recommend that you make yourselves acquainted with the commandments of the Lord, and the laws of the state, and govern yourselves accordingly" (History of the Church, 1:341).

The Saints Are to Deal Honestly and Establish a Storehouse

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 51:9-15

51:9 Let every man deal honestly. The seriousness of this command is illustrated in the account of the deceitful Ananias and his wife, Sapphira. As a member of the meridian-day Church, Ananias "sold a possession, and kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles' feet. But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land? Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. And Ananias hearing these words fell down, and gave up the ghost: . . . And the young men arose, wound him up, and carried him out, and buried him. And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in. And Peter answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yea, for so much. Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold, the feet of them which have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out. Then fell she down straightway at his feet, and yielded up the ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, carrying her forth, buried her by her husband. And great fear came upon all the church, and upon as many as heard these things" (Acts 5:1-11).

51:11 If another church. Reference is to another branch of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

51:13 Let the bishop appoint a storehouse unto this church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:34; 78:3.

51:15 A privilege of organizing themselves according to my laws. Man- made experiments and government programs forever fall short in their attempt to solve the problems associated with poverty and the economic inequality common to humanity. The Saints were given an opportunity to live in a society like that enjoyed by Enoch and his people. The Lord properly places his instructions regarding the law of consecration in the context of a blessing and a privilege.

Ohio Is to Be a Temporary Gathering Place

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 51:16-20

51:16 For a little season. Those who thought that Kirtland was the site of the city of the New Jerusalem learn here that this was not the case. Later, the Lord revealed that the Saints were to "retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland, for the space of five years." See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 64:20-21.

51:17 Act upon this land as for years. The work of the Lord should not be approached with tentativeness. Such an attitude inhibits both our faith and our actions. The Lord commanded the Saints to work with all their might, as if they were remaining in Ohio for years and not "a little season." The Saints from Colesville, New York, who settled the land in Thompson, followed the Lord's command. They cleared the land for farms and built homes, which were left behind when they traveled to Missouri. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 54.

51:18 This shall be an example. The instructions regarding the law of consecration were to serve as an example that would be implemented in other branches of the Church. "So it was not confined to any particular locality," explained Elder Lorenzo Snow, "but in that revelation [D&C 51] it was told the Bishop that this should be an example unto him in organizing in all Churches. So that wherever Edward Partridge should find a Church, he would have the privilege of organizing them according to the United Order, the Celestial Law, or the Order of Enoch" (Journal of Discourses, 19:344).
