Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 52

DATE: 7 JUNE 1831 (6 JUNE)

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

On 3 June 1831 the elders of Israel, then scattered throughout the country to declare the gospel, assembled in Kirtland for a priesthood conference. They came with the promise that the Lord would pour out his Spirit upon them (D&C 44:2). The minutes of the first day of the conference list sixty- two present and tell us that their time was spent in ordaining and giving exhortation. It was at this conference that men were ordained to the office of high priest for the first time in this dispensation. The conference lasted for three days. This revelation was given after the conference had concluded (whether that was June 6 or 7 is not entirely clear).

According to John Whitmer, who had been charged to keep the history of the Church, "The Spirit of the Lord fell upon Joseph in an unusual manner," and he prophesied many things. Having done so he "laid his hands upon Lyman Wight and ordained him to the High Priesthood, . . . after the holy order of God. And the Spirit fell upon Lyman and he prophesied concerning the coming of Christ (in Smith, History of the Church, 1:176 fn). For a consideration of the nature of the office of high priest see commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:29.

At this conference Brothers Lyman Wight, John Murdock, Reynolds Cahoon, Harvey Whitlock, and Hyrum Smith were ordained high priests by the Prophet. Lyman Wight in turn ordained Parley P. Pratt, Thomas B. Marsh, Isaac Morley, Edward Partridge, Joseph Wakefield, Martin Harris, Ezra Thayer, Ezra Booth, John Corrill, Samuel H. Smith, Solomon Hancock, Simeon Carter, Wheeler Baldwin, Jacob Scott, Joseph Smith Sr., John Whitmer, Joseph Smith Jr., and Sidney Rigdon, to the same office (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 7).

John Whitmer also notes that Joseph Smith said "that the man of sin would be revealed" at this conference. "While the Lord poured out His Spirit upon His servants," he noted, "the devil took a notion to make known his power. He bound Harvey Whitlock and John Murdock so that they could not speak, and others were affected but the Lord showed to Joseph, the seer the design of the thing; he commanded the devil in the name of Christ, and he departed, to our joy and comfort" (in Smith, History of the Church, 1:175, fn).

"In this conference much instruction was given by President Smith, who spake in great power, as he was moved upon by the Holy Ghost," recalled Parley P. Pratt, "and the spirit of power and of testimony rested down upon the Elders in a marvelous manner. Here also were some strange manifestations of false spirits which were immediately rebuked" (Autobiography, 68).

The Next Conference of the Church to Be in Missouri

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 52:1-2

52:2 Missouri. This is the first reference to the state of Missouri in the revelations of the Restoration. In September 1830 the Lord had stated that no man knew the place where the city of Zion would be built but that it would be located on the "borders by the Lamanites" (D&C 28:9). This revelation tells us it would be in Missouri. Independence, Missouri, was identified as the center place of the city of Zion in a revelation received six weeks later on 20 July 1831 (D&C 57:1-3).

A remnant of Jacob. As used in scripture, the remnant of Jacob generally refers to the twelve tribes collectively. A remnant of Jacob could be any of the various scattered parts of Jacob's family. In this instance the reference is to the descendants of Lehi, who was a rightful heir of all the promises made by God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (D&C 19:27).

Heirs according to the covenant. All of Abraham's seed are heirs according to the covenant. They have a right to all the promises made to their ancient father on condition of righteousness. "I give unto thee a promise," the Lord told Abraham, "that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abraham 2:11). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 86:8-11.

Elders Assigned to Travel Together

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 52:3-8

52:3-4 The revelation necessary for us to accomplish what we have been commanded to do will in most instances come as we proceed, not before. Echoing the same principle, Nephi said, "I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do" (1 Nephi 4:6).

52:7 Lyman Wight. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 103:29-40; 124:18, 62-83.

John Corrill. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 50:38.

52:8 John Murdock. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 99.

The Elders to Declare What the Apostles and Prophets Have Written

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 52:9-13

52:9 Some have suggested that those commissioned to teach the gospel should confine their teaching to holy writ. The present text does not sustain such an idea. Here, those going forth in the name of the Lord are directed to teach from the words of the prophets and apostles and "that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith." True gospel teachers begin with the declaration of scripture, which they then teach under the direction of the Spirit. With the aid of that same Spirit they apply their message to those they are teaching. In many instances the Spirit will then unfold additional light and understanding to them (Alma 5:43-49). The supposition that the Spirit cannot reach beyond what has already been revealed denies the prophetic spirit of their message and suggests that they do not enjoy its companionship.

The Pattern by Which Spirits Are Discerned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 52:14-21

52:14 A pattern in all things. The principles given here constitute a pattern or standard by which all who come professing to represent the Lord can be discerned.

52:15-21 Indecorous behavior is never attractive to the Spirit of the Lord, be it in prayer, preaching, music, or any other form. It is evident from the instructions given here that the irreverent spirit does not like to conform to the ordinances of the Lord. Ordinances here means all divine standards, not simply such rituals as baptism and receipt of the priesthood. If the spirit is good, the fruits will be good; they will always edify and be associated with dignity, purity, and modesty. Those spirits will always maintain the discipline associated with a house of order and can be trusted to conform to the pattern and standard of scripture.

Saints Are Expected to Provide for Their Own Needs

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 52:22-44

52:39 Let them labor with their own hands that there be no idolatry nor wickedness practised. It has ever been the practice among the true servants of the Lord to provide for themselves. In the Lord's Church there is no paid ministry, no professional clergy, as commonly found in other churches. More significantly there is no laity, for all are expected to serve. Under normal circumstances, all active members of the Church expect to serve in whatever capacity or position to which they are called by those whom they have sustained as their leaders.
