Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 53

DATE: JUNE 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation illustrates the propriety of our inquiring of the Lord as to where he would have us serve. Though we do not seek particular callings or positions in the Church, we should seek to serve. Often the kind of direction sought by Sidney Gilbert in this revelation is given to us in patriarchal blessingsa privilege not then available to him.

Sidney Gilbert Is Called to Be Ordained an Elder and as the Bishop's Agent

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 53:1-7

53:1 Concerning your calling and election in the church. Brother Gilbert was not among the many called at the Kirtland conference to serve as a missionary traveling to Zion (D&C 52). Naturally, when he learned that others received instructions regarding their service, he wondered where he was to serve. Hence, the Prophet recorded that "at the request of Algernon Sidney Gilbert I inquired, and obtained the following" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:179). By revelation Elder Gilbert was directed to accompany the Prophet as he journeyed to Zion (D&C 53:5).

53:2 Crucified for the sins of the world. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19:16-17.

Forsake the world. To "forsake the world" is to forsake that which is worldly, not to shun relationships with those of the world as the Jews did anciently. We have been called to be a light and an example to all who have not yet embraced the gospel. We can do this only as we interrelate with such individuals.

53:5 Edward Partridge and Martin Harris had been commanded to go to Missouri with Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon (D&C 52:24). Soon after this revelation was received, W. W. Phelps was also called to travel in company with this group (D&C 55:5).

53:6 The first ordinances. Instructions of the Lord are commandmentsas in city ordinances or laws. In this instance the Lord commanded that Sidney Gilbert be ordained an elder and travel with the Prophet to Zion, where he would be given an appointment by Bishop Partridge.
