Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 54

DATE: JUNE 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Though this revelation was given to Newel Knight, it was intended for all those who were a part of the branch of the Church in Thompson, Ohio. This same group of people had joined the Church together in Colesville, New York, and had responded to the commandment to go to Ohio. Having settled in Thompson, they were directed by revelation to embrace the law of consecration and receive their stewardships as noted in section 51. Problems grew out of their effort to do so. It appears that pettiness and selfishness hindered their efforts. Although the full story has not been preserved, it appears that a recent convert from the Shakers by the name of Leman Copley, who owned a large tract of land in Thompson, became disaffected with the Church and returned to the Shakers. When he did so he demanded the return of his property and expelled the Saints who were living on it. Joseph Knight Jr. recalled, "The man was turned out of the church for bad conduct; . . . he then began to persecute us and we had to leave his farm and pay sixtey dollars damage for putting up his houses and planting his ground" (as quoted in Porter, "Colesville Branch," 383).

The Saints Must Keep the Gospel Covenant to Obtain Mercy

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 54:1-6

54:2 Newel Knight had been called to preside over the Saints at Thompson. Difficulties in the branch caused him to wonder if he ought to be released. Here the Lord tells him to stand in the office to which he was appointed.

54:4-5 Salvation is found in keeping the covenants we make with the Lord and is lost in breaking them. Here Leman Copley broke his covenants with the Church, returned to the Shakers, and expelled from their homes the Saints who had been given inheritances on his land. Of such a course, the Lord said, "It had been better for him that he had been drowned in the depth of the sea."

The Saints Must Be Patient in Tribulation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 54:7-10

54:7-8 At least twelve families, composed of twenty-three adults and thirty-nine children, took their journey from Thompson to Missouri (Porter, "Study of the Origins," 299-303). In so doing they became the first community of Saints to travel to the land of Zion.

54:9 Seek ye a living like unto men. The Thompson Saints were to stop living the law of consecration. They were to provide for themselves until directed otherwise.
