Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 55

DATE: JUNE 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

"About the middle of June, while we were preparing for our journey to Missouri," wrote Joseph Smith, "William W. Phelps and his family arrived among us'to do the will of the Lord,' he said: so I inquired of the Lord concerning him and received the following" (History of the Church, 1:184-85).

William Wines Phelps, born 17 February 1792, at Hanover, New Jersey, became interested in the message of the Restoration while residing in Canandaigua, New York, about twelve miles south of Palmyra. His interest in the Book of Mormon led him to purchase a copy in April of 1830. He read the book and was convinced of its truthfulness. His further investigation of the Restoration took him to Ohio with the intent of becoming a member of the Church.

Previous to this time he was very involved in politics as editor of a partisan newspaper. He had sought nomination of the Anti- Mason Party for the office of lieutenant governor of the state of New York. Concerning the influence that he had in the Church, historian Bruce Van Orden observed: "Excluding Sidney Rigdon, W. W. Phelps was the most publicly well- known convert to the early Church. However, unlike Elder Rigdon, his contributions to the Kingdom of God were not for just a few years, but lasted throughout his life. As editor of The Evening and the Morning Star and as a frequent contributor to other Church publications (Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, the Times and Seasons, and the Deseret News) and also as a powerful orator, Brother Phelps was one of the most influential early exponents of LDS doctrines and practices. No one was better educated and more articulate than he in the early days of the Church" ("By That Book," 204).

W. W. Phelps Is Called and Chosen to Be Baptized, Ordained an Elder, and Preach the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 55:1-3

55:1-3 The singular privilege is here accorded to W. W. Phelps, a nonmember of the Church, of having the Prophet inquire of the Lord in his behalf. This revelation comes in response to that request. W. W. Phelps is told to be baptized and receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Thus the revelation, like many given under the hands of priesthood leaders, personalizes principles that apply to all accountable persons. The same message would be given to any honest truth seeker who in like manner sought a revelation from the Lord through the living oracle of his or her day.

W. W. Phelps is then told that he will be ordained an elder and called to preach the principles he has complied with, namely faith, repentance, baptism, and the receipt of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands.

55:1 Thou art called and chosen. In modern revelation the Lord confirms the doctrine of his ancient apostles, speaks of our "calling and election in the church" (D&C 53:1; 55:1), and declares that we "are called" to his "everlasting gospel" (D&C 101:39). He names the elders of his Church as among those "whom he hath called and chosen in these last days" (D&C 52:1; 41:2).

Because all are foreordained to gain exaltation and because no man can be exalted without the priesthood, it is self- evident that worthy brethren were foreordained to receive the priesthood. Alma taught that those who were ordained high priests in this life were "called and prepared from the foundation of the world according to the foreknowledge of God" (Alma 13:3). Joseph Smith declared, "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world," which could include all who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, "was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365).

He Is Also to Write Books for Children in Church Schools

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 55:4

55:4 The work of printing. Previous to joining the Church, Brother Phelps worked as editor of three newspapers and was familiar with printing.

Schools in this church, that little children also may receive instruction. This is the first reference in the revelations of the Restoration to Church schools. Ignorance and the gospel of Jesus Christ are incompatible, and the necessity of the Church to teach its membersparticularly the childrenwill ever be with it. Many revelations would follow that dealt with this subject (D&C 88:77-80, 118, 127; 90:7, 13-15; 93:53; 95:17; 97:3-5; 109:7-8; 130:18-19).

The importance of teaching children to read and write was revealed during the translation of the Bible. "A book of remembrance was kept, in the which was recorded, in the language of Adam, for it was given unto as many as called upon God to write by the spirit of inspiration; and by them their children were taught to read and write, having a language which was pure and undefiled" (Moses 6:5-6).

President Joseph F. Smith taught, "The object, I may say almost the only purpose, for the maintenance of Church schools is that true religion and undefiled before God the Father, may be inculcated in the minds and hearts of our children while they are getting an education, to enable the heart, the soul and the spirit of our children to develop with proper teaching, in connection with the secular training that they receive in schools" (Gospel Doctrine, 353).

In the first edition of The Evening and Morning Star, the Church-owned newspaper in Independence, Missouri, William W. Phelps, as editor of the paper, wrote: "The disciples should lose no time in preparing schools for their children, that they may be taught as is pleasing unto the Lord, and brought up in the way of holiness. Those appointed to select and prepare books for the use of schools, will attend to that subject as soon as more weighty matters are finished. But the parents and guardians in the Church of Christ need not waitit is all- important that children to become good should be taught [good]. Moses, while delivering the words of the Lord to the congregation of Israel, that is, to the parents, says, 'And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart: and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.' If it were necessary then to teach their children diligently, how much more necessary is it now, when the Church of Christ is to be an ensign, yea, even an ensample to the world, for good? A word to the wise ought to be sufficient, for children soon become men and women. Yes, they are they that must follow us, and perform the duties which not only appertain to this world, but to the second coming of the Savior, even preparing for the Sabbath of creation, and for eternity" (as quoted in Smith, History of the Church, 1:276-77).

He Is to Travel to Missouri, Which Will Be the Area of His Labors

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 55:5-6

55:5 W. W. Phelps was informed that his work would be in the soon-to-be designated site of latter-day Zion. His journey to Kirtland, Ohio, to be baptized was only the beginning of his travels. Once he put his hand to the plow there was to be no turning back. His talents were needed in Independence, Missouri, where he would become editor for the Church newspaper, The Evening and the Morning Star, and where he would be called to supervise the printing of the revelations to be published as the Book of Commandments (D&C 57:11).
