Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 56

DATE: JUNE 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Ezra Thayre (see commentary on D&C 33:1) was commanded to consecrate his property and travel to the western borders of Missouri with Thomas B. Marsh (D&C 52:22). He refused to leave until he had received compensation for his property, thus leaving Thomas B. Marsh without a companion. Elder Marsh inquired of the Prophet about what he should do. The Prophet said, "I inquired of the Lord, and received the following . . . " (Smith, History of the Church, 1:186).

The Lord Commands and Revokes, and the Disobedient Are Cast Off

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 56:1-13

56:1-2 Salvation comes to those who obey the word of the Lord. Mere confession of the Lord's name has never led to the faith unto repentance required for a forgiveness of sins. True faith in Christ leads to obedience and willingness to sacrifice for the kingdom of God. In this manner true Saints follow the Savior in taking up their cross, looking to his example.

56:4 I, the Lord, command and revoke, as it seemeth me good. The Lord explained, "I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing" (D&C 58:32). To illustrate, the children of Israel were commanded to posses the land of Canaan. They feared the people of the land and their mighty walled cities as reported by the spies sent to scout Canaan. In their rebellion "all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: . . . and they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt" (Numbers 14:2, 4). Because of the Israelites' rebellion, the Lord revoked his command that they enter the Promised Land. Instead the Lord commanded that they wander in the wilderness for forty years until the rebellious generation had all died. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 124:49-55.

56:5-10 New commands are given to compensate for and adjust to the consequences of the choices made by the rebellious who have failed to fulfill their responsibilities. Accordingly, the innocent and repentant are given new assignments within the Lord's vineyard. In this instance, the mission assignments of four individualsThomas B. Marsh, Ezra Thayre, Newel Knight, and Selah J. Griffin are revised. In an earlier revelation, Thomas B. Marsh had been called to journey to Missouri with Ezra Thayre (D&C 52:22). Similarly, Newel Knight and Selah J. Griffin had been called to take their journey together as missionary companions (D&C 52:32). After Ezra Thayre's failure to prepare to leave in a timely manner and following the problems in the branch in Thompson, Ohio, over which Newel Knight presided, the Lord assigned Thomas B. Marsh to travel with Selah J. Griffin. Newell Knight was called to lead the Thompson Saints in their journey to Missouri. Ezra Thayre was left to determine whether he would join the Saints in Missouri or separate himself from the Church.

56:8 The former commandment which I have given him. The "former commandment" concerning farms in the Kirtland, Ohio, area was recorded in the "Kirtland Revelation Book." This revelation was not chosen for publication in the Book of Commandments or in the Doctrine and Covenants. It reads as follows:

"Hearken unto my words and behold I will make known unto you what ye shall do as it shall be pleasing unto me for verily I say unto you it must needs be that ye let the bargain stand that ye have made concerning those farms until it be so fulfilled behold ye are holden for the one even so likewise thine advisary is holden for the other. Wherefore it must needs be that ye pay no more money for the present time until the contract be fulfilled and let mine aged servant Joseph and his family go into the house after thine advisary is gone and let my servant Ezra board with him and let all the brethren immediately assemble together to put up an house for my servant Ezra and let my servant Fredericks family remain and let the house be prepared and their wants be supplied and when my servant Frederick returns from the west behold and lo he desireth to take his family in mine own due time unto the west let that which belongeth unto my servant Frederick be secured unto him by deed or bond and thus he willeth that the brethren reap the good thereof let mine aged servant Joseph govern the things of the farm and provide for the families and let him have help in as much as he standeth in need. Let my servant Ezra humble himself and at the conference meeting he shall be ordained unto power from on high and he shall go from thence (if he be obedient unto my commandments) and proclaim my gospel unto the western regions with my servants that must go forth even unto the borders by the Lamanites for behold I have a great work for them to do and it shall be given unto you to know what ye shall do at the conference meeting even so amen.

"What shall the brethren do with the monies. Ye shall go forth and seek diligently among the brethren and obtain lands and save the money that it may be consecrated to purchase lands in the west for an everlasting inheritance even so Amen" ("Kirtland Revelation Book", 91-92).

It is clear from this unpublished revelation that Ezra Thayre's concern did not regard the land in Thompson, Ohio, as has been commonly thought (see heading to this section in the current edition of the Doctrine and Covenants). Rather, it involved property in Kirtland, Ohio, upon which homes were located and in which the families of Joseph Smith Sr. and Frederick G. Williams resided.

Wo unto the Rich Who Will Not Help the Poor, and Wo unto the Poor Whose Hearts Are Not Broken

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 56:14-20

56:14 You seek to counsel in your own ways. The Nephite prophet Jacob declared: "O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish" (2 Nephi 9:28).

56:15 Pleasure in unrighteousness. This phrase comes from Paul's epistle to the Thessalonians. Speaking to those who "received not the love of the truth," Paul said that "God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness" (2 Thessalonians 2:10-12).

56:16 Many are blinded by the deceitfulness of riches. Speaking to Joseph Smith, the Lord said: "There are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen? Because their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world" (D&C 121:34-35). To a wealthy young ruler who kept the laws of God, Christ said: "Yet lackest thou one thing: sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me. And when he heard this, he was very sorrowful: for he was very rich. And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful, he said, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God" (Luke 18:22-25). In the Joseph Smith Translation the text reads, "It is impossible for them who trust in riches, to enter into the kingdom of God; but he who forsaketh the things which are of this world, it is possible with God, that he should enter in" (JST Luke 18:27). Riches, like talents, are given to us to share with others. The law of consecration revealed in the restoration of the gospel helps protect the Saints from the love of riches and teaches that this world's goods are to be used "to do goodto clothe the naked, and to feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted" (Jacob 2:19).

Your riches will canker your souls. Like slow-working poison, riches may rob individuals of eternal life. Jacob warned: "Wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their god. And behold, their treasure shall perish with them also" (2 Nephi 9:30).

The harvest is past. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:2.

56:17 The poor who have their hearts set upon the riches that they wish they possessed are also in danger of losing their souls. King Benjamin taught, "I say unto the poor, ye who have not and yet have sufficient, that ye remain from day to day; I mean all you who deny the beggar, because ye have not; I would that ye say in your hearts that: I give not because I have not, but if I had I would give. And now, if ye say this in your hearts ye remain guiltless, otherwise ye are condemned; and your condemnation is just for ye covet that which ye have not received" (Mosiah 4:24-25).

56:20 Their generations shall inherit the earth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:17.
