Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 57

DATE: 20 JULY 1831

PLACE: ZION, JACKSON COUNTY, MISSOURI

"On the 19th of June," wrote the Prophet Joseph Smith, "in company with Sidney Rigdon, Martin Harris, Edward Partridge, William W. Phelps, Joseph Coe, Algernon S. Gilbert and his wife, I started from Kirtland, Ohio, for the land of Missouri, agreeable to the commandment before received, wherein it was promised that if we were faithful, the land of our inheritance, even the place for the city of the New Jerusalem, should be revealed. We went by wagon, canal boats, and stages to Cincinnati. . . . We left Cincinnati in a steamer, and landed at Louisville, Kentucky, where we were detained three days in waiting for a steamer to convey us to St. Louis. At St. Louis, myself, Brothers Harris, Phelps, Partridge and Coe, went by land on foot to Independence, Jackson county, Missouri, where we arrived about the middle of July, and the rest of the company came by water a few days later. . . .

"The meeting of our brethren, who had long awaited our arrival, was a glorious one, and moistened with many tears. It seemed good and pleasant for brethren to meet together in unity. But our reflections were many, coming as we had from a highly cultivated state of society in the east, and standing now upon the confines or western limits of the United States, and looking into the vast wilderness of those that sat in darkness; how natural it was to observe the degradation, leanness of intellect, ferocity, and jealousy of a people that were nearly a century behind the times, and to feel for those who roamed about without the benefit of civilization, refinement, or religion; yea, and exclaim in the language of the Prophets: 'When will the wilderness blossom as the rose? When will Zion be built up in her glory, and where will Thy temple stand, unto which all nations shall come in the last days?'" (History of the Church, 1:188-89).

These questions couched in the imagery of the prophets bring to mind the words of Isaiah wherein he said, "The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose" (Isaiah 35:1); "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee" (Isaiah 60:1); "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it" (Isaiah 2:2).

Joseph Smith's question concerning the location of the latter-day temple is addressed in this section. The other two questions are answered in Doctrine and Covenants 58.

Independence, Missouri, Is the Place for the City of Zion and the Temple

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 57:1-3

57:1-2 The land for the city of Zion, or the New Jerusalem, was set apart from the time of the creation of the earth. The land near Independence, Missouri, encompasses the area of the garden planted eastward in Eden, in which Adam and Eve were placed. We learn from Brigham Young that "our God will finish his work where he commenced it, where the centre [place] of Zion is, and where the garden of Eden was" (Journal of Discourses, 8:72).

57:2 The city of Zion. The city of Zionthe New Jerusalem to be built in Independence, Missouri and the Jerusalem of old will be the capitals of the millennial kingdom of Christ. The latter-day city of Zion shall be blessed with the presence of Enoch and his people, who were taken to heaven without tasting death (Moses 7:62-64). It shall expand its borders to include all of North and South America, until eventually the entire globe shall be called Zion. The Prophet Joseph Smith stated: "You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 362). Further, "when Joseph first revealed the land where the Saints should gather," Brigham Young explained, "a woman in Canada asked if we thought that Jackson County would be large enough to gather all the people that would want to go to Zion. I will answer the question really as it is. Zion will extend, eventually, all over this earth. There will be no nook or corner upon the earth but what will be in Zion. It will all be Zion" (Journal of Discourses, 9:138). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 133:21.

The building up of Zion began like a seed planted in parched soil. The Prophet expressed dismay at the lack of civilization and "leanness of intellect" of the inhabitants of the surrounding regions. As the kingdom of God on earth is like the stone cut out of the mountain without hands (Daniel 2:44-45), which rolled forth until it filled the earth, so is the beginning of the establishment of Zion the commencement of a new covenant community that will likewise fill the earth, in which the citizens are the pure in heart. A great change was and is required for the environs of Independence, Missouri, to become worthy of the divinely appointed appellationZion. In time, under the direction of his prophets, the city of Zion will be built upon the foundations laid at the dawn of this dispensation. It will be "Zion, because it is a place of righteousness," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and all who build thereon, are to worship the true and living Godand all believe in one doctrine, even the doctrine of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 80).

57:3 Independence is the center place. There are many stakes in Zion in which the Saints will gather. However, the Lord singled out Independence, Missouri, as the center place of the millennial kingdom. Bruce R. McConkie taught: "Let Israel gather to the stakes of Zion in all nations. Let every land be a Zion to those appointed to dwell there. Let the fulness of the gospel be for all the saints in all nations. Let no blessing be denied them. Let temples arise wherein the fulness of the ordinances of the Lord's house may be administered. But still there is a center place, a place where the chief temple shall stand, a place to which the Lord shall come, a place whence the law shall go forth to govern all the earth in that day when the Second David reigns personally upon the earth. And that center place is what men now call Independence in Jackson County, Missouri, but which in a day to come will be the Zion of our God and the City of Holiness of his people. The site is selected; the place is known; the decree has gone forth; and the promised destiny is assured" (New Witness, 595). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:9.

The temple. Among all houses of the Lord, the temple to be built at the center place of Zion will stand supreme. It is destined to consist of a complex of twenty- four buildings, all dedicated as houses of the Lord. The Lord revealed that the gathering to and building of the city of the New Jerusalem will have its beginning at the place of the temple (D&C 84:4). Along with the companion temple to be built in the Jerusalem of old, this is the temple in which Isaiah's words will find fulfillment: "And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem" (Isaiah 2:2-3). Further, it is at the temple in the New Jerusalem that "the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads" (D&C 133:18). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 133:7-16, 18.

The twenty-four buildings aforementioned were located on a plot map of the future city of Zion. Joseph Smith wrote: "The names of the temples to be built on the painted squares as represented on the plot of the city of Zion, which is now about to be forwarded thither:numbers 10, 11, and 12, are to be called, House of the Lord, for the Presidency of the High and most Holy Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of the Son of God, upon Mount Zion, City of the New Jerusalem. Numbers 7, 8, and 9, the Sacred Apostolic Repository, for the use of the Bishop. Numbers 4, 5, and 6, the Holy Evangelical House, for the High Priesthood of the Holy Order of God. Numbers 1, 2, and 3, the House of the Lord, for the Elders of Zion, an Ensign to the Nations. Numbers 22, 23, and 24, House of the Lord for the Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the Order of Aaron, a Standard for the People. Numbers 19, 20, and 21, House of the Lord, the Law of the Kingdom of Heaven, and Messenger to the People; for the Highest Priesthood after the Order of Aaron. Numbers 16, 17, and 18, House of the Lord for the Teachers in Zion, Messenger to the Church. Numbers 13, 14, and 15, House of the Lord for the Deacons in Zion, Helps in Government. Underneath must be written on each houseHoliness To The Lord" (History of the Church, 1:359). The Prophet Joseph Smith further instructed the Saints to commence by building temple number five as the beginning of the city of Zion, which temple was very similar to that built in Kirtland, Ohio (History of the Church, 1:359-62). Whether the other buildings will be built before or after the Savior returns remains to be revealed.

The Saints Are to Purchase Lands and Receive Inheritances in That Area

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 57:4-7

57:4 The land should be purchased by the saints. The earth "and all things therein are mine," declared the Lord (D&C 104:14). He has rightful title to the land of Zion. However, the Saints are peacemakers, who obey the laws of the land. They are to obtain legal deed to the lands, which will enable them to build up the city of Zion as they "carefully gather together, as much in one region as can be, consistently with the feelings of the people" (D&C 105:24).

"Here we pause for a moment," wrote the Prophet Joseph Smith at a later time, "to make a few remarks upon the idea of gathering to this place. It is well known that there were lands belonging to the government, to be sold to individuals; and it was understood by all, at least we believed so, that we lived in a free country, a land of liberty and of laws, guaranteeing to every man, or any company of men, the right of purchasing lands, and settling, and living upon them: therefore we thought no harm in advising the Latter-day Saints, or 'Mormons,' as they are reproachfully called, to gather to this place, inasmuch as it was their duty, (and it was well understood so to be,) to purchase, with money, lands, and live upon them, not infringing upon the rights of any individual, or community of people; always keeping in view the saying, 'Do unto others as you would wish others to do unto you;' following also the good injunction: 'Deal justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God.'

"These were our motives in teaching the people, or Latter- day Saints, to gather together, beginning at this place; and inasmuch as there are those who have had different views from this, we feel that it is a cause of deep regret. Be it known unto all men, that our principles concerning this thing, have not been such as have been represented by those who, we have every reason to believe, are designing and wicked men, that have said that this was our doctrine: 'To infringe upon the rights of a people who inhabit our civil and free country: such as to drive the inhabitants of Jackson County from their lands, and take possession thereof unlawfully.' Far, yea, far be such a principle from our hearts. It never entered into our minds; and we only say, that God shall reward such in that day when He shall come to make up His jewels" (History of the Church, 2:254-55).

The line running directly between Jew and Gentile. "This expression," wrote Joseph Fielding Smith, " . . . has reference to the line separating the Lamanites from the settlers in Jackson County. At this time the United States Government had given to the Indians the lands west of the Missouri, only later to take them away again. The Lamanites, who are Israelites, were referred to as Jews, and the Gentiles were the people, many of whom were of the lawless element, living east of the river" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:206).

57:5 Every tract bordering by the prairies. This phrase refers to the general area around Independence, Missouri, that was within the borders of the United States at that time. The land of western, central, and northern Missouri was covered with prairies.

57:7 Divide unto the saints their inheritance. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:17.

Sidney Gilbert, W.W. Phelps, and Oliver Cowdery Are Given Specific Callings

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 57:8-16

57:8-16 Authors Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl record that "as soon as this Revelation had been received, Edward Partridge and the other brethren, appointed to 'plant' themselves in Zion, began the work of building. During the first winter the settlers put up with many inconve niences. In some log cabins, without windows and with the frozen ground for floor, several families were living together. They had very little to eat, but they were united, and their hearts were filled with brotherly love and a fervent desire to build up Zion. As a consequence, their meetings were times of refreshing, and in their family devotions they were blessed with the presence of the Holy Spirit. And as soon as the Saints in Ohio and elsewhere learned that the site of the City of Zion had been made known, the spirit of gathering was poured out upon them, and many sent money to Sidney Gilbert, the agent, and instructed him to secure land for them. So rapidly did they gather, that in 1832 there were 830 souls in the new settlements, and a certain degree of prosperity had begun to attend their efforts" (Doctrine and Covenants Commentary, 331).

57:10 Those who sit in darkness and in the region and shadow of death. The reference is to spiritual darkness. The wording is similar to that employed by Isaiah in prophesying of the Messiah: "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined" (Isaiah 9:2). Various applications have been made of this text. Matthew saw the ministry of the Savior in Galilee as fulfilling Isaiah's words (Matthew 4:16). The Prophet Joseph Smith used this same phrase to refer to those who had died without receiving the fulness of the gospel. In A Vision, a poetical version of the visions revealing the qualifications and characteristics of those who will inherit the three kingdoms of glory, he wrote:

Behold, these are they that have died without law; The heathen of ages that never had hope, And those of the region and shadow of death, The spirits in prison, that light has brought up. (Times and Seasons, 4:84; see commentary on D&C 76)

57:13 Let my servant Oliver Cowdery assist him . . . to correct, and select, that all things may be right before me. Apostle George A. Smith, cousin to the Prophet, capsulated the importance of the Lord's admonition that Oliver Cowdery preside over Brother Phelps's writing and editorializing: "Joseph asked my opinion of W. W. Phelps as an editor. I told him that I considered Phelps the sixth part of an editor, and that was the satirist. When it came to the cool direction necessarily intrusted to an editor in the control of public opinionthe soothing of enmity, he was deficient, and would always make more enemies than friends; but for my part, if I were able, I would be willing to pay Phelps for editing a paper, providing no body else should have the privilege of reading it but myself. Joseph laughed heartilysaid I had the thing just right. Said he, 'Brother Phelps makes such a severe use of language as to make enemies all the time'" (in Smith, History of the Church, 5:390-91).

57:15 Reference here is particularly to members of the Colesville Branch, who traveled under the direction of Newel Knight. Obedient to the Lord's command that they relocate in Missouri (D&C 54:8), this group of Saints arrived in Independence 25 July 1831. Arrangements were made for them to settle near the Big Blue River in Jackson County, approximately twelve miles west of Independence.
