Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58

DATE: 1 AUGUST 1831

PLACE: ZION, JACKSON COUNTY, MISSOURI

Twelve days prior to this revelation, Joseph Smith identified the place of the New Jerusalem and the building of the great temple of the latter days that place being Independence, Missouri. Two days after this revelation was received, the Prophet dedicated the land for this purpose.

Introducing this revelation, he noted that "the first Sabbath after our arrival in Jackson county, Brother W. W. Phelps preached to a western audience over the boundary of the United States, wherein were present specimens of all the families of the earth; Shem, Ham and Japheth; several of the Lamanites or Indians representative of Shem; quite a respectable number of negroes descendants of Ham; and the balance was made up of citizens of the surrounding country, and fully represented themselves as pioneers of the West. At this meeting two were baptized, who had previously believed in the fulness of the Gospel.

"During this week the Colesville branch, referred to in the latter part of the last revelation, and Sidney Rigdon, Sidney Gilbert and wife and Elders Morley and Booth, arrived. I received the following" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:190-91).

Those Who Endure Tribulation Shall Be Crowned with Glory

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:1-5

58:2 Blessed is he that keepeth my commandments, whether in life or in death. Death is the temporary separation of the body and the spirit. The spirit goes to a world of spirits to await the day of resurrection, the inseparable union of body and spirit. These simple truths, lost to the Bible- believing world and restored to us in the Book of Mormon (Alma 40), bring with them the understanding that those who were prevented from complying with the full law of the gospel in this life will have that opportunity to do so in the worlds to come. Thus that world is an extension of the present world, to which the desires of our hearts follow us. Someone who kept the commandments here will keep them there. Those who loved light and truth here will love it there. Those who would have embraced the gospel here and valiantly defended the truth but died without the opportunity will have it there. Thus death enhances the righteous in the pursuit of godliness and grants light to all who desire to see the light.

58:3-5 These verses contain the Lord's answer to the Prophet's question as to when the wilderness would blossom as a rose and Zion be built up in her glory. The Lord knew that it would be "many years" before the Saints received inheritances in the land of Zion (D&C 58:44) and that only the path of tribulation would lead to the glory they sought. The Saints of the early 1830s could scarcely have conceived the ugly scenes that awaited them. Where the glory of heaven is destined to rest we can but expect the legions of the adversary to wage their best fight. See commentary on introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 57.

"In the true sense, the wilderness shall blossom as the rose when the earth is renewed and receives its paradisiacal glory. In the full sense, Zion shall regain her ancient glory, and attain that grandeur and might promised in the prophetic word, only during the Millennium, though the work of establishing Zion and building the New Jerusalem must precede our Lord's return. And as to the temple unto which all nations shall come in the last days, it shall be built in the New Jerusalem before the Second Coming, all as a part of the preparatory processes that will make ready a people for their Lord's return" (McConkie, New Witness, 595).

The Saints Are to Prepare for the Marriage of the Lamb and the Supper of the Lord

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:6-12

58:7 That you might be honored in laying the foundation. "The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith; "it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory, 'the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God will gather together all things that are in heaven, and all things that are upon the earth,' 'even in one,' when the Saints of God will be gathered in one from every nation, and kindred, and people, and tongue, when the Jews will be gathered together into one, the wicked will also be gathered together to be destroyed, as spoken of by the prophets; the Spirit of God will also dwell with His people, and be withdrawn from the rest of the nations, and all things whether in heaven or on earth will be in one, even in Christ. The heavenly Priesthood will unite with the earthly, to bring about those great purposes; and whilst we are thus united in one common cause, to roll forth the kingdom of God, the heavenly Priesthood are not idle spectators, the Spirit of God will be showered down from above, and it will dwell in our midst. The blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessing which they will realize; a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets; a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 231-32).

58:8 A feast of fat things, of wine on the lees well refined. "And in this mountain [Zion] shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things," wrote Isaiah, "a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined" (Isaiah 25:6). It is a gospel feast of which the ancient prophet wrote, a meal worthy to be placed before the children of a King, even the Eternal Father. Anciently, meats with abundant fats were the privilege of the rich who could graze their animals to be served at banquets. The use of jellies and preserves from wines were also the diet of the rich. Thus these images are used to represent the goodness or richness of the gospel message that is to be taken to the poor.

That the earth may know that the mouths of the prophets shall not fail. There is a unity of faith among the prophets. All have sworn allegiance to the same principles and the same standards. The gospel known to them is one and the same as the gospel revealed anew to us in this the dispensation of the fulness of all past dispensations. So it is that their faith is our faith, their doctrines our doctrines, their prophecies our prophecies. We look to see the words of all the prophets find fulfillment in the events of this the greatest of all gospel dispensations. We look to the Book of Mormon to prove that the Bible is true (D&C 20:11; 1 Nephi 13:39; 2 Nephi 3:11; JST Genesis 50:30-31). Further, we find the revelations of the Restoration to be the perfect evidence that the God of heaven is the same yesterday, today, and forever.

58:9-11 The gospel has always been taught on a priority basis. Here we are told that it is to go first to "the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble." That is, the gospel was destined to come forth in a nation that had sufficient natural resources and land to which the scattered remnants of Israel could gather and find means to provide for themselves, a place rich in the opportunity to learn and obtain wisdom, this so that it could in turn send forth missionaries by the tens and hundreds of thousands to others. In so doing, this great army of missionaries went first to the literate and comparatively rich nations of Europe, for here would be found a people capable of providing the stability and learning necessary to lay the foundations of the Church so that their sons and daughters could in turn go to other nations here described as the "poor, the lame, the blind, and the deaf." These, we are promised, will be lifted up, taught, and refined that they might then take their rightful place in the quorums of the priesthood and the leadership of the Church.

"For it shall come to pass," declared the Lord, "that which I spake by the mouths of my prophets shall be fulfilled; for I will consecrate of the riches of those who embrace my gospel among the Gentiles unto the poor of my people who are of the house of Israel" (D&C 42:39). Those that accept the gospel among the rich in all nations of the world are responsible to prepare the way for chapels and temples to be built in the lands of the poor; for the Book of Mormon to be translated and published in all languages; for missionaries to travel to the far reaches of the world empowered with the authority of the priesthood to baptize and administer the ordinances of the restored gospel. They are to see that the supper of the Lord is well prepared for the lame, the blind, and the deaf. Then the day will come when the Lord himself, who ministered to the poor and afflicted, will return to reign as King in equity and righteousness. In that millennial day, all will be one, partakers of his goodness.

58:11 Come in unto the marriage of the Lamb. This New Testament imagery has reference to the ushering in of the Messiah's millennial kingdom. The invitation extended by missionaries to enter into the covenant of baptism is in effect the invitation to attend the marriage feast of the Lamb.

Bishops Are Judges in Israel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:13-18

58:15 Blindness of heart. All true religion is a feeling. Describing the spirit of revelation, the Lord said, "I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart" (D&C 8:2). Again, the Lord has directed that his servants "speak the thoughts that I shall put into your hearts," with the attendant promise: "and you shall not be confounded before men" (D&C 100:5). To be insensitive to our feelings is to block the light and thus to reject the spirit of revelation.

58:17 A judge in Israel. Reference is to judges and officers that sat in the gates of the cities of ancient Israel. To them were brought the disputes and legal matters of the community, which they were to settle. Judges also taught the law of God to the Lord's people and instructed them in the ways of righteousness. Moses, the great judge among the Old Testament prophets, and his successor, Joshua, had the additional responsibility of dividing the land of Canaan among the various tribes of the house of Israel. The reception of the land of Canaan was in fulfillment of Abraham's covenant with God, wherein the Lord promised Abraham: "I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession" (Genesis 17:8). In this revelation the Lord restored the principle of receiving a land inheritance that was integral to the Abrahamic covenant. Bishop Edward Partridge filled a similar role to the ancient judges when Saints received inheritances at his hand. This land assignment also prefigured the day when the Saints will literally inherit the earth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:17.

The Saints Are to Obey the Laws of the Land

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:19-23

58:21-23 It is expected that Latter-day Saints will be obedient to the laws of the land. However, they are to hold forth the law received from Christ as an example to the governments of men. Hopefully, in this manner, they may influence the laws of respective nations to align more closely with the laws of God. Members of the Church are also encouraged to be actively involved in political processes, especially in areas where moral issues are concerned. "If this people live to the principles they have embraced," declared Brigham Young, "they will be capable of counseling the nations; for we build upon a just foundation, and our principles are truth, righteousness, and holiness. Let us stand by those principles until they crush out folly, . . . and we become teachers of wisdom to the nations" (Journal of Discourses, 7:66). See commentary on the Articles of Faith, page 1017.

Men Should Use Their Agency to Do Good

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:24-29

58:25 Let them bring their families to this land. Faith and sacrifice were required of all who came to the land of Zion. For example, members of Edward Partridge's family traveled from Ohio without the help of their father because of his duties in Missouri. Concerning their move to Zion, Emily Partridge, Bishop Partridge's daughter, wrote: "It seemed to him a very great undertaking for mother to break up her home and prepare for such a journey with a family of little children, without her husband to advise and make arrangements for her. For she was then young and inexperienced in such things. . . .

"The next season mother with her family started for Missouri, in a company of saints under the direction of W. W. Phelps and A. S. Gilbert. Mother must have had a great deal to try her on that journey that we as children knew nothing about. What little money she had with her to defray her expense, she was advised to put into the hands of W. W. Phelps and he cheated her out of it. We went down the Ohio River to Cincinnati in a keel boat. Then we took a steamboat and went up the Missouri River. It was on this boat that our provision chest was rifled and thrown over board. We saw it floating down stream and knew it at once. The lid was open and we could see that everything had been taken out but the papers that things were packed in. . . . When we were within about one hundred miles of our destination we met the ice coming down the river so thick that the boat could not proceed and we were forced to land at a place called 'Arrow Rock.' On the banks of the river there was a log cabin occupied by Negroes. There was two rooms, with no windows. The light was admitted through the open door, a common thing then in the negro cabins, and white folks too sometimes. These negroes let mother and Sister Morley have one room. There was about fifteen in number in both families. But there was a fire place in the room. We could have a good fire, and so keep from freezing. We remained here about two or three weeks, it being very cold weather. At the end of that time a large Kentucky wagon was procured and the two families and their effects were stowed into it and we started again for Independence. The weather was still very cold, so cold that we had to lay by again one day. That day my father and Brother Morley met us, and anybody that has been in like circumstances can understand how happy we were. . . . Whatever suffering and privation my mother had to endure she never murmured or complained, but rejoiced that she was counted worthy to endure tribulation for the Gospel's sake. She felt that she had enlisted in a good cause and she looked forward to the happy time that had been promised to the saints. Her religion compensated her for all the hardships she had to endure" ("Reminiscences," 8-9).

58:26 The desire to do that which is right and proper ought to be innate to the soul. "Virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light; mercy hath compassion on mercy" (D&C 88:40). To be devoid of such virtues is to be devoid of the Spirit. When we have been compelled to do a particular work, we typically do it according to the letter of the law, which "letter killeth"; but if our offering is freely given, that spirit will give it life (2 Corinthians 3:6). The virtue of all actions is in the motive behind them.

58:28 For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. The doctrine of agency finds place among the plain and precious things lost from the text of the Bible. In his inspired translation of the book of Genesis, Joseph Smith first learned about our premortal estate, the Grand Council in heaven, Lucifer's rebellion and his desire to destroy the gift of agency that God had given to all of his spirit children (Moses 4:1-4).

In a revelation received in September 1830, the Prophet learned that the Lord charged Adam to be an agent unto himself while in Eden (D&C 29:35). After the Fall, when Adam and Eve became parents, the Lord said, "It is given unto them to know good from evil; wherefore they are agents unto themselves" (Moses 6:56).

As an agent unto yourself, you have the power of self-action. That is, you determine how you are going to act or what you are going to do. In the dictionary of Joseph Smith's day, agency was defined as "exerting power" or the "state of being in action." An "agent" was defined as one "entrusted with the concerns of another." The dictionary cited as examples an attorney or a minister (Webster, Dictionary, 1828, s.v. "agent"). There is no hint or intimation that the word has anything to do with choosing or the freedom of choice.

Teaching this principle, Joseph Fielding Smith said: "I have heard people say, and members of the Church too, 'I have a right to do as I please.' My answer is: No, you do not. You haven't any right at all to do just as you please. There is only one right that you have, and that is to do just what I read to you: keep the commandments of Jesus Christ. He has a perfect right to tell us so. We have no right to refuse. I do not care who the man is; I do not care where he lives, or what he is when the gospel of Jesus Christ is presented to him, he has no right to refuse to receive it. He has the privilege. He is not compelled to receive it, because our Father in heaven has given to everyone of us, in the Church and out, the gift of free agency. That free agency gives us the privilege to accept and be loyal to our Lord's commandments, but it has never given us the right to reject them. Every man who rejects the commandments of our Father in heaven is rebellious" (Conference Report, April 1967, 120-21).

Scripture speaks of our being moral agents (D&C 101:78). A moral agent is someone who is obligated to act morally. To act morally is more than being moral. All infants are moral beings; they simply cannot do things that are wrong. They are not, however, moral agents because they do not have the power to act, the power to bring about change. The more mature the child, the greater his or her agency and ability to grow up into the power to act for himself, to make his own choices.

Similarly, as we grow in intelligencemeaning light and knowledgein obedience, and faith, our agency grows proportionately. To increase in faith and knowledge of spiritual things is at the same time to increase in agency. Thus, God becomes the perfect example of a moral agent. No one has a greater power to act in a responsible and moral manner than he does.

Salvation can be granted only to moral agents, for only moral agents have the ability to distinguish between right and wrong and they alone have the capacity to be righteous.

The Lord Commands and Revokes

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:30-33

58:33 I revoke and they receive not the blessing. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 56:4.

To Repent, Men Must Confess and Forsake Their Sins

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:34-43

58:35-36 The gathering to the New Jerusalem was under the direction of the bishop of Zion and reserved for those that consecrated their property and goods to the Lord. It was the Saints' inability to live this very law that prevented them from redeeming Zion in the 1830s. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:1-10.

58:41 He seeketh to excel. In this context, the wickedness of excelling is that one seeks to be better than another for praise. The principle of unity upon which Zion must be built is sacrificed for the aggrandizement of the individual.

58:42 I, the Lord, remember them no more. The power of the Atonement is infinite and eternal. Those that are cleansed in the blood of the Lamb have every vestige of sin removed from their souls. The Lord promised: "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool" (Isaiah 1:18). In essence, they are perfected in Christ, and it is as though they had never sinned. The repentant sinner may receive every blessing that the Father has prepared for his children.

58:43 He will confess them and forsake them. "No one can ever be forgiven of any transgression until there is repentance," taught Spencer W. Kimball, "and one has not repented until he has bared his soul and admitted his intentions and weaknesses without excuses or rationalizations. He must admit to himself that he has grievously sinned. When he has confessed to himself without the slightest minimizing of the offense, or rationalizing its seriousness, or soft- pedaling its gravity, and admits it is as big as it really is, then he is ready to begin his repentance; and any other elements of repentance are of reduced value, until the conviction is established totally, and then repentance may mature and forgiveness may eventually come" (Love Versus Lust, 10).

To forsake is more than to refrain from sinning. It includes a mighty change that leads the individual to forsake the sins in his heart as well as to change his behavior. Those who are unable to root the desire to sin out of their hearts are like Lot's wife, who was unable to forsake Sodom and continued to look back upon her previous life until she returned to meet her own destruction. Thus, those who speak of their former sins with any degree of longing or attitude of boasting are in bondage to their sins. They have not yet fully repented.

The Saints Are to Purchase Their Inheritance and Gather in Missouri

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:44-58

58:50 Sidney Rigdon wrote a description of the land, which was not acceptable to the Lord. Concerning Rigdon's efforts, the Lord revealed: "I, the Lord, am not pleased with my servant Sidney Rigdon; he exalted himself in his heart, and received not counsel, but grieved the Spirit; Wherefore his writing is not acceptable unto the Lord, and he shall make another; and if the Lord receive it not, behold he standeth no longer in the office to which I have appointed him" (D&C 63:55-56). Our present records do not contain any further description of the land written by him.

58:56 Let the work of the gathering be not in haste, nor by flight. These words were first given by the Lord to the prophet Isaiah (Isaiah 52:12) and later taught to the Nephites by the Savior (3 Nephi 21:29). Sad experience taught the Saints the wisdom of the Lord's counsel. Those members that gathered to Zion before they had consecrated their property and, in turn, received an inheritance from the bishop, created confusion and lacked the Spirit of the Lord necessary to build up Zion. Today, unwise zeal should not influence Saints to gather to Jackson County, Missouri. The proper course is to follow counsel from the president of the Church in gathering. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:4; 63:24.

58:57 "On the second day of August," wrote the Prophet Joseph Smith, "I assisted the Colesville branch of the Church to lay the first log, for a house, as a foundation of Zion in Kaw township, twelve miles west of Independence. The log was carried and placed by twelve men, in honor of the twelve tribes of Israel. At the same time, through prayer, the land of Zion was consecrated and dedicated by Elder Sidney Rigdon for the gathering of the Saints. It was a season of joy to those present, and afforded a glimpse of the future, which time will yet unfold to the satisfaction of the faithful" (History of the Church, 1:196).

John Whitmer, in his History of the Church, gave further details about that date from a statement of Oliver Cowdery's: "'On the second day of August, 1831, Rigdon stood up and asked, saying,

"'Do you receive this land for the land of your inheritance with thankful hearts from the Lord?'

"Answer from all: 'We do.'

"'Do you pledge yourselves to keep the law of God in this land which you never have kept in your own lands?'

"'We do.'

"'Do you pledge yourselves to see that others of your brethren who shall come hither do keep the laws of God?'

"'We do.'

"After prayer, he arose and said: 'I now pronounce this land consecrated and dedicated unto the Lord for a possession and inheritance for the Saints, and for all the faithful servants of the Lord to the remotest ages of time. In the name of Jesus Christ, having authority from Him. Amen'" (in Smith, History of the Church, 1:196, note).

Whitmer also recorded that on 3 August 1831, in obedience to these instructions, "eight elders, viz., Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Peter Whitmer Jr., Frederick G. Williams, Wm. W. Phelps, Martin Harris, and Joseph Coe, assembled together where the Temple is to be erected. Sidney Rigdon dedicated the ground where the city is to stand: and Joseph Smith Jr. laid a stone at the northeast corner of the contemplated temple in the name of the Lord Jesus of Nazareth. After all present had rendered thanks to the great ruler of the universe, Sidney Rigdon pronounced this spot of ground wholly dedicated unto the Lord forever: Amen" ("Book of John Whitmer," 11).

Ziba Peterson Is Reprimanded

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 58:59-65

58:60 Four days after the receipt of this revelation, which includes a reprimand to Ziba Peterson, he again "was reprimanded publicly at a conference of the Church, and he subsequently confessed in a satisfactory manner. . . . On 11 August 1831, Ziba married Rebecca Hopper. . . . Because the marriage came so soon after the reprimand, some wondered if the two events were related; however, there is no historical evidence to support the relationship" (Garrett, "Ziba Peterson," 30).
