Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 59

DATE: 7 AUGUST 1831

PLACE: ZION, JACKSON COUNTY, MISSOURI

The weeks preceding this revelation had been very eventful. The Prophet and his party had arrived in Jackson County, Missouri; by the spirit of revelation he had designated the site for the temple, held conferences with the Saints in the area of Independence, directed the dedication of the land of Zion for the gathering of the Saints, and the day that this revelation was received he spoke at the funeral of a dear Saint and personal friend, Polly Knight, the aged wife of Joseph Knight Sr., who had died the day before. This revelation was received on Sunday, which it identifies as the day of worship for the Saints. It restored the law of the Sabbath as it had been given to ancient Israel. It was by this ancient covenant that the Lord's people were always to be known.

The Faithful Saints in Zion Shall Be Blessed

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 59:1-4

59:1-2 These verses have reference to Sister Polly Knight, wife of Joseph Knight Sr. She had traveled to Missouri with the Saints of the Colesville Branch from Ohio. Elder B. H. Roberts explained: "Polly Knight's health had been failing for some time, according to a statement made by her son, Newel. She was very ill during her journey from Kirtland to Missouri. 'Yet,' says her son, 'she would not consent to stop traveling; her only, or her greatest desire was to set her feet upon the land of Zion, and to have her body interred in that land. I went on shore and bought lumber to make a coffin in case she should die before we arrived at our place of destination so fast did she fail. But the Lord gave her the desire of her heart, and she lived to stand upon that land'" (in Smith, History of the Church, 1:199 n). Concerning the day this revelation was received, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "I attended the funeral of Sister Polly Knight, the wife of Joseph Knight, Sen. This was the first death in the Church in this land, and I can say, a worthy member sleeps in Jesus till the resurrection" (History of the Church, 1:199).

59:4 With commandments not a few. This verse could have read, "with revelations not a few," because the words commandment and revelation were often used interchangeably. Thus the compilation of the Prophet's revelations was to be called the Book of Commandments (D&C 1:6), meaning the book of revelations. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 19.

Faithful Saints Are to Love and Serve the Lord and Keep His Commandments

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 59:5-8

59:5-9 This revelation not only reestablishes the law of the Sabbath for this dispensation but also reinstitutes the Decalogue, affirming that the Ten Commandments as given to Moses on Sinai were part of the higher law rather than the law of carnal commandments. As given in this dispensation, these commandments are as follows:

59:5 The true doctrine of worship is herein reiterated. We worship the Father in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ. The Savior taught the Samaritan woman, "True worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth" (John 4:23). All of God's children, the Son of Man included, are commanded to worship the Father. True worship is to emulate the life of the one worshipped. In this regard the plan of salvation is founded on the principle of worship, in which we do as our Heavenly Father did before us that we might become like him. "Our relationship with the Father is supreme, paramount, and preeminent over all others," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "He is the God we worship. It is his gospel that saves and exalts. He ordained and established the plan of salvation. He is the one who was once as we are now. The life he lives is eternal life, and if we are to gain this greatest of all the gifts of God, it will be because we become like him.

"Our relationship with the Father is one of parent and child. He is the one who gave us our agency. It was his plan that provided for a fall and an atonement. And it is to him that we must be reconciled if we are to gain salvation. He is the one to whom we have direct access by prayer, and if there were some needwhich there is notto single out one member of the Godhead for a special relationship, the Father, not the Son, would be the one to choose.

"Our relationship with the Son is one of brother or sister in the premortal life and one of being led to the Father by him while in this mortal sphere. He is the Lord Jehovah who championed our cause before the foundations of the earth were laid. He is the God of Israel, the promised Messiah, and the Redeemer of the world.

"By faith we are adopted into his family and become his children. We take upon ourselves his name, keep his commandments, and rejoice in the cleansing power of his blood. Salvation comes by him. From creation's dawn, as long as eternity endures, there neither has been nor will be any act of such transcendent power and import as his atoning sacrifice.

"We do not have a fraction of the power we need to properly praise his holy name and ascribe unto him the honor and power and might and glory and dominion that are his. He is our Lord, our God, and our King" (Sermons and Writings, 65). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:19.

Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. The love of God is the foundation for the purest form of worship. No one can have love for God fill his heart without also loving his fellowmen. The quality of our efforts to serve God and our treatment of others are a reflection of our feelings toward them. Anything less than a pure love of God, that empowers the soul to keep all of the commandments and to endure faithfully in tribulation, will not sustain an individual in the test of mortality to attain eternal life. Likewise, a love for our neighbors that falls short of esteeming them as ourselves will not kindle our kindest efforts in their behalf. Love for others must fill our hearts or, in the room that is left, the adversary will plant seeds of envy and selfishness. Further, and most important, our treatment of others is a measure of our love for God and his Son. The Savior declared, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me" (Matthew 25:40).

In the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt serve him. Our commandment is to worship the Father in the name of his Son.

59:6 Anything like unto it. When God placed Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, he told them that they could eat of the fruit of all the trees except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Of that tree he said, "Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die" (Genesis 3:3). Sin is born in the touching stage. We court or flirt with sin before we commit ourselves to it. For instance, we may seek the exact demarcation or definition of a sin so that we can push up as close to it as possible, thinking that we can touch without tasting. This becomes particularly dangerous in sexual transgression, where sins are often simulated with the idea that no offense has been given to the Spirit. This simply is not the case. Toying with sin, simulating sin, and defining sin in such a manner that one can effectually touch it while still feigning innocence are each sins which can be as harmful, or in some instances even more harmful, than the sin itself.

59:7 All true worship of God includes gratitude to him for the blessings he bestows upon us. "O how you ought to thank your heavenly King!" exclaimed King Benjamin. "I say unto you, my brethren, that if you should render all the thanks and praise which your whole soul has power to possess, to that God who has created you, and has kept and preserved you, and has caused that ye should rejoice, and has granted that ye should live in peace one with another I say unto you that if ye should serve him who has created you from the beginning, and is preserving you from day to day, by lending you breath, that ye may live and move and do according to your own will, and even supporting you from one moment to anotherI say, if ye should serve him with all your whole souls yet ye would be unprofitable servants. . . . In the first place, he hath created you, and granted unto you your lives, for which ye are indebted unto him. And secondly, he doth require that ye should do as he hath commanded you; for which if ye do, he doth immediately bless you; and therefore he hath paid you. And ye are still indebted unto him, and are, and will be, forever and ever" (Mosiah 2:19-21, 23-24).

By Keeping the Lord's Day Holy, the Saints Are Blessed Temporally and Spiritually

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 59:9-19

59:9 That thou mayest more fully keep thyself unspotted from the world. James identified keeping oneself unspotted from the world as part of pure and undefiled religion (James 1:27). The Lord herein reveals that true religion includes observance of the Sabbath daya holy day not a holiday a day set apart upon which we rest from the cares of the other six days to offer up our "oblations and sacraments" and renew our souls. Countless discussions have centered on what constitutes proper observance of the Sabbath. The true test is here given. That which keeps us "unspotted from the world" is in harmony with the law of the Sabbath; that which does not so distinguish us is not in harmony with the spirit of the day. Our dress, our speech, and our behavior on this day should be such that it attests that we are a covenant people who love and honor the Lord. Anything less than this is less than the standard which ought to be ours.

Go to the house of prayer. Saints are to assemble together on the Sabbath day in buildings set apart for worship of the Lord. To seek solace in nature or at home does not fulfill the command. The Saints are to gather together to partake of the sacrament and to instruct one another.

Offer up thy sacraments. Sacraments are sacred oaths or covenants. Anciently, a sacrament was a ceremony in which a soldier swore an oath of allegiance to his king. So it is in the realm of spiritual things; a sacrament is a ceremony associated with a covenant in which we pledge loyalty to Christ and the standards of his gospel. Thus a sacrament is a formal expression of commitment and loyalty to our divinely sent King.

In the sacrament prayers, we remember the atonement of Christ, that we were bought with a price, and that we have covenanted to take his name upon us, thus doing and saying those things which he would do or say (D&C 20:77, 79). By doing so we obtain the promise that we might always have his Spirit to be with us.

My holy day. This revelation was received on a Sunday, the first day of the week, thus settling the issue for Latter-day Saints as to what day should be for the day of worship. In the first dispensations of the gospel, the seventh day was set apart to recall that the Lord rested on that day from his labors of creation (Genesis 2:1-3). During the Mosaic dispensation, the Lord affirmed that his people were to worship on the seventh day as a remembrance of his goodness in delivering them from their Egyptian bondage (Deuteronomy 5:12-15). Following the resurrection of Christ, the Saints were directed by revelation to observe the Sabbath on the first day of the week in remembrance of the day upon which the Lord rose from the tomb. This revelation affirms that this practice is to continue among his people.

59:10 Pay thy devotions unto the Most High. True religion centers in a reverence of respect shown to God. Out of this comes an understanding of his nature and purpose. As he chooses to rest and renew himself on the seventh day, we too, being in his image and likeness, are commanded to do likewise.

59:11 It is not enough to set the Sabbath apart as a day to do good or live properly. Such works do not distinguish the Sabbath from any other day. Proper works and devotions should be the labor of the Saints at all times. There are no gospel principles that apply alone to the Sabbath day, yet this day should be devoted alone to this purpose.

59:12 Thou shalt offer thine oblations. An oblation is an offering given in service to God. It may be our time, talents, or other means. "Offer your whole souls as an offering unto [God]," admonished Amaleki (Omni 1:26). The Lord's day is a day to "turn away thy foot . . . from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honourable; and [thou] shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord" (Isaiah 58:13-14).

Confessing thy sins. The Sabbath is a day of reconciliation with the Lord and with any against whom we may have sinned. The Lord exhorts his Saints that not one Sabbath day should pass without making the wrongs of the week right. Most sins would not be grievous, if attended to immediately. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:43.

Public confession is appropriate when the transgression is public. If our transgression involved but one or a few people, then it would be to them that the confession would be made and to none others. If our action is an offense to the ward, our confession should in like manner be made to the ward. Transgressions that are sufficiently serious that they call in question our standing in the Church should be made to the appropriate ecclesiastical officer, normally the bishop. All sins should be confessed to our Father in Heaven. Sins not involving Church standing or other people need be confessed only to God.

59:13 Let thy food be prepared with singleness of heart. The heart is to be turned wholly to the Lord on his day. This is not a commandment precluding nice meals on the Lord's day, but rather that those that prepare meals and those that receive of the bounty of the Lord recognize the hand from whom all blessings flow. This was the practice of the meridian-day Church of whom we read, "And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart" (Acts 2:46).

That thy fasting may be perfect. Each Sabbath day is a day of fasting. This has no reference to abstaining from food. Rather, it refers to abstaining from the things of the world, including the good things of the world. Similar to the fact that we must eat good food to maintain the strength of the body, yet on occasions we fast from that nourishment; likewise, the Sabbath is a day to refrain from worldly activities regardless of how wholesome they may be. To justify participating in worldly activities on the Sabbath because they are good activities is to have an imperfect fast. The Savior's reference to doing well on the Sabbath day dealt with loosing spiritual burdens, healings by the power of God (Matthew 12:10-12; John 5:16-17, 21), and ultimately the resurrection during the great Sabbath of the earth the Millennium.

59:15 Do these things with thanksgiving. Observance of the Lord's day is a means by which we show our gratitude to the Lord. Children must be taught gratitude for all that is given them. Likewise, we as the children of God must render thanks to God for the many blessings received at his hand. See commentary on verse 21.

With cheerful hearts and countenances. The Lord's day should be the most joyful day of the week. The Saints are to gather together in joy and gladness, rejoicing in that which they have received at the hand of the Lord. The Sabbath should be a day of rest from worldly cares. Anciently, the Lord admonished his people to "call the sabbath a delight," a day to "delight thyself in the Lord" (Isaiah 58:13-14). True delight and joy comes from the peace of the Spirit, which is to be sought with particular attention on the Lord's day.

Not with much laughter, for this is sin. Activities that lead to excessive laughter are not appropriate on the Sabbath. The Spirit of God is available to those who are cheerful, yet thoughtful and reflective. Fits of laughter were part of the false influences thought to be bestowed by the Spirit of God in camp revivals during frontier days. Clearly, the Spirit of God does not inspire Saints to break into uncontrollable laughter. "But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance" (Galatians 5:22-23). Similarly, the brethren who attended the School of the Prophets were admonished to "cast away your . . . excess of laughter far from you" (D&C 88:69) and to "cease from all your light speeches, from all laughter" (D&C 88:121).

59:16-19 Sabbath observance is a principle with a promise. Those living this principle are promised a richness and prosperity that will not be known to others. Similarly, the Lord blessed ancient Israel, saying, "Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the Lord. If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely. And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land" (Leviticus 26:2-6).

The Saints Are to Acknowledge Their Blessings

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 59:20-24

59:20 Unto this end were they made to be used. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 104:17-18.

59:21 Confess not his hand in all things. "Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God," Moses warned the children of Israel, "in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day: lest when thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied; then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God" (Deuteronomy 8:11-14). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 59:7).
