Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 60

DATE: 8 AUGUST 1831

PLACE: ZION, JACKSON COUNTY, MISSOURI

The time arrived for the elders gathered in Missouri to return to Ohio. The Lord did not desire that they return with the same haste that they traveled to Missouri (D&C 58:63). The Prophet Joseph Smith recorded: "On the 8th, as there had been some inquiry among the Elders what they were to do, I received the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:201).

The Elders Are to Preach the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 60:1-9

60:2 They hide the talent which I have given unto them. The truths of the Restoration are not to be hoarded or hidden from others but shared freely. In this passage, reference is to the Savior's parable of the talents recorded in the New Testament. Three servants were given talents (pieces of money) to improve upon. Two were faithful in doubling the amount they received from their master. The third "went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money" (Matthew 25:18). The first two were blessed for their wisdom while the third was cursed for being a "wicked and slothful servant" (Matthew 25:26). The message to the elders in Missouri was that they must share the gospel and its saving ordinances with others or they would lose the blessings the gospel offers.

60:5 It mattereth not unto me. Apparently, the elders petitioned the Lord to know whether he desired that they construct canoes or purchase them for their return to Ohio. Our decisions in such situations do not matter to the Lord. "No answer is likely to come to a person who seeks guidance in choosing between two alternatives that are equally acceptable to the Lord," explained Elder Dallin H. Oaks. "Thus, there are times when we can serve productively in two different fields of labor. Either answer is right. Similarly, the Spirit of the Lord is not likely to give us revelations on matters that are trivial. I once heard a young woman in a testimony meeting praise the spirituality of her husband, indicating that he submitted every question to the Lord. She told how he accompanied her shopping and would not even choose between different brands of canned vegetables without making his selection a matter of prayer. That strikes me as improper. I believe the Lord expects us to use the intelligence and experience He has given us to make these kind of choices. When a member asked the Prophet Joseph Smith for advice on a particular matter, the Prophet stated: 'It is a great thing to inquire at the hands of God, or to come into His presence: and we feel fearful to approach Him on subjects that are of little or no consequence' (History of the Church, 1:339)" ("Revelation," 46). In a revelation given a few days later, the Lord emphasized that he expects the Saints to make some decisions "according to their judgments" (D&C 61:22).

60:7 Declare my word with loud voices, without wrath or doubting. The tone and approach taken in teaching the word of God is as important as the words uttered. The sacred responsibility of priesthood bearers is to teach the gospel as the Lord Jesus Christ taught it. The gospel is to be taught not in anger but rather with the voice of hope in the salvation made available through the atoning blood of Christ. Further, the voice of God is one of assurance, not uncertainty.

They Should Not Idle Away Their Time, nor Bury Their Talents

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 60:10-17

60:12-14 These verses concern the companionships of elders that were commanded to teach the people on their routes to Missouri from Ohio, who had not yet arrived in Jackson County.

60:13 Thou shalt not idle away thy time. Revelation and inspiration from the Lord often comes as we are in the midst of doing. A common cliché states: "The Lord cannot steer a parked car!" The meaning is that we are guided as we are going about the Lord's business. It is better to get off one's knees after pleading for divine direction and to go forward full of faith that revelation will come in our moment of need than to wait on our knees unwilling to budge until the heavens resound with answers. Nephi understood this principle of revelation. Regarding his attempt to obtain the brass plates, he declared, "I was led by the Spirit, not knowing beforehand the things which I should do. Nevertheless I went forth" (1 Nephi 4:6-7). Likewise, the Lord instructed the brother of Jared that he was to propose means to light the barges of the Jaredites rather than expect God to solve the problem of crossing the ocean in darkness (Ether 2:25).

60:14 Thou shalt speedily return, . . . not in haste. How can these elders return speedily but not in haste? Simply, get up and move, but do not move so quickly that you are too busy to teach people the gospel.

60:15 Shake off the dust of thy feet. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 24:15.
