Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 61

DATE: 12 AUGUST 1831

PLACE: MCILWAINE'S BEND, ON THE MISSOURI RIVER

John the Revelator saw in vision that in the last days destruction would be upon the waters (Revelation 8:8-11; 16:3-4). This same principle was revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith and his companions as they journeyed from Independence, Missouri, to Ohio in August 1831. They traveled in canoes on the Missouri River for two days, arriving near McIlwaine's Bend. "The canoe in which the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were riding ran into a tree lodged and bobbing in the river. The canoe was upset, and the occupants almost drowned. With this near tragedy, the party of eleven decided to . . . encamp" (Cook, Revelations, 96).

Regarding this experience, the Prophet Joseph Smith recorded, "On the 9th, in company with ten Elders, I left Independence landing for Kirtland. We started down the river in canoes, and went the first day as far as Fort Osage, where we had an excellent wild turkey for supper. Nothing very important occurred till the third day, when many of the dangers so common upon the western waters, manifested themselves; and after we had encamped upon the bank of the river, at McIlwaine's Bend, Brother Phelps, in open vision by daylight, saw the destroyer in his most horrible power, ride upon the face of the waters; others heard the noise, but saw not the vision.

"The next morning after prayer, I received the following" (History of the Church, 1:203-4). The Prophet then recorded the revelation that we now have as Doctrine and Covenants 61.

The Elders Returning to Ohio Were to Preach Along the Way

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 61:1-12

61:2 I . . . am merciful unto those who confess their sins. B. H. Roberts explained that "during the three days upon the river some disagreements and ill feeling had developed among the brethren and explanations and reconciliations had become necessary" (Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:262-63). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:42-43.

61:3 The inhabitants on either side are perishing in unbelief. This message reemphasizes the chastening the Lord gave these same elders before they departed from Independence, Missouri (D&C 60:1-9). They were in such a hurry that they neglected to raise the voice of warning to those people along their return route. Those who have received the fulness of the gospel have obligation to share the good news with others. The difficulties of mortality can be overwhelming, and "where there is no vision, the people perish" (Proverbs 29:18). The restored gospel provides the answers that give strength and purpose to life, but the work of the Restoration is vain if the people never hear the needed message because the Lord's servants are in a hurry to get home.

61:4 Good came of the elders' swift movement down the river because they were able to witness the power of the destroyer. Had that not been the case, the Lord might have intervened sooner to chastise them for their failure to teach the gospel along the way.

61:5 I, the Lord, have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the waters. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 61:14-16.

61:7 The errand referred to was to obtain a printing press, since W. W. Phelps had been appointed to serve as "a printer unto the church" (D&C 57:11).

The Waters Were Cursed by John, and the Destroyer Rideth upon Their Face

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 61:13-22

61:14-16 In the Creation God blessed the waters to bring life forth abundantly (Genesis 1:20). Such conditions will not continue as we draw nearer to the days alluded to in these verses. Apparently, John the Beloved has been involved in bringing to pass the vision he was shown concerning destruction of life in the waters. He wrote that he saw in vision "as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea became blood; and the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed. And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; and the name of the star is called Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter" (Revelation 8:8-11). There is no key given in scripture as to the details concerning the fulfillment of this destruction. Clearly, the devastating events are in the future.

61:17 I, the Lord, in the beginning cursed the land. This refers to the Lord's words to Adam after he partook of the forbidden fruit: "And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground" (Genesis 3:17-19).

I blessed it, in its time, for the use of my saints. The fulfillment of this promise has come a little at a time. The Prophet Joseph Smith and the Saints turned a virtual, mosquito- infested swamp along the Mississippi River into Nauvoo, the City Beautiful. Later, those pioneers who settled the barren regions of the western United States saw the desert "rejoice, and blossom as the rose" (Isaiah 35:1). In both instances the faith and determination of the Saints was blessed from on high. A future millennial day will see greater changes, "for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert. And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water" (Isaiah 35:6-7).

61:19 The destroyer rideth upon the face thereof. It is not clear if this destroyer is an angel of God or a devil. On other occasions when the destroyer is mentioned in scripture, he is a servant of God. For example, at the time of the first Passover in ancient Egypt, death was sent to all households that did not have the blood of a lamb upon their doorposts. But faithful Israelites were protected; the Lord promised them that he would "not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you" (Exodus 12:23). In our dispensation, when the Saints were being driven from Zion, the Lord declared, "Behold, the destroyer I have sent forth to destroy and lay waste mine enemies; and not many years hence they shall not be left to pollute mine heritage, and to blaspheme my name upon the lands which I have consecrated for the gathering together of my saints" (D&C 105:15). In a similar vein, "angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to" destroy the wicked (D&C 86:5). Likewise, the revelation given to John the Beloved, referred to in this section, mentions several angels who send plagues and calamities upon the earth (Revelation 8-10, 15-18). Given that the destroyer rides upon the waters by the Lord's decree, it seems likely that the being seen in vision by William W. Phelps was a servant of God.

On the other hand, Joseph Fielding Smith wrote concerning this decree, "These brethren, while encamped at McIlwaine's Bend on the Missouri, beheld the power of the destroyer as he rode upon the storm. One of that number saw him in all his fearful majesty, and the Lord revealed to the entire group something of the power of this evil personage. It may seem strange to us, but it is the fact that Satan exercises dominion and has some control over the elements. . . . Paul speaks of Satan as the 'prince of the power of the air.' (Eph. 2:2.) The Lord revealed to these brethren some of the power of the adversary of mankind and how he rides upon the storm, as a means of affording them protection. They were commanded to use judgment as they traveled upon these waters, and the saints coming to Zion were instructed to travel by land on their way up to Zion. Moreover, notwithstanding the great power of Satan upon the waters, the Lord still held command and he could protect his people whether on land or by water as they journeyed" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:224-25).

61:22 It mattereth not unto me. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 60:5.

Some Have Power to Command the Waters

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 61:23-29

61:23 The canal. Travel on the waterways was a common mode of transportation in the 1830s. "The canal" refers to man- made waterways in the state of Ohio. Canal barges were towed by teams of mules or horses moving at fewer than five miles an hour. The Prophet Joseph Smith and other Saints used the canal system to travel to Missouri.

61:27 Power to command the waters. The priesthood is God's power on earth. God may instruct his servants to command the elements in his name. Such power comes only to those with faith. For example, Jacob informs us that those in his day received this power. "We search the prophets," he declared, "and we have many revelations and the spirit of prophecy; and having all these witnesses we obtain a hope, and our faith becometh unshaken, insomuch that we truly can command in the name of Jesus and the very trees obey us, or the mountains, or the waves of the sea" (Jacob 4:6). Other examples are Enoch, at whose command "rivers of water were turned out of their course" (Moses 7:13), and Moses, who commanded the parting of the Red Sea. LeGrand Richards shared an example of one in the latter days who had power given to him over the waters: "You will recall that in the early days of the gathering of the Saints it was considered as good as an insurance policy when a company of Latter-day Saints embarked on a vessel crossing the Atlantic. I recall reading in my grandfather's diary of a time when the boat upon which he was sailing was in great jeopardy, so much so that the captain of the boat came to him and pleaded with him to intercede with the Lord in behalf of the boat and her passengers; and Grandfather, remembering that he had been promised that he should have power over the elements, walked out on the deck of the boat and raised his hands to high heaven and rebuked the sea and the waves, and they were immediately calmed, and the appreciation of the captain of the boat was so great that he offered him the use of his private quarters during the balance of the journey" (Conference Report, April 1941, 84). In all of these instances the priesthood bearer followed the Master, who "rebuked the winds and the sea" (Matthew 8:26).

Elders Are Held Responsible to Preach the Gospel to the Wicked

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 61:30-35

61:30-31 "At the time of this revelation, Cincinnati was only a village, yet it was like other western towns such as Independence, the gathering place of many who had been forced to flee from the larger cities because of the violation of the law. In all the border towns in that day wickedness to a very great extent prevailed" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:225).

61:34 They shall rid their garments. The sins of the wicked symbolically stain the garment of the priesthood bearer who does not warn the wicked to repent (Ezekiel 3:16-21). This principle is illustrated in the explanation of Jacob, son of Lehi. He indicated that he and his brother Joseph "did magnify our office unto the Lord, taking upon us the responsibility, answering the sins of the people upon our own heads if we did not teach them the word of God with all diligence; wherefore, by laboring with our might their blood might not come upon our garments; otherwise their blood would come upon our garments, and we would not be found spotless at the last day" (Jacob 1:19). President John Taylor emphasized to the elders that they must serve with all their heart, might, mind, and strength or "God will hold you responsible for those whom you might have saved had you done your duty. How many of you can say, My garments are clean from the blood of this generation? I speak in behalf of the nations and the people thereof, and the honest in heart who are ignorant of God and his laws. He has called upon us to enlighten them, and to spread forth the truth, and send forth the principles of the Gospel, and point out the way of life. And it is for us to attend to these things, that we may secure the smiles and approbation of God" (Journal of Discourses, 20:23).

Prepare for the Coming of the Son of Man

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 61:36-39

61:36 I have not forsaken you. Tribulation is not evidence that the Lord has abandoned his people. This reassurance was especially comforting to the little band of elders following their harrowing experience on the Missouri River. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 122:9.

61:38 Gird up your loins and be watchful and be sober. The Prophet Joseph Smith stated, "When I contemplate the rapidity with which the great and glorious day of the coming of the Son of Man advances, when He shall come to receive His Saints unto Himself, where they shall dwell in His presence, and be crowned with glory and immortality: when I consider that soon the heavens are to be shaken, and the earth tremble and reel to and fro; and that the heavens are to be unfolded as a scroll when it is rolled up; and that every mountain and island are to flee away, I cry out in my heart, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness!" (Teachings of the Prophet Jospeh Smith, 29).

For he cometh in an hour you think not. The scriptures do not reveal the precise time of the Savior's return in glory. Those who are slothful will say in their heart that he "delayeth his coming" (D&C 45:26) and will indulge in sin, thinking that they will yet have a season to repent. The faithful servant will watch and be ready for the Master's return, regardless of when it is.

61:39 Abide the day of his coming, whether in life or in death. Preparation for the Lord's return is not exclusively reserved for those in mortality. The Second Coming will also be a reality and day of judgment for those in the spirit world. Those who have died will come forth from the grave in proper order, according to the law they abide. The righteous Saints, whether alive on the earth or in the grave, will "be caught up to meet him" (D&C 88:96). Those who are found under condemnation will be judged unworthy to be resurrected and to live upon the earth during the Millennium.
