Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 62

DATE: 13 AUGUST 1831

PLACE: CHARITON, MISSOURI, ON THE BANK OF THE MISSOURI RIVER

As the Prophet Joseph Smith and his company continued their return journey from Zion to Ohio, they met with another group of elders who were still on their way to Independence, Missouri. These two missionary companionships Hyrum Smith and John Murdock, and David Whitmer and Harvey Whitlock (D&C 52:8, 25)were about three weeks behind the elders that arrived with Joseph and dedicated the land for the building up of Zion. These latter four elders had invested their efforts in testifying to the people of the restoration of the gospel rather than traveling speedily to Zion. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote, "On the 13th [August] I met several of the Elders on their way to the land of Zion, and after the joyful salutations with which brethren meet each other, who are actually 'contending for the faith once delivered to the Saints,' I received the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:205).

Testimonies Are Recorded in Heaven

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 62:1-9

62:1 Who knoweth the weakness of man and how to succor them who are tempted. Temptations common to mortality were part of the Savior's mortal experience. The apostle Paul assured us that "we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need" (Hebrews 4:15-16). "For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted," Paul further wrote, "he is able to succour them that are tempted" (Hebrews 2:18). This revelation reassures the Saints that Jesus Christ, by experience, is familiar with our mortal trials and temptations. Moreover, he knows how to help us to overcome our weaknesses and has made ample provision and preparation to cleanse us of our sins.

62:2 The elders that met with the Prophet's party, who had not had the privilege of going to Zion, were to complete their journey.

62:3 The testimony which ye have borne is recorded in heaven for the angels to look upon. The angels of heaven rejoice when we are filled with the Spirit and bear faithful testimony. Bearing Spirit-inspired testimony is an indication that we have received the power of the Holy Ghost into our lives. "A testimony of the truth is more than a mere assent of the mind," taught President Joseph F. Smith; "it is a conviction of the heart, a knowledge that fills the whole soul of its recipient" (Gospel Doctrine, 364). The Spirit bears witness to those who hear or read the words of truth in the message of the testimony. These powerful declarations of truth influence individuals on both sides of the veil. Further, they are recorded that they might strengthen the convictions of those who read them. Thus, "all who bear testimony by the power of the Holy Ghost are blessed," explained Elder Bruce R. McConkie; "their inspired utterances are recorded in heaven for the angelstheir fellowservantsto look upon" (Mortal Messiah, 3:38).

Your sins are forgiven you. James taught: "Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him; let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins" (James 5:19-20). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 4:4; 61:33-34.

62:4 Offer a sacrament unto the Most High. The elders were instructed to stand upon the ground consecrated to be the center place of Zion and to make covenants with the Lord on that sacred site. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 59:9.

62:5 It mattereth not unto me; only be faithful. There are a multitude of decisions that pale in significance to keeping the commandments. Blessings of the greatest import are predicated upon obedience to God. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 60:5.
