Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63

DATE: LATE AUGUST 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Revelations designating the location of Zion and the site for the temple brought a renewed excitement among the Saints in Ohio (D&C 57-58). The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "In these infant days of the Church, there was a great anxiety to obtain the word of the Lord upon every subject that in any way concerned our salvation; and as the land of Zion was now the most important temporal object in view, I enquired of the Lord for further information upon the gathering of the Saints, and the purchase of the land, and other matters, and received the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:207).

A Day of Wrath Shall Come upon the Wicked

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:1-6

63:2 Whose anger is kindled against the wicked and rebellious. "Righteous anger is an attribute of Deity" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 37). Unlike the anger of sinful men and women, the wrath of God does not consume his passions nor dominate his thoughts and actions. Often the Lord's anger is referred to as his wrath. Bruce R. McConkie explained: "Inherent in it is the purpose and intent of meting out a just punishment upon those whose acts have caused it to be aroused. The wrath of God does not fall upon the righteous, but upon the wicked (D&C 1:9; 59:21). 'Instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings, wrath, indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your follies, and by all your abominations, which you practise before me, saith the Lord' (D&C 124:48)" (Mormon Doctrine, 851).

Those wicked and rebellious individuals upon whom the Lord was about to pour out his wrath called themselves "the people of the Lord" (D&C 63:1). They added to their sins that of hypocrisy and were like tares among the wheat, or a wolf among the flock. The Lord sought to bless the pure in heart by identifying the deceptions of predators and poisonous serpents that were posing as Saints in the Church.

63:3-4 The Lord knows that which is necessary for the salvation of each of his children. Some will die and work out their salvation in the world of spirits. Others will remain in mortality seeking to overcome the natural man while still in the flesh.

Signs Come by Faith

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:7-12

63:8 There are those among you who seek signs. These Saints sought signs because faith had been rooted out of their heart by the spirit of adultery. "He who seeketh a sign is an adulterous person," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith; "and that principle is eternal, undeviating, and firm as the pillars of heaven; for whenever you see a man seeking after a sign, you may set it down that he is an adulterous man" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157).

63:9 Faith cometh not by signs. The idea that faith could come by seeing a sign is both a delusion and a contradiction. Such a notion supposed that a sign will substitute for faith. In effect that attitude says, Remove the need for faith and I will have faith. By contrast it is understood among those having the Spirit that faith precedes the miraclethat the miracle is the reward of faith, not the author of it.

Exercising faith brings spiritual strength, but sign seeking does not. Ezra Booth was present when Joseph Smith healed the arthritic arm of Alice (or Elsa) Johnson. As a result of this experience, he joined the Church. Soon after his baptism, however, he began to find fault with the Prophet, apostatized, and eventually published newspaper articles against the Church (D&C 71).

President Joseph F. Smith declared, "Show me Latter- day Saints who have to feed upon miracles, signs and visions in order to keep them steadfast in the Church, and I will show you members of the Church who are not in good standing before God, and who are walking in slippery paths. It is not by marvelous manifestations unto us that we shall be established in the truth, but it is by humility and faithful obedience to the commandments and laws of God. When I as a boy first started out in the ministry, I would frequently go out and ask the Lord to show me some marvelous thing, in order that I might receive a testimony. But the Lord withheld marvels from me, and showed me the truth, line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, until he made me to know the truth from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and until doubt and fear had been absolutely purged from me. He did not have to send an angel from the heavens to do this, nor did he have to speak with the trump of an archangel. By the whisperings of the still small voice of the Spirit of the living God, he gave to me the testimony I possess" (Gospel Doctrine, 7).

63:11 Unto such he showeth no signs, only in wrath unto their condemnation. Sherem and Korihor are examples of those who demanded signs to their own detriment. Both were struck down by the power of God; Sherem fell to the earth and died a few days later, while Korihor was struck dumb (Jacob 7:13-20; Alma 30:48-50). "When the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was first founded," explained George A. Smith, "you could see persons rise up and ask, 'What sign will you show us that we may be made to believe?' I recollect a Campbellite preacher who came to Joseph Smith, I think his name was Hayden. He came in and made himself known to Joseph, and said that he had come a considerable distance to be convinced of the truth. 'Why,' said he, 'Mr. Smith, I want to know the truth, and when I am convinced, I will spend all my talents and time in defending and spreading the doctrines of your religion, and I will give you to understand that to convince me is equivalent to convincing all my society, amounting to several hundreds.' Well, Joseph commenced laying before him the coming forth of the work, and the first principles of the Gospel, when Mr. Hayden exclaimed, 'O this is not the evidence I want, the evidence that I wish to have is a notable miracle; I want to see some powerful manifestation of the power of God, I want to see a notable miracle performed; and if you perform such a one, then I will believe with all my heart and soul, and will exert all my power and all my extensive influence to convince others; and if you will not perform a miracle of this kind, then I am your worst and bitterest enemy.' 'Well,' said Joseph, 'what will you have done? Will you be struck blind, or dumb? Will you be paralyzed, or will you have one hand withered? Take your choice, choose which you please, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ it shall be done.' 'That is not the kind of miracle I want,' said the preacher. 'Then, sir,' replied Joseph, 'I can perform none, I am not going to bring any trouble upon any body else, sir, to convince you. I will tell you what you make me think ofthe very first person who asked a sign of the Savior, for it is written, in the New Testament, that Satan came to the Savior in the desert, when he was hungry with forty days' fasting, and said, 'If you be the Son of God, command these stones to be made bread.' And now,' said Joseph, 'the children of the devil and his servants have been asking for signs ever since; and when the people in that day continued asking him for signs to prove the truth of the Gospel which he preached, the Savior replied, 'It is a wicked and an adulterous generation that seeketh a sign,' &c.

"But the poor preacher had so much faith in the power of the Prophet that he daren't risk being struck blind, lame, dumb, or having one hand withered, or any thing of the kind. We have frequently heard men calling for signs without knowing actually what they did want. Could he not have tested the principles, and thus have ascertained the truth? But this is not the disposition of men of the religious world" (Journal of Discourses, 2:326-27).

The Adulterous in Heart Shall Deny the Faith and Be Cast into the Lake of Fire

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:13-19

63:15 Their folly shall be made manifest. Often at the most inopportune time unrepented immorality is made known. Adultery may be hidden for a season, but all wicked acts kept in darkness are eventually drawn out into the light of day. Even if our unrepented sins are not revealed in this life, certainly at the judgment all will be made manifest.

63:16 They . . . shall deny the faith. "Those who are guilty and do not repent in a short time become fault-finders, criticizing their brethren, then the principles of the Gospel, and finally become bitter in their souls against the work and those who are engaged in it. The most bitter opponents of the Church and the Gospel many times have been proved to be immoral and leading unclean lives" (Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:230).

63:17-18 Adultery and its companion, lust, are among the most dangerous of soul-destroying sins. Those who are unable to overcome the temptations of immorality "suffer the wrath of God on earth. These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. These are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God" (D&C 76:104-6). Thus, the excruciating agony of seared flesh, of burning pain without reprieve, typifies their suffering. At the coming of Christ such sinners will be judged and "found under condemnation . . . and they live not again until the thousand years [of the Millennium] are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth" (D&C 88:100-101).

63:17 Whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. "Some sins cannot be separated," declared Elder Bruce R. McConkie; "they are inseparably welded together. There never was a sign seeker who was not an adulterer, just as there never was an adulterer who was not also a liar. Once Lucifer gets a firm hold over one human weakness, he also applies his power to kindred weaknesses" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:277).

The Faithful Shall Receive an Inheritance upon the Transfigured Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:20-21

63:20 The day of transfiguration. This phrase refers to the change that will come upon those who live on earth during the Millennium, the seventh day of the earth's temporal existence (D&C 77:6-7). This change will be like that experienced by the Three Nephites. Mormon explained that transfiguration is not the same as resurrection but came upon the three disciples "that they might not taste of death . . . that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow" (3 Nephi 28:38).

63:21 The earth shall be transfigured. When the Lord comes again, "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (Article of Faith 10). Isaiah prophesied that there will be "a new earth" during the Millennium (Isaiah 65:17). All forms of lifebe it plant or animalthat exist on the earth during the Millennium must abide that glory.

Shown unto mine apostles upon the mount. This refers to the events on "an high mountain apart" (Matthew 17:1) to which Jesus took Peter, James, and John. In this revelation we learn that both the Savior his three most trusted apostles were transfigured at that time.

Which account the fulness ye have not yet received. We look to a future day when we as a Church have reached sufficient spiritual maturity to be entrusted with the full account of what took place on the Mount of Transfiguration. "It appears that Peter, James, and John received their own endowments while on the mountain (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:165). Peter says that while there, they 'received from God the Father honour and glory,' seemingly bearing out this conclusion. It also appears that it was while on the mount that they received the more sure word of prophecy, it then being revealed to them that they were sealed up unto eternal life (2 Pet. 1:16-19; D&C 131:5)" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:400).

Subsequent to the revelation of Doctrine and Covenants 63, Joseph Smith learned further details regarding the events at the Mount of Transfiguration as he worked on his inspired translation of the Bible. From this work we learn that John the Baptist was present on the mount as a spirit being (JST Mark 9:3), and that Moses and Elijah spoke to the Savior "of his death, and also his resurrection, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem" (JST Luke 9:31).

The Obedient Receive the Mysteries of the Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:22-23

63:22-23 In the context of the gospel, mysteries are truths that can be known only by revelation. "The key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God" is reserved for those Saints who enter the house of the Lord and are there endowed (D&C 84:19).

"It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God," taught Alma; "nevertheless they are laid under a strict command that they shall not impart only according to the portion of his word which he doth grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto him. And therefore, he that will harden his heart, the same receiveth the lesser portion of the word; and he that will not harden his heart, to him is given the greater portion of the word, until it is given unto him to know the mysteries of God until he know them in full" (Alma 12:9-10).

Inheritances in Zion Are to Be Purchased

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:24-31

63:24 Not in haste, lest there should be confusion, which bringeth pestilence. "Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion" (D&C 132:8). In their zeal some Saints were ready to gather to Zion with no thought of providing the necessities of life once they arrived. This problem was addressed in an epistle that was published in The Evening and the Morning Star, the official Church newspaper, and sent to the Church from the elders in Zion in July 1833. "To see numbers of disciples come to this land, destitute of means to procure an inheri tance, and much less the necessaries of life, awakens a sympathy in our bosoms of no ordinary feeling; and we should do injustice to the Saints were we to remain silent, when, perhaps, a few words, by way of advice, may be the means of instructing them, that hereafter great difficulties may be avoided. For the disciples to suppose that they can come to this land without ought to eat, or to drink, or to wear, or anything to purchase these necessaries with, is a vain thought. For them to suppose that the Lord will open the windows of heaven, and rain down angel's food for them by the way, when their whole journey lies through a fertile country, stored with the blessings of life from His own hand for them to subsist upon, is also vain. For them to suppose that their clothes and shoes will not wear out upon the journey, when the whole of it lies through a country where there are thousands of sheep from which wool in abundance can be procured to make them garments, and cattle upon a thousand hills, to afford leather for shoes, is just as vain" (in Smith, History of the Church, 1:382).

63:27 I the Lord will that you should purchase the lands. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 57:4.

63:28-29 Satan desires to shed the blood of the Saints. He plotted with Cain to take the life of the righteous Abel. He entered the hearts of Judas and the Jewish leaders to crucify the Christ. In our day he seeks opportunity to turn the hearts of the people against the kingdom of God. Nephi prophesied of our day, saying, "At that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good" (2 Nephi 28:20). Nephi also said that "the blood of the saints" would "cry from the ground against" those who warred against them (2 Nephi 28:10).

In his wisdom the Lord warned the Saints that they should not give the wicked occasion against them because of the means by which they obtained the land of their inheritance in Zion.

The Lord Decrees Wars, and the Wicked Slay the Wicked

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:32-35

63:32 I am holding my Spirit from the inhabitants of the earth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:33.

63:32-35 "God is not pleased either with war," declared President Heber J. Grant and his counselors in the First Presidency, "or with the wickedness which always heralds it. When He uses war, it is to wipe out sin and unrighteousness" (Conference Report, October 1940, 6). Wicked ness is the cause of all war. When men harden their hearts against the light of Christ, it will cease to strive with them. They then are left to themselves, and Satan has power and dominion over them. They rise up against one another in senseless wars and bloodshed. When the Lord says that he has "decreed wars on the face of the earth," we must not suppose that he condones war. Rather, the decree is that as men wax cold in iniquity, war will be the result, war in which the wicked will slay one another. Brigham Young explained, "God has decreed and foreordained many things that have come to pass, and he will continue to do so; but when he decrees great blessings upon a nation or upon an individual they are decreed upon certain conditions. When he decrees great plagues and overwhelming destructions upon nations or people, those decrees come to pass because those nations and people will not forsake their wickedness and turn unto the Lord" (Journal of Discourses, 10:324).

63:34 The saints also shall hardly escape. The Lord warned the Saints that they too would be affected by the ravages of inhumanity and destruction. Regarding the great wars of devastation that are prophesied, Nephi promised the Saints of the latter days: "For the time soon cometh that the fulness of the wrath of God shall be poured out upon all the children of men; for he will not suffer that the wicked shall destroy the righteous. Wherefore, he will preserve the righteous by his power, even if it so be that the fulness of his wrath must come, and the righteous be preserved, even unto the destruction of their enemies by fire. Wherefore, the righ teous need not fear; for thus saith the prophet, they shall be saved, even if it so be as by fire" (1 Nephi 22:16-17).

The Saints Are to Gather to Zion and Provide Moneys to Build It Up

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:36-48

63:36-48 These verses refer to the Isaac Morley farm and the Whitney store. Before the missionaries arrived in Kirtland, Isaac Morley and Titus Billings had joined with others of like mind in a communal order. They lived together on the Morley farm in a group known as "the family." When the Prophet Joseph Smith relocated from New York to Ohio, he stayed the first few months on the Morley farm and had a small log house built for him and his wife (D&C 41:7). Apparently, while Brother Morley traveled to Missouri, Titus Billings was left in charge of the farm.

The second property of importance was the store owned by Newel K. Whitney. This store became the headquarters for the Church after the Prophet's second journey to Missouri to set up a branch of the United Firm in Zion (D&C 82-83; for more on the United Firm, see commentary on D&C 78:3-4). The store was on the main floor; the Prophet and his family occupied the second level as their home. Many revelations of the Doctrine and Covenants were received in the store, and the School of the Prophets was first held there (D&C 84-98, 101).

We Live in the Latter Days and the Millennium Is Nigh

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:49-54

63:50 The age of man. Isaiah identifies this period of time as one hundred years (Isaiah 65:20).

63:51 Changed in the twinkling of an eye. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 101:31.

63:53 Speaking after the manner of the Lord, they are now nigh at hand. The Lord alludes to the fact that the time of the Second Coming and resurrection from the dead was not near as man measures time. In the grand scheme of things, however, the Saints are living in the latter days, during the last dispensation of the gospel before the ushering in of the Millennium.

63:54 Until that hour there will be foolish virgins among the wise. The Church will have members numbered among both the righteous and the wicked until the Lord returns in glory. The day of separation is a work directed by the Master and his angels and not left to mortal man. Thus, there is no guarantee of salvation for those who claim membership in the Lord's church. The foolish members of the kingdom who fail to live the laws revealed by God will be cut off with the rest of the wicked. This revelation, directed to the members of the Church, identifies two sins that the Saints are commanded to repent of or be cast down to helladultery and lying (vv. 14-19).

This Is a Day of Warning

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:55-58

63:56 His writing is not acceptable. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:50.

63:57 In meekness, to warn sinners to repentance. "Let the elders be exceedingly careful about unnecessarily disturbing and harrowing up the feelings of the people," the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote to the Saints. "Remember that your business is to preach the gospel in all humility and meekness, and warn sinners to repent and come to Christ.

"Avoid contentions and vain disputes with men of corrupt minds, who do not desire to know the truth. Remember that 'it is a day of warning, and not a day of many words.' If they receive not your testimony in one place, flee to another, remembering to cast no reflections, nor throw out any bitter sayings. If you do your duty, it will be just as well with you, as though all men embraced the gospel" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 43).

63:58 This is a day of warning. Elder Ezra Taft Benson explained, "The voice of warning is unto all people by the mouths of His servants [D&C 1:4]. If this voice is not heeded, the angels of destruction will increasingly go forth, and the chastening hand of Almighty God will be felt upon the nations, as decreed, until a full end thereof will be the result. Wars, devastation, and untold suffering will be your lot except you turn unto the Lord in humble repentance. Destruction, even more terrible and far- reaching than attended the last great war, will come with certainty unless rulers and people alike repent and cease their evil and godless ways. God will not be mocked [D&C 63:58]. He will not permit the sins of sexual immorality, secret murderous combinations, the killing of the unborn, and disregard for all His holy commandments and the messages of His servants to go unheeded without grievous punishment for such wickedness. The nations of the world cannot endure in sin. The way of escape is clear. The immutable laws of God remain steadfastly in the heavens above. When men and nations refuse to abide by them, the penalty must follow. They will be wasted away. Sin demands punishment" (This Nation Shall Endure, 11).

The Lord's Name Is Taken in Vain by Those Who Use It without Authority

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 63:59-66

63:62 Use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having not authority. Elder Spencer W. Kimball wrote: "Presumptuous and blasphemous are they who purport to baptize, bless, marry, or perform other sacraments in the name of the Lord while in fact lacking his specific authorization. And no one can obtain God's authority from reading the Bible or from just a desire to serve the Lord, no matter how pure his motives" (Miracle of Forgiveness, 55). "Although a man should be baptized an hundred times it availeth him nothing" (D&C 22:2), unless it is done by one having authority. "Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name? Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?" (D&C 132:9-10).

In all societies and among all peoples, to act falsely in someone else's name is a serious wrongdoing. Be it in the form of plagiarism, counterfeiting, forgery, or even blasphemy, such acts are offensive to the spirit of truth. Many have mistakenly professed the authority to teach the gospel of Christ and administer the ordinances of salvation, but despite their sincerity, this is a grievous offense against the kingdom of God. Those who would usurp the sacred right to teach the gospel or administer its ordinances, professing the power to act in the name of Christ, do so without authority if they have not been properly called, ordained, and sent forth by him whose gospel it is and their works are vain. They are administering adulterated truths, doctrinal forgeries, and counterfeited ordinances. However well intended, their works are profane, lacking validity in this life and, as the Lord himself declared, are without "efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection from the dead" (D&C 132:7).

63:64 In like manner the Savior counseled his disciples: "The mysteries of the kingdom ye shall keep within yourselves; for it is not meet to give that which is holy unto the dogs; neither cast ye your pearls unto swine, lest they trample them under their feet. For the world cannot receive that which ye, yourselves, are not able to bear; wherefore ye shall not give your pearls unto them, lest they turn again and rend you. Say unto them, Ask of God; ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and unto him that knocketh, it shall be opened" (JST Matthew 7:10-13). The truths of the restored gospel are like pearls that are treasured by the pure in heart. We should teach no more to our listeners than they are prepared to receive.

By constraint of the Spirit. By definition, in the dictionary of Joseph Smith's day, constraint describes that which "compels" one to act or "to forebear action." Thus the "constraint of the Spirit" could involve either boldness of speech or restrained silence (Webster, Dictionary, 1828). It means to trust in the promptings of the Spirit.

63:65 Seek them a home. The Prophet and Sidney Rigdon prepared to move to Hiram, Ohio, soon after receiving this revelation. Joseph and his family were welcomed into the home of John and Alice (or Elsa) Johnson. Sidney's family lived in a log home located across the street from the Johnsons.
