Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64

DATE: 11 SEPTEMBER 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

During this time the Church at Kirtland, Ohio, experienced a limited apostasy. In addition to the problems of the Saints in Ohio who were seeking after signs and suffering the spiritual weaknesses caused by immorality (see D&C 63), Ezra Booth returned from his mission to Missouri, discontented with imperfections he had observed in the conduct of the Prophet Joseph Smith during their sojourn together in the land of Zion. Booth accused the Prophet of "lightness and levity," a "proneness to jesting and joking," and a "temper easily irritated" (Roberts, Comprehensive History of the Church, 1:266). In a bitter spirit of opposition to the Prophet Joseph Smith, Booth convinced some members to join him in withdrawing from the Church and later wrote letters to local newspapers attacking the Prophet (see D&C 71). By revelation, the Lord acknowledged that Joseph had weaknesses and warned the Saints of the debilitating spirit of faultfinding that existed among them.

The day after this revelation was received, 12 September 1831, Joseph Smith, who had just returned from Missouri, moved with his family from Kirtland to Hiram, Ohio, which was approximately thirty- five miles south. There he and his family took residence with John Johnson, a prosperous farmer, with the hope that sufficient peace would be afforded him to continue his labor on the inspired translation of the Bible.

For the next six and one-half months the Johnson home would serve as the headquarters of the Church. Some of the greatest visions and revelations vouchsafed to this dispensation were received at this home, including "the vision" or revelation on the degrees of glory. Much work on the translation of the Bible was accomplished, and fifteen of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were received here. Such a marvelous outpouring of divine truth did not go unnoticed by the prince of darkness. Opposition came swiftly, with apostates joining forces with other settlers in an attempt to interrupt the growth of the Church in the area. This organized resistance led to the mobbing of Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon and forced their departure.

In July 1833, when a mob destroyed the printing press in Missouri to prevent the publication of the Book of Commandments, a few copies of what had been printed were salvaged. They included this section down to the verse that reads, "For, verily I say that the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim" (D&C 64:36).

The Saints Must Forgive One Another

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:1-11

64:2 That ye should overcome the world. The vision of the degrees of glory identifies those who inherit the celestial kingdom as those "who overcome by faith" (D&C 76:53), that is, those whose first loyalty is to God and the principles of his gospel. Many are called, the Prophet taught, but few are chosen. That is because their hearts are set too much upon the things of the world (D&C 121:34-36). The world loves, honors, and rewards its own. We recall these classic lines from Shakespeare, in which Thomas Wolsey, chancellor to three kings, lamented when in his old age he found himself shorn of his office:

Had I but served my God with half the zeal I served my king, he would not in mine age Have left me naked to mine enemies. (Henry VIII, III:ii)

"Ye are of God," John reminded the meridian Saints, "because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world." Of those not of the covenant he said, "They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error" (1 John 4:4-6).

64:4 I have given unto you the kingdom. This refers to the Church and kingdom of God as it had been established once again upon the earth. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 65.

64:5 The keys . . . of the kingdom shall not be taken from . . . Joseph Smith. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 28:7; 43:3; 90:2-3.

Inasmuch as he obeyeth mine ordinances. To obey the ordinances is to keep the commandments. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 52:14-21.

64:6 "I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom," said the Prophet Joseph Smith. "It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 156-57). One of the first examples of this principle in this dispensation is Ezra Booth. Soon after finding fault in the Prophet Joseph Smith he left the Church, became the first to publish anti- Mormon material, and was part of the mob that tarred and feathered the Prophet. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 64:15-16; the introduction to Doctrine and Covenants 71; and the commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:9; 121:16-46; 122.

64:7 Sinned unto death. "Whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him. And whosoever doeth this must receive his wages of him; therefore, for his wages he receiveth death, as to things pertaining unto righteousness, being dead unto all good works" (Alma 5:41-42).

We read the following in 1 John 5:16-17: "If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it. All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death." Modern revelation declares: "I, the Lord, forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death" (D&C 64:7). "For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries" (Hebrews 10:26-27). "All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men, . . . neither in this world, neither in the world to come" (Matthew 12:31-32).

"In the sense that 'no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him' (1 John 3:15), that is, that none guilty of premeditated murder can ever gain the celestial kingdom, murder also is a sin unto death. Such persons can never again enjoy spiritual life. It appears that there are some special circumstances under which adultery, in this sense, is also a sin unto death, as witness the Prophet's declaration: "If a man commit adultery, he cannot receive the celestial kingdom of God. Even if he is saved in any kingdom, it cannot be the celestial kingdom" (Smith, History of the Church, 6:81).

64:8 With the exception of Judas, who was from Judah, the twelve apostles chosen by the Savior were from Galilee; a number of them were relatives, and all were neighbors. They would have been well acquainted with each other at the time of their call to the apostleship, and with that association would have come ample opportunity for life always seems to afford suchto give and take offense. Some of these matters remained unresolved "in their hearts," which would both restrain the Spirit and canker the soul. For this, the Savior said, they were sorely chastened.

The same circumstances existed among these early brethren of the latter- day Church; such circumstances are common in small branches of the Church, as they are in small communities. Some of the early brethren had been living together in a communal organization in which they had attempted to own all things in common. The situation was rife with opportunity to either take or give offense. Thus the lesson learned by their counterparts in earlier generations seems most applicable.

In what we have come to know as the Sermon on the Mount, which was the ordination sermon for the newly called apostles in the meridian dispensation, Christ said, "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift" (Matthew 5:23-24). The remembrance Christ speaks of is not that you have something against your brother, for the assumption is that you already would have corrected such feelings; instead, one coming to the altar may remember that his brother harbors bad feelings toward him. Such feelings may be unjustified; nevertheless, the responsibility rests with the true Saint to go to his brother and see that the matter is corrected.

64:8-9 Teaching the principles presented here, President Boyd K. Packer used the following illustration:

"There are spiritual disorders and spiritual diseases that can cause intense suffering.

"If you suffer from worry, from grief or shame or jealousy or disappointment or envy, from self-recrimination or self- justification, consider this lesson taught to me many years ago by a patriarch. He was as saintly a man as I have ever known. He was steady and serene, with a deep spiritual strength that many drew upon.

"He knew just how to minister to others who were suffering. On a number of occasions I was present when he gave blessings to those who were sick or who were otherwise afflicted. His was a life of service, both to the Church and to his community. . . .

"He grew up in a little community with a desire to make something of himself. He struggled to get an education.

"He married his sweetheart, and presently everything was just right. He was well employed, with a bright future. They were deeply in love, and she was expecting their first child.

"The night the baby was to be born, there were complications. The only doctor was somewhere in the countryside tending to the sick.

"After many hours of labor, the condition of the mother-to-be became desperate.

"Finally the doctor was located. In the emergency, he acted quickly and soon had things in order. The baby was born and the crisis, it appeared, was over.

"Some days later, the young mother died from the very infection that the doctor had been treating at another home that night. . . . Everything was not right now; everything was all wrong. He had lost his wife. He had no way to tend both the baby and his work.

"As the weeks wore on, his grief festered. 'That doctor should not be allowed to practice,' he would say. 'He brought that infection to my wife. If he had been careful, she would be alive today.'

"He thought of little else, and in his bitterness, he became threatening. Today, no doubt, he would have been pressed by many others to file a malpractice suit. And there are lawyers who would see in his pitiable condition only one ingredientmoney!

"But that was another day, and one night a knock came at his door. A little girl said simply, 'Daddy wants you to come over. He wants to talk to you.'

"'Daddy' was the stake president. A grieving heartbroken young man went to see his spiritual leader.

"This spiritual shepherd had been watching his flock and had something to say to him.

"The counsel from that wise servant was simply, 'John, leave it alone. Nothing you do about it will bring her back. Anything you do will make it worse. John, leave it alone.'

"My friend told me then that this had been his trialhis Gethsemane. How could he leave it alone? Right was right! A terrible wrong had been committed and somebody must pay for it. It was a clear case.

"But he struggled in agony to get hold of himself. And finally, he determined that whatever else the issues were, he should be obedient.

"Obedience is powerful spiritual medicine. It comes close to being a cure-all.

"He determined to follow the counsel of that wise spiritual leader. He would leave it alone.

"Then he told me, 'I was an old man before I understood! It was not until I was an old man that I could finally see a poor country doctoroverworked, underpaid, run ragged from patient to patient, with little medicine, no hospital, few instruments, struggling to save lives, and succeeding for the most part.

"'He had come in a moment of crisis, when two lives hung in the balance, and had acted without delay.

"'I was an old man,' he repeated, 'before I finally understood! I would have ruined my life,' he said, 'and the lives of others.'

"Many times he had thanked the Lord on his knees for a wise spiritual leader who counseled simply, 'John, leave it alone'" ("Balm of Gilead," 17-18).

The Unrepentant Are to Be Tried in Church Disciplinary Councils

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:12-22

64:12 Him that repenteth not of his sins, and confesseth them not. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 58:42-43.

64:13 That ye may be justified in the eyes of the law. Compassion is not a godly virtue when used to excuse a transgressor's accountability before the law. Not only does it deny the sinner the opportunity to properly repent, but it also turns the supposedly compassionate person into a transgressor, because in such a course they too have disregarded God's law. On the other hand, to administer God's law without love and compassion would be to misuse and misapply his law. Ours is a God both of law (3 Nephi 15:9) and of love (1 John 4:8) and neither attribute can be at odds with the other in the divine nature. To be justified in the eyes of the law is to have honored the law and by so doing to have honored the Lawgiver. To wink at the law is to have dismissed both the law and its Author as unwise and unjust.

64:15-16 Ezra Booth and Isaac Morley were called to serve as missionary companions in traveling to Independence, Missouri (D&C 52:23). They had angered the Lord in that they had "kept not the law, neither the commandment." A specific knowledge of what they did or did not do has not been preserved for us. It appears that they imbibed a selfish and critical spirit relative to what they had been asked to do. Isaac Morley repented of that spirit and became a valiant servant of the Lord. Ezra Booth, on the other hand, nurtured his association with the spirit of darkness until he became its servant. Six months later he joined the mob that tarred and feathered Joseph Smith (George A. Smith, Journal of Discourses, 11:6-7).

64:17 Edward Partridge. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 41:9, "Ordained a bishop."

64:20-21 When the revelation was given identifying Independence, Missouri, as the "center place" or "seat" of Zion (D&C 57:3), the place to which the Saints were to gather and build a temple to their God, the eyes and hearts of the Latter- day Saints turned to that place and they felt a natural anxiousness to unite with other Saints there. The time to leave Kirtland had not yet come, however, for it had not yet filled its destiny. Thus some were called to sell their land and leave while others were directed to stay.

Kirtland was, according to the language of this revelation, to remain a "strong hold" for the work of the Lord for another five years. Explaining why this was necessary, President Joseph Fielding Smith said: "It was in that land where the first temple in this dispensation was to be built. In that Temple the essential keys of restoration were to be revealed. It seems apparent that had all the people moved to Zion in Missouri at that time, the building of a temple would have been frustrated by the enemies of the people. . . . The restoration of the keys of the Priesthood held by the ancient prophets was essential to the progress of the Church. The Lord decreed that a house to his name should be reared in Kirtland where he could come and where he could send his messengers with these keys of power. The building of such a temple required time, and while the elders went to work with their might this house was not ready for dedication until March 27, 1836. It was on the third day of April 1836, that the Lord appeared in that house and where Elias, Moses and Elijah appeared and conferred the keys of their dispensations and authorities. How many other messengers came at that time we do not know. We know, however, that it was necessary that every key and authority should be revealed. Some were revealed, of necessity, before there was temple to which these messengers could come, but it was according to the divine plan that keys of this nature should be revealed in a house built to the name of the Lord. The revelation in which the Lord called upon the Saints to keep a strong hold in Kirtland, was given Sept. 11, 1831. It was in March 1836 that the house of the Lord was dedicated and the following April when the holy keys were bestowed. After this glorious event, the members of the Church were at liberty to remove to Zion. In fact there followed a few months later an apostasy, and many turned away from the Church, but some were saved, and they were under the necessity of fleeing from the place. However, the Spirit of the Lord prevailed until his work in that place was accomplished and the appointed time had passed" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:237).

It may well be that these verses have an important application in our day. Knowing that in time certain of the Saints will be called to return to Missouri, that the temple will be built there, and that Independence will become the "center place" of Zion, some acting independent of priesthood direction have chosen to return to that area in the attempt to assure themselves of some role in the events prophesied to take place there. We note with special interest that those who were to migrate to Zion in that early day were specifically named and called to do so by revelation given through the Prophet. Such was the order of things until Kirtland had fulfilled its purpose. Then the general invitation was given for all desiring to unite with the Saints in Missouri to do so. We would expect the same pattern to be followed in that future day of return and suggest that those who have acted on their own, going before they have been called, will find themselves more of a hindrance to the Lord's purpose than a help.

He That Is Tithed Shall Not Be Burned

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:23-25

64:23 Now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man. We leave the past behind us; the future is in the hands of God; only the present, or "today," is given to us to act upon. The present is our stewardship, and we must prove ourselves wise stewards. With this thought in mind, Alma said, "The day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors." And thus he said, "I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed" (Alma 34:32-33).

A day for the tithing of my people. This first reference to tithing in the revelations of the Restoration does not carry the same meaning we have given that principle in our day. This revelation was given while the Church was living the law of consecration and thus is being used in the broad and general sense of giving liberally, of sacrificing without counting the cost. The law of tithing as it is presently practiced among the Saints was revealed in 1838 after the Saints had been driven out of Zion and were no longer practicing the law of consecration as it applied to the stewardship of lands. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 119.

He that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming. That is to say, he that serves the Lord with all his heart, might, mind, and strength will find safety in that great and dreadful day. This text is not suggesting that all but faithful Latter-day Saints will be burned as stubble when Christ returns. The earth is at present subject to a telestial law. When Christ returns to usher in the millennial era, the earth will abide by a terrestrial and paradisiacal law. At that time all that is of a telestial order will be destroyed, while that which is terrestrial or celestial will be preserved.

64:24 They that do wickedly shall be as stubble. "The scriptures abound in declarations and reiterations, in repeated and solemn affirmations of the great fact that the day of the Lord's coming will be a day of glory and a day of terror of glory and recompense unto those who are living righteously, and a day of terror unto the proud and unto all who do wickedly. Now, many have asked, do we interpret that scripture as meaning that in the day of the Lord's coming, all who are not members of the Church shall be burned, or otherwise destroyed, and only this little body of men and women, very small compared with the uncounted hosts of men now living, shall be spared the burning and shall escape destruction? I think not so. I do not think we are justified in putting that interpretation upon the Lord's word, for He recognizes every man according to the integrity of his heart, and men who have not been able to understand the Gospel or who have not had opportunity of learning it and knowing of it will not be counted as the willfully sinful who are fit only to be burned as stubble; but the proud, who lift themselves in the pride of their hearts and rise above the word of God and become a law unto themselves and who willfully and with knowledge deny the saving virtues of the atonement of Christ, and who are seeking to lead others away from the truth will be dealt with by Him according to both justice and mercy" (Talmage, Conference Report, April 1916, 128).

The Saints Are Warned against Debt to Their Enemies

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:26-33

64:26-33 In these verses Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert are warned not to get into debt to their enemies. They are reminded that the Lord has power to provide for his own. Elders Whitney and Gilbert are acknowledged as his agents and can conduct business on his behalf, though they are to do so according to his will. They are to avoid discouragement as they lay the foundations of Zion, remembering that "out of small things proceedeth that which is great" (33).

64:31-32 Some members of the Church were losing faith because the redemption of Zion had not come according to their expectations. Here the Lord reminds us that his words are sure, and that he does not fail. Nevertheless, such things happen according to his timetable, not our own.

The Rebellious Shall Be Cut Off

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:34-36

64:34 The Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind. It was the desire of the Lord that his people establish Zion; to do so required a people of "one heart and one mind," a people who could dwell together "in righ teousness," among whom there would be neither poverty nor idleness (Moses 7:18; D&C 68:30).

The measure of the worth of a man or woman, that is, their worth in the sight of God, is found in their hearts (1 Samuel 16:7). The true state of their hearts is expressed in their love of truth, their love of righteousness, and a desire to do those things that would please their Eternal Father. Christ, the "Beloved Son" of the Father, or as Mormon stated it the "most Beloved" of the Father, was beloved because of his willingness to do the will of the Father (3 Nephi 11:7; Mormon 5:14; Mosiah 15:7). Many profess a love for Christ, but as he said, "They draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me, they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof" (Joseph Smith-History 1:19). To those of his own day he said, "If ye love me, keep my commandments" (John 14:15). He then added, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him" (John 14:21).

Only when we have given our hearts to God is anything else that we give acceptable to him. We must have the attitude encouraged by so many of our leaders: It is the kingdom of God or nothing. "Zion, first and foremost," said President Joseph F. Smith. "Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, that all other things may be added in the due time of the Lord, and in accordance with His pleasure. These are principles that should pervade the minds and hearts of all the Latter-day Saints. . . .

"For my own part I would like to so live that with open heart and mind, before God and all men, if I were required to go to the ends of the earth and remain there proclaiming the Gospel of Christ, that I would be willing to do it; or if I were asked to give up what I possess in the world, for the building up of Zion, for some special necessary purpose, for advancing the cause of Zion in the world, that I would be prepared and ready to say, Father, here is all that I have; I place it upon the altar freely and give it for the benefit of Thy kingdom upon the earth and for the advancement of Thy cause. I would like to live so that this would indeed be my determination and that I would be able, if the requirement were made, to carry it out not only without regret but with pleasure. . . .

"I want to live so that, no matter what any other man in the world may do or say, so far as I am concerned there is but this one thing for me to do, and that is to be true to the covenants I have made with God and my brethren, to stand firm and steadfast for the advancement of Zion and for the building up of the kingdom of God in the earth" (Conference Report, April 1909, 3-5).

64:35 Zion was to be a holy and consecrated land. The Lord had expressly said, "My law shall be kept on this land" (D&C 58:19). Those who would not keep the law must of necessity be "cut off out of the land of Zion" (D&C 64:35), that is, they would have no right to an inheritance there, for the few can bring "the whole church under condemnation. . . . For shall the children of the kingdom pollute my holy land?" the Lord asked. "Verily, I say unto you, Nay" (D&C 84:55, 59).

All who will be a part of a covenant community must keep their covenants, for their failure is hurtful not just to themselves but to the whole of the community. These verses remind us that our covenants are not simply between ourselves and God, but they also involve promises to the community of Saints. Indeed, the Saints would yet learn that they had covenant obligations to the Saints of dispensations past and to those of their kindred who had lived when the gospel was not on the earth (D&C 128:15, 18).

The breaking of covenants not only hurts the transgressor but diminishes the community of believers of which they are a part. The oft- quoted text from Malachi is seen more clearly when we recognize that the Lord is addressing himself to the nation of Israel rather than particular individuals within that nation. "Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we return? Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord of hosts. And all nations shall call you [the covenant people or nation of Israel] blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the Lord of hosts" (Malachi 3:7-12; emphasis added).

64:36 The rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim. As a host of scriptures attests, the great promise of the last days is both the gathering and redemption of Israel. Israel is gathered by embracing the covenant of salvation restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith. She will be redeemed when each of her tribes returns to its land of promise and temples are built in both the Jerusalem of old and in the New Jerusalem. The promise of an inheritance in the New World rests with the descendants of Joseph or his sons, Ephraim and Manasseh. This promise is real and rests with his literal seed. In them is to be found believing blood and a propensity to observe the statutes of the Lord. Thus those who rebel against the laws of the Lord as revealed to the inhabitants of Zion identify themselves as not being children of the covenant or "of the blood of Ephraim."

This was the last verse printed for the Book of Commandments before mobbers destroyed the press. The irony is poignant. Those seeking to destroy the Saints are here being told that in the due course of the Lord, they themselves will be driven from the land of Missouri and will have no claim upon it.

The Church Shall Judge the Nations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:37-40

64:37-40 In an attempt to encourage the members of the Church at Corinth to solve their own difficulties rather than appeal to the secular courts, the apostle Paul asked, "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?" And again he asked, "Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" (1 Corinthians 6:2-3). John the Revelator referred to this principle when he said, "And I saw thrones," referring to those who have been exalted, "and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them" (Revelation 20:4). Thus it appears that all who are to obtain a crown of glory will be placed in a position of judgment over those who fail to obtain such a crown.

However, before Zion will be placed in a position to judge the world she must first set her own house in order. If there are any not worthy of the offices to which they have been called, be they apostles, prophets, or those serving at any level in the Church, they must be replaced by those who will honor the call given to them. It will be remembered that Paul, writing to the Saints in Corinth, warned that there were "false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ" (2 Corinthians 11:13). The Church must cleanse itself before it can righ tfully sit in judgment on the world.

Joseph Smith said, "It has been the design of Jehovah, from the commencement of the world, and is His purpose now, to regulate the affairs of the world in His own time, to stand as a head of the universe, and take the reins of government in His own hand. When that is done, judgment will be administered in righteousness; anarchy and confusion will be destroyed, and 'nations will learn war no more'" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 250-51).

Zion Shall Flourish

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 64:41-43

64:41 Zion shall flourish. "Who, let me ask, unless he was inspired of the Lord, speaking by the gift and power of God, at that remote period of the Church's history, when our numbers were few, when we had no influence, name or standing in the worldwho, I would ask, under the circumstances in which we were placed when this prediction was made, could have uttered such words unless God inspired him?" So queried Joseph F. Smith. To his own question he responded, "Zion is, indeed, flourishing on the hills, and it is rejoicing on the mountains, and we who compose it are gathering and assembling together unto the place appointed. I now ask this congregation if they cannot see that this prediction (which was made many years before the idea prevailed at all among this people that we should ever migrate and gather out to these mountain valleys) has been and is being literally fulfilled? If there were no other prophecy uttered by Joseph Smith, fulfilment of which could be pointed to, this alone would be sufficient to entitle him to the claim of being a true prophet" (Gospel Doctrine, 486-87).

On another occasion President Smith added to that prophecy of Joseph Smith his own prophetic words: "May Israel flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and assemble together unto the place which God has appointed, and there prosper, multiply and replenish the earth, and thence spread abroad throughout the land; for the time will come when we will find it necessary to fulfil the purposes of the Almighty by occupying the land of Zion in all parts of it. We are not destined to be confined to the valleys of the mountains. Zion is destined to grow, and the time will come when we will cry aloud, more than we do today, 'Give us room that we may dwell!'" (Gospel Doctrine, 75).

64:43 Fear because of her terrible ones. This prophecy is most remarkable, since it came in a day when the enemies of the Church inflicted pain and suffering upon the Saints with impunity. Yet, the promise was that sometime in the future all the nations of the earth would find reason to fear the power held by the elders of Israel. "Their arm shall be my arm," the Lord promised, "and I will be their shield and their buckler; and I will gird up their loins, and they shall fight manfully for me; and their enemies shall be under their feet; and I will let fall the sword in their behalf, and by the fire of mine indignation will I preserve them" (D&C 35:14).
