Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 65

DATE: 30 OCTOBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

This revelation was designated by the Prophet as a "prayer" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:218). When we have so accorded our thoughts with those of heaven that our prayers are dictated by the Holy Ghost, we have the perfect assurance that our petitions will be honored. Such, for instance was the promise given to Nephi, son of Helaman, to whom the Lord said, "All things shall be done unto thee according to thy word, for thou shalt not ask that which is contrary to my will" (Helaman 10:5). A perfect illustration of this principle in our day is the prayer offered by President Spencer W. Kimball when he, the First Presidency, and the Quorum of the Twelve united in prayer in the house of the Lord to seek the privilege of granting the priesthood to all worthy male members of the Church. See commentary on Official Declaration 2, page 1154.

This revelation refers to the prophecy of Daniel that the God of heaven will set up his kingdom again upon the earth in the last days and announces that the fulfillment of that prophecy has commenced in the restoration of the gospel. Speaking of himself, the Prophet Joseph Smith said, "I calculate to be one of the instruments of setting up the kingdom of Daniel by the word of the Lord, and I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 366). This section is also an important commentary on Matthew 6:10, wherein the Savior prayed, as part of the Lord's Prayer, that the kingdom of his Father, or "the kingdom of heaven," as it is here described, might be established on the earth. Thus the Prophet's prayer and the Lord's Prayer become one.

Keys of the Kingdom Are Committed to Man

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 65:1-2

65:1 A voice as of one sent down from on high. The "one" spoken of here is the Prophet Joseph Smith, whose testimony of the Father and the Son and of the restoration of the gospel will yet go to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Every faithful missionary is to declare these truths and echo the testimony of the Prophet called to stand at the head of this, the greatest of all gospel dispensations.

Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. This language, which is Isaiah's, is descriptive of the ministry of John the Baptist and of Joseph Smith (Isaiah 40:3; Matthew 3:3; John 1:23; 1 Nephi 10:8). The path of the Lord is made "straight" by the declaration of "the gospel of repentance, and of baptism . . . for the remission of sins" (D&C 13:1; see also 133:17. As only a straight course will take us to the Lord, so only a straight course will bring the Lord to us. In all things pertaining to the Church and kingdom of God there must be discipline and order.

No messagesave it be the gospel of Christcan prepare the children of men to receive Christ. No messenger can declare that gospel unless the God of heaven has commissioned him. "I have sent mine everlasting covenant into the world," the Savior said, be a light to the world, and to be a standard for my people, and for the Gentiles to seek to it, and to be a messenger before my face to prepare the way before me" (D&C 45:9). And to Joseph Smith he said, "This generation [meaning dispensation] shall have my word through you" (D&C 5:10). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 33:10.

65:2 This verse announces that Daniel's prophecy of the establishment of God's kingdom in the last days is about to be fulfilled in the restoration of the gospel through Joseph Smith. This kingdom, the prophecy holds, is destined to "break in pieces and consume all" earthly kingdoms and "stand forever." Surely this would have seemed an awesome thing to the then-infant Church struggling for survival in Kirtland, Ohio, and Jackson County, Missouri.

It will be recalled that Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, in the second year of his reign "dreamed dreams" that greatly troubled him. His diviners could not tell him the dreams or interpret them for him (Daniel 2:5a). Angry, Nebuchadnezzar ordered that they be cut into pieces and their houses made into dunghills. Upon learning this, Daniel asked the king to give him time before he sought to give the interpretation. He then united in importuning the heavens with his companions (Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- nego) and had the secret revealed to him in a night vision. Daniel then sought audience with the king, where he first rehearsed the particulars of Nebuchadnezzar's dream and then gave its interpretation.

That which the king had seen was "a great image" with a head of fine gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and feet of iron and clay. Then he saw a stone "cut out without hands" "which smote the image upon his feet," breaking them into pieces. "Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth."

"Thou art this head of gold," Daniel explained to Nebuchadnezzar, "and after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth." Then was to come a fourth kingdom with the strength of iron; that kingdom would be divided and the iron would be mixed with clay. "And in the days of these kings," Daniel explained, "shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure" (Daniel 2:1, 44-45).

By interpretation, we would understand that the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar, which bore rule over all the earth, was the head of gold. Orson Pratt said, "'After thee shall come another kingdom represented by the breast and the arms of silver.' That is the Medo-Persian kingdom. After that another kingdom still inferior, called the kingdom of brass, forasmuch as gold is better than silver, silver more precious than brass, so these kingdoms that were to arise, to succeed each other, were to be inferior as time should pass along. The third kingdom, of brass, represented the Macedonian empire; then after that another kingdom, great and terrible, whose legs were of iron, strong and powerful. The fourth kingdom bore rule over the earth; that is admitted, by all commentators, to be the great Roman Empire, and by the division of the Roman empire into two divisions, representing the legs, and afterwards into the feet and toes. . . . The present modern kingdoms of Europe that have grown out from the Roman empire represent the last vestiges of that great and powerful empire of Rome; that is, it fills up and makes the image complete" (Journal of Discourses, 15:71).

The keys of the kingdom of God are committed unto man on the earth. The keys of the kingdom were committed to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the spring of 1829 by Peter, James, and John, who received them at the hands of the Lord himself (D&C 27:12-13; 128:20-21).

The stone . . . cut out of the mountain. The stone cut out of the mountain is the latter-day kingdom of God as it was restored by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

As to how the stone is to fill the whole earth, Orson Pratt observed that the fulfillment of the prophecy would not come through the use of weapons of warfare, for the "kingdom or stone cut out of the mountain without hands is a power superior to that of carnal weaponsthe power of truth, for the kingdom of God cannot be organized on the earth without truth being sent down from heaven, without authority being given from the Most High; without men again being called to the holy Priesthood and Apostleship, and sent forth to publish the truth in its naked simplicity and plainness to the inhabitants of the earth. This truth will be the weapon of warfare, this authority and power sent down from heaven will go forth and will proclaim the message of the everlasting Gospel, the Gospel of the latter- day kingdom, publishing it first among the nations that compose the feet and toes of the great image. Will they be broken to pieces? Yes, when this message is published to them. When they are sufficiently warned, when the servants of God have gone forth in obedience to his commandments, and published in their towns, villages, cities, States and governments these sacred and holy principles that God Almighty has sent down from heaven in the latter times, it will leave all people, nations and tongues that hear the Gospel, and the principles and message pertaining to that kingdom, without any excuse. It will be a warning that will be everlasting on the one hand, or on the other, either to the bringing of the people to repentance, reformation and obedience to the Gospel of the kingdom, or the judgments which are predicted in this prophecy of Daniel will be poured out upon the heads of those nations and kingdoms, and they will become like the chaff of the summer threshing floor, even all those kingdoms that compose the great image; for be it known that the remnants of the Babylonish kingdom, represented by the head of gold, still exist in Asia; the remnants of the silver kingdom, of the brass kingdom, and the kingdom of iron still have their existence; but when the Lord Almighty shall fulfil this prophecy, the toes and feet and legs of iron of that great image, or all these kingdoms, will be broken in pieces, and they will become like the chaff of the summer threshing floor; the wind will carry them away and no place will be found for them" (Journal of Discourses, 15:72).

Without hands. The expression "without hands," as found in the prophecy of Daniel, is intended to emphasize that the kingdom to be established in the last days will come by divine agency, not by the councils of men. It is to rest upon a new revelation, not upon the wisdom of ecumenical councils.

The Millennial Kingdom Shall Join the Kingdom of God on Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 65:3-6

65:3 Prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom. This imagery is that of the New Testament (Matthew 22:2; Revelation 19:9). Christ is both Lamb and Bridegroom; the bride is his Church, for whom the time of his coming will be a time of celebration. Missionaries now encompass the earth issuing the invitation to attend the marriage feast and rejoice with the King's Son. Those who clothe themselves in the robes of righteousness, or the wedding garment, will be accorded that privilege (Matthew 22:11-14).

65:4 Make known his wonderful works among the people. Isaiah described the restoration as a "marvellous work and a wonder" (Isaiah 29:14). Habakkuk described it by saying we would be called upon to "wonder marvelously" (Habakkuk 1:5; 3 Nephi 21:9).

65:6 It would be from this verse that the section obtains its name "the prayer." Here, the Prophet addresses the heavens with the plea that the stone seen by Daniel (meaning the kingdom of God) will go forth and fill the whole earth, that the day of the millennial kingdom (spoken of here as the kingdom of heaven) might come.

The kingdom of heaven. This refers to the political kingdom that will be established during the millennial era when the Lord has made a full end of all nations (Daniel 2:35, 44; D&C 87:6).
