Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 66

DATE: 29 OCTOBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

In August 1831 William E. McLellin, then twenty- five years of age and recently widowed, was teaching school in Paris, Illinois. It was near this small town that he heard Harvey Whitlock and David Whitmer bear testimony of the Book of Mormon and the restored gospel in an outdoor meeting. Fascinated with their message, he closed his school with the idea of going to Missouri to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. In Independence, Missouri, he met the Prophet's brother Hyrum, with whom he went into the woods and had a four- hour discussion about the events surrounding the Restoration. The following day he asked Hyrum to baptize him. Four days later he was ordained an elder. It was not, however, until he had traveled back to Kirtland, Ohio, to attend a conference that he first saw Joseph Smith. At this conference, held on 25 October 1831, McLellin was ordained a high priest. On Saturday, 29 October, he obtained the blessing from the Prophet here recorded. Of that occasion he said, "This day the Lord condescended to hear my prayer and give me a revelation of his will, through his prophet or seer (Joseph)And these are the words which I wrote from his mouth." It is of particular interest that he recorded his own blessing (Journals of William E. McLellin, 45; spelling and syntax standardized).

In 1848 after McLellin's disaffection from the Church and after Brigham Young had led the Saints west, McLellin wrote of this occasion that "I had expected and believed that when I saw Bro. Joseph, I should receive [a revelation] and I went before the Lord in secret, and on my knees asked him to reveal the answer to five questions through his Prophet, and that too without his having any knowledge of my having made such request. I now testify in the fear of God, that every question which I had thus lodged in the ears of the Lord of Sabbaoth, were answered to my full and entire satisfaction. I desired it for a testimony of Joseph's inspiration. And I to this day consider it to me an evidence which I cannot refute" (Journals of William E. McLellin, 57; spelling and syntax standardized).

Although we have no record of the questions of which William E. McLellin speaks, they evidence themselves, at least in part, by a thoughtful reading of the revelation.

The Everlasting Covenant Is the Fulness of the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 66:1-4

66:1 Received my truths. William E. McLellin had prayerfully sought the truth. "I rose early," he records in his journal on 20 August 1831, "and betook myself to earnest prayer to God to direct me into truth; and from all the light that I could gain by examinations, searches and researches I was bound as an honest man to acknowledge the truth and validity of the book of Mormon and also that I had found the people of the Lord the living Church of Christ. Consequently as soon as we took breakfast I told Elder H. Smith that I wanted him to baptize me because I wanted to live among a people who were based upon pure principles and actuated by the Spirit of the Living God. I went with the Elders present to the water and was immersed according to the commandments of Jesus Christ by H[yrum] S[mith] and was confirmed by the water's edge by the laying on of the hands" (Journals of William E. McLellin, 33-34; spelling and syntax standardized).

The Savior . . . of as many as believe on my name. Though Christ saves all from deathmaking the separation of body and spirit but a temporary state only those who believe on his name, that is, those who accept his gospel and honor those servants he has sent in his stead, are saved in the full and proper sense. They alone have claim upon the crown of eternal life here promised to William E. McLellin (D&C 66:12). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 138:19.

66:2 Mine everlasting covenant, even the fulness of my gospel. We err in supposing that the fulness of the gospel embraces all truth. Here we are told that William E. McLellin had embraced "the fulness" by being baptized. Yet such things as the Word of Wisdom, law of tithing, temple ordinances, and the organization of the Quorum of the Twelve were yet to be revealed.

As it was written by the prophets and apostles in days of old. Here William E. McLellin is assured that the restoration of the gospel comes in fulfillment of the promises made by the prophets and apostles of old and that the restored gospel is not simply in harmony with the Bible but in fulfillment of it.

66:3 Repent . . . of those things which are not pleasing . . . for the Lord will show them unto you. See commentary on verse 10.

Preach the Gospel, Heal the Sick, and Resist Temptation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 66:5-13

66:5-8 Elder McLellin had obviously wanted to know the Lord's will concerning him. Should he go forth as a missionary? Should he go to Zion to seek an inheritance there? Or should he remain in Kirtland? The Lord responds, calling him to go back east, declaring the gospel from city to city, particularly in those places where it had not as yet been declared. He is to take Samuel Smith as his companion and be a mentor to him.

66:6 But inasmuch as you can send, send. Elder McLellin was to send whatever money he could spare to Zion, though he was not to go there as yet.

66:9 Lay your hands upon the sick, and they shall recover. In the short time he had been a member of the Church, Elder McLellin had been raised from affliction in a healing blessing administered to him by Hyrum Smith, he had assisted Hyrum in giving a blessing in which a sick child was instantly healed, and he had been healed of a severely sprained ankle by the Prophet. It would appear that among the blessings he had prayerfully sought from the Lord was that of the gift of healing, which is here promised him (Journals of William E. McLellin, 40, 43, 45; spelling and syntax standardized).

66:10 Seek not to be cumbered. Elder McLellin was not to concern himself with obtaining property, wealth, or earthly possessions.

Commit not adulterya temptation with which thou hast been troubled. William E. McLellin's wife, Cinthia, and an infant child had died before the summer of 1831. Extant information suggests that he had a warm and tender relationship with her and that the temptation here mentioned came only after her death and before he married again (Journals of William E. McLellin, 251; spelling and syntax standardized).

66:11 Push many people to Zion. It will be recalled that Moses, in blessing the tribes of Joseph, promised that the thousands of Manasseh and the ten thousands of Ephraim would "push" scattered Israel "together to the ends of the earth" (Deuteronomy 33:17). Significantly, at the conclusion of McLellin's record of this revelation, he added, "A revelation given to William E. McLellin a true descendant from Joseph who was sold into Egypt down through the loins of Ephraim his SonGiven in Hiram, Portage Co. Ohio, 29th Oct 1831" (Journals of William E. McLellin, 46; spelling and syntax standardized).

With songs of everlasting joy upon their heads. See Doctrine and Covenants 45:71.
