Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 67

DATE: NOVEMBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

This revelation was received at the same conference at which the Church determined to publish the revelations received by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the form of the Book of Commandments. What is known to us today as section 1, or the Lord's preface, and section 133, the appendix, were also received at this conference. Of these events the Far West Record records, "Br. Joseph Smith jr. said that inasmuch as the Lord has bestowed a great blessing upon us in giving commandments and revelations, asked the Conference what testimony they were willing to attach to these commandments which should shortly be sent to the world. A number of the brethren arose and said that they were willing to testify to the world that they knew that they were of the Lord" (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 27). After the receipt of section 1 a discussion arose rela tive to the language of some of the revelations, and concern was expressed as to whether those revelations suitably represented the mind of the Lord. It was in response to this discussion that the following revelation was given.

Fears and Doubt Cause Blessings to be Lost

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 67:1-3

67:1 O ye elders of my church, who have assembled yourselves together. Those present numbered only ten: Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, William E. McLellin, David Whitmer, John Whitmer, Peter Whitmer Jr., Orson Hyde, Luke Johnson, and Lyman Johnson.

67:3 Apparently at least some of those present had come to the conference expecting spiritual manifestations that they did not receive. Two of the three witnesses to the Book of Mormon, Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer, were present. They had been privileged to witness the appearance of Moroni, who personally showed them the plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated and many other things prior to writing their testimony which is published with the book. The anticipation that such a written testimony would also be appended to the Book of Commandments would have been most natural, as would the thought that it might be preceded by some marvelous manifestation. The promise that the time would come when such manifestations would be given them, as given in verses 10-13 of this revelation, seems to affirm that this was their expectation. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 17.

This verse affirms that the Spirit was restrained by their fears and doubts. It would be necessary for them to strip themselves of "jealousies and fears" and become more humble before they could enjoy such manifestations. Indeed, we are told that they were not "sufficiently humble" at that time to be "quickened by the Spirit of God" that they might rend the veil. See Doctrine and Covenants 67:10-11.

The Wisest among Them Challenged to Duplicate the Least of the Revelations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 67:4-9

67:4-9 Of these verses the Prophet said, "After the foregoing was received, William E. M'Lellin, as the wisest man, in his own estimation, having more learning than sense, endeavored to write a commandment like unto one of the least of the Lord's, but failed; it was an awful responsibility to write in the name of the Lord. The Elders and all present that witnessed this vain attempt of a man to imitate the language of Jesus Christ, renewed their faith in the fulness of the Gospel, and in the truth of the commandments and revelations which the Lord had given to the Church through my instrumentality; and the Elders signified a willingness to bear testimony of their truth to all the world. Accordingly I received the following:

"The testimony of the witnesses to the book of the Lord's commandments, which He gave to His Church through Joseph Smith, Jun., who was appointed by the voice of the Church for this purpose; we therefore feel willing to bear testimony to all the world of mankind, to every creature upon the face of all the earth and upon the islands of the sea that the Lord has borne record to our souls, through the Holy Ghost, shed forth upon us, that these commandments were given by inspiration of God, and are profitable for all men, and are verily true. We give this testimony unto the world, the Lord being our helper; and it is through the grace of God, the Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, that we are permitted to have this privilege of bearing this testimony unto the world, that the children of men may be profited thereby" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:226).

67:5 His language you have known, and his imperfections you have known. The revelations of scripture are not to be considered absolutely perfect, nor, with the single exception of Jesus, do we have infallible prophets. Of the revelations of the Restoration the Lord said, "These commandments are of me, and were given unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language, that they might come to understanding" (D&C 1:24). In like manner Moroni said, "Condemn me not because of mine imperfection, neither my father, because of his imperfection, neither them who have written before him; but rather give thanks unto God that he hath made manifest unto you our imperfections, that ye may learn to be more wise than we have been" (Mormon 9:31).

Teaching this principle, Brigham Young said, "I am so far from believing that any government upon this earth has constitutions and laws that are perfect, that I do not even believe that there is a single revelation, among the many God has given to the Church, that is perfect in its fulness. The revelations of God contain correct doctrine and principle, so far as they go; but it is impossible for the poor, weak, low, grovelling, sinful inhabitants of the earth to receive a revelation from the Almighty in all its perfections. He has to speak to us in a manner to meet the extent of our capacities. . . .

"If an angel should come into this congregation, or visit any individual of it, and use the language he uses in heaven, what would we be benefitted? Not any, because we could not understand a word he said. When angels come to visit mortals, they have to condescend to and assume, more or less, the condition of mortals, they have to descend to our capacities in order to communicate with us" (Journal of Discourses, 2:314).

67:7 No one would ever be justified in saying that God did not live, that Jesus of Nazareth was not the Christ, or that Joseph Smith was not the great prophet of the Restoration. This text simply says that if someone could write something the equal of the puniest of the revelations to be found in the Book of Commandments (or today, the Doctrine and Covenants) they would be justified, for the moment, in saying that they did not yet know with perfect assurance that he was a Prophet. They would still be without excuse at the day of judgment if they did not proceed under the direction of the Spirit to obtain that witness of which the revelations of the Restoration contain more than ample evidence.

Make one like unto it. Illustrating the futility of man attempting to imitate the revelations of heaven, Orson F. Whitney observed, "It is not so easy to put the spirit of life into things. Man can make the body, but God alone can create the spirit. You have heard, have you not, of the scientist who took a grain of wheat and endeavored to make one just like it? First he separated the grain of wheat into its component parts, and found that it contained so much lime, so much silica, so much of this element and that; and then he took other parts corresponding thereto, brought them together by means of his chemical skill, and produced a grain of wheat so exactly similar to the other that the natural eye could not detect any difference between them. But there was a difference, a vast difference, and it was demonstrated when he planted the two grains. The one that God made sprang up, and the one that man made stayed down. Why? Because the man-made grain of wheat had no spirit only a body, and the body without the spirit is dead. Man cannot breathe into the body of things the breath of life; that is a function and prerogative of Deity. It is not so easy to frame revelations from God. A vain boaster making ridicule of the proverbs of Solomon, said: 'Anybody can make proverbs.' His friend answered, 'Try a few,' and the conversation ended" (Conference Report, April 1917, 42). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 18:35-36.

67:9 There is no unrighteousness in them. Here we have one of the laws by which that which is of God is discerned from that which is of men or of devils. James stated it thus, "But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy" (James 3:17).

Faithful Elders Shall Be Quickened by the Spirit and See the Face of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 67:10-14

67:10-14 It was not intended that the opening of the heavens be only upon the head of Joseph Smith. As the glory of the sunrise is for all who will get up to see it, so the glories of God's kingdom are there to bless all who will receive them. "What power shall stay the heavens?" the Prophet would yet ask. "As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the heads of the Latter-day Saints" (D&C 121:33).

All who ask with an honest heart will receive. All who serve in faith will be rewarded with greater faith. In the revelation that follows these same elders are promised that their words will be scripture (D&C 68:1-5). The promise of the ministering of angels had already been given them (D&C 13). Indeed, the higher priesthood which they held was given to administer the gospel and held within it the "key of the mysteries of the kingdom, even the key of the knowledge of God" (D&C 84:19). It would be their right, as it is the right of every faithful Saint, "while in the flesh," to "bear his presence in the world of glory" (D&C 76:118).

67:11 The oft-quoted text in the Gospel of John stating that "no man hath seen God at any time" (John 1:18) was corrected by the Prophet in the Joseph Smith Translation to read, "And no man hath seen God at any time, except he hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved" (JST John 1:19). Similarly, a statement in Timothy about the resurrected Lord says, "[He] only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power everlasting" (1 Timothy 6:16); this was changed to read, "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see, unto whom no man can approach, only he who hath the light and the hope of immortality dwelling in him" (JST 1 Timothy 6:16). And the text in 1 John 4:12 declaring that "no man hath seen God at any time" was corrected to read, "No man hath seen God at any time, except them who believe" (JST 1 John 4:12).

In each of these texts, the correction indicates that a person seeing the resurrected Christ must first demonstrate faith and devotion. We are reminded that Christ, who made many appearances after his resurrection, did so only to the faithful and devoted disciple. To those who had warred against him, such as the Sanhedrin, Caiaphas, Pilot, or Herod, the resurrected Lord did not appear. Nor did he appear to those who had been indifferent to him. Again, his only appearances were to his faithful disciples.

We find this same pattern in his brief but significant visit to those in the spirit world, of which our account says, "Unto the wicked he did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised; neither did the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face" (D&C 138:20-21). The same was of course true of his appearances in the New World. The wicked and unworthy were all destroyed before he made his appearance there.
