Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 68

DATE: NOVEMBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 68 has the appearance of combining three revelations, the first being the direction of the Lord to Orson Hyde, Luke S. Johnson, Lyman E. Johnson, and William E. McLellin, all of whom had been called to serve as missionaries (vv. 1-12). The revelation then turns our attention to the right of a direct lineal descendant of Aaron to hold the same keys of presidency that were held by John the Baptist and Aaron (vv. 13-24). The final section of the revelation deals with the responsibility of parents to teach the gospel to their children and warns against the evil of idleness among the Saints in Zion (vv. 25-35). Why these three concepts were placed together in the same revelation is not apparent.

Words of Elders When Moved upon by the Holy Ghost Are Scripture

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 68:1-7

68:1-7 In an earlier revelation the elders of Israel had been commanded to go forth "preaching the word by the way, saying none other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith" (D&C 52:9). That is, they were to preach from the scriptures, no other source for such writings being available to them, and then add to that as directed by the Comforter or the Holy Ghost.

Explaining these principles, Alma said, "For I am called to speak after this manner, according to the holy order of God, which is in Christ Jesus; yea, I am commanded to stand and testify unto this people the things which have been spoken by our fathers concerning the things which are to come" (Alma 5:44). The reference to the things spoken by their fathers would be the scriptural records available to them. "And this is not all," Alma continued. "Do ye not suppose that I know of these things myself? Behold, I testify unto you that I do know that these things whereof I have spoken are true. And how do ye suppose that I know of their surety? Behold, I say unto you they are made known unto me by the Holy Spirit of God. Behold, I have fasted and prayed many days that I might know these things of myself. And now I do know of myself that they are true; for the Lord God hath made them manifest unto me by his Holy Spirit; and this is the spirit of revelation which is in me" (Alma 5:45-56). Given that the things of the Spirit can be known only by the Spirit, it is the obligation of those who teach from the scriptures to know by revelation the verity of that which they teach (D&C 50:13-22). Then Alma added, "And moreover, I say unto you that it has thus been revealed unto me, that the words which have been spoken by our fathers are true, even so according to the spirit of prophecy which is in me, which is also by the manifestation of the Spirit of God" (Alma 5:47). To all of this Alma then says, "I say unto you, that I know of myself that whatsoever I shall say [future tense] unto you, concerning that which is to come, is true; and I say unto you, that I know that Jesus Christ shall come, yea, the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace, and mercy, and truth. And behold, it is he that cometh to take away the sins of the world, yea, the sins of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name. And now I say unto you that this is the order after which I am called, yea, to preach unto my beloved brethren, yea, and every one that dwelleth in the land; yea, to preach unto all, both old and young, both bond and free; yea, I say unto you the aged, and also the middle aged, and the rising generation; yea, to cry unto them that they must repent and be born again" (Alma 5:48-49).

Thus the pattern established by Alma and called by him "the holy order of God," a Book of Mormon phrase for priesthood, which is interchangeable with the phrase "the order of his Son" (D&C 107:3), was to teach from the scriptures, testify of a personal knowledge born of the Spirit that the scriptures are true, and then add to that as the Spirit directs. This, he said, was the pattern to be followed in teaching the old, the young, the middle-aged, and the rising generation.

Teaching this same principle, Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained that "those who preach by the power of the Holy Ghost use the scriptures as their basic source of knowledge and doctrine. They begin with what the Lord has before revealed to other inspired men. But it is the practice of the Lord to give added knowledge to those upon whose hearts the true meanings and intents of the scriptures have been impressed. Many great doctrinal revelations come to those who preach from the scriptures. When they are in tune with the Infinite, the Lord lets them know, first, the full and complete meaning of the scriptures they are expounding, and then he ofttimes expands their views so that new truths flood in upon them, and they learn added things that those who do not follow such a course can never know. . . . In a living, growing, divine church, new truths will come from time to time and old truths will be applied with new vigor to new situations, all under the guidance of the Holy Spirit of God" (Promised Messiah, 515-16).

68:2-3 The four elders to whom this revelation was given are simply the example of the principle that applies to "all the faithful elders of my church" (v. 7). All are to teach by the power of the Holy Ghost, all are to know by the spirit of revelation that what they are teaching is true, and all are to be enlightened by the Spirit as they teach. Joseph Smith taught that "no man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations. The Holy Ghost is a revelator" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 328).

68:4 Whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture. It must be remembered that this revelation was given to four elders sent forth to teach the message of the Restoration. They did not hold the office of apostle or seventy, for these offices had not yet been restored. By the world's standard they were too young to be learned in theology, but their God loved young men who had faith. The oldest of their number was twenty-six. None of them had been a member of the Church for more than a few months. The formal instruction they had received in its doctrines and practices could be counted in hours or days at the most. Their success depended on their companionship with the Holy Spirit. The path they marked would yet be followed by countless others.

Nowhere in the Bible is the spirit of revelation defined. Nowhere in that marvelous book do we find a definition of scripture. Here, with a single sentence, the Prophet sweeps away cobwebs woven of darkness and confusion that for centuries have blocked the light of heaven. Scripture is the mind of the Lord, the will of the Lord, the word of the Lord, the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation. Its source is the Holy Ghost, and all who by the laying on of hands have received the promise of the companionship of that member of the Godhead at the same time assume the obligation to witness of him and of his gospelthey are to speak scripture.

"Anything spoken by the Father, Son, or Holy Ghost, by the angels of heaven, or by mortal man when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, is scripture. Such spoken words are the will, mind, word, and voice of the Lord. (D. & C. 68:1-5.)

"Since it is a comparatively rare thing for mortal man to hear the personal voice of Deity, or to converse with angels, it follows that most scriptural utterances are given to man by revelation from the Holy Ghost. These statements, made by the power of the Holy Spirit, consist of the identical words which the Lord himself would speak under the same circumstances. They are indeed the Lord's words because he authorizes and directs the Holy Ghost to influence and guide men in giving utterance to them.

"It is by the power and guidance of the Holy Ghostthat Spirit Personage who, as a member of the Godhead, has power to speak with unerring certainty to the spirit within manthat the saints 'have the mind of Christ.' (1 Cor. 2:16.) That is, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost, the saints are enabled to think what our Lord thinks, to give voice to the very words he does or would speak, and to act as he would act in the same situation. What is true of the mortal saints is also true of the heavenly saints, for 'Angels speak by the power of the Holy Ghost; wherefore, they speak the words of Christ.' (2 Ne. 32:3.)

"All scripture is true. It is composed wholly and solely of pure, unvarnished, irrefutable, and eternal truth. 'Thy word,' O God, 'is truth.' (John 17:17.) 'By the power of the Holy Ghost ye may know the truth of all things.' (Moro. 10:5.)

"All scripture comes by revelation. Whenever any revealed truth is expressed in words, those words are scripture. 'The Holy Ghost is a revelator,' Joseph Smith said. 'No man can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations.' (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 328.) And when those revelations are either spoken or written, they are scripture.

"Most scripture has been, is now, and will continue to be oral and unrecorded. Throughout the length and breadth of his earthly kingdom, the Lord's agents are frequently moved upon to speak, testify, prophesy, exhort, expound, preach, and teach by the power of the Holy Ghost. Such inspired utterances benefit and bless those who speak them and the spiritually endowed among the hearers" (McConkie, Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 1:55-56).

68:7 All the faithful elders of my church. "What I say unto one I say unto all" (D&C 93:49).

Elders Are to Preach and Baptize in All the World

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 68:8-12

68:8 Go ye into all the world. It was with this same language that Christ commissioned the meridian Twelve to go into "all the world" to declare his gospel (Mark 16:15). This is the first time that this express language appears in the revelations of the Restoration; in that sense, then, these words could be regarded as our commission to declare the gospel among all the nations of the earth. The phrase also finds expression in Doctrine and Covenants 84:62 and 112:28.

68:10 He that believeth shall be blest with signs. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 64:7-12; 88:64-70.

68:11 Though no man will know the day or the hour of Christ's return, his coming will not surprise the faithful Saints who, knowing the signs of the times, will have all things in readiness.

Firstborn among the Sons of Aaron May Serve as the Presiding Bishop

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 68:13-24

68:15-18 Explaining these verses, Elder Joseph Fielding Smith taught: "There are some men in the Church who have been blessed by patriarchs and pronounced descendants of Levi, but they have not made any claim to the office of bishop, for the revelation governing this situation says literal descendant of Aaron, not of Levi. There is evidently a great host of men who are descendants of Levi but not of Aaron.

"The person spoken of in the revelations as having the right by lineage to the bishopric is the one who is the firstborn. By virtue of his birth he is entitled to hold 'the keys or authority of the same.' This has reference only to the one who presides over the Aaronic Priesthood. It has no reference whatever to bishops of wards. Further, such a one must be designated by the First Presidency of the Church and receive his anointing and ordination under their hands. The revelation comes from the Presidency, not from the patriarch, to establish a claim to the right to preside in this office. In the absence of knowledge concerning such a descendant, any high priest, chosen by the Presidency, may hold the office of Presiding Bishop and serve with counselors" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:92-93).

As the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood is an absolutely essential part of the restoration of all thingsparticularly since that priesthood prepared the way for the first coming of Christ and must prepare the way for his returnso the office that presides over that priesthood is also an essential part of that restoration. Robert J. Matthews, in his work on the life of John the Baptist, observes that "the things of the law of Moses, especially with regard to the qualifications of the priests and their functions in the offering of various animal sacrifices, were designed by revelation to prefigure and typify the Messiah and to bear witness of him. Heavy penalties were affixed to the performance of sacred rites and duties without the proper authority. It was, therefore, essential that when the Messiah came in person as the Lamb of God, John, the forerunner and witness of the Lamb, should be of the proper lineage to qualify him for the mission. If it was necessary for a priest to be of the lineage of Aaron in order to labor with the sacrificial symbols, which were only prefigures of the Messiah, how much greater the necessity that John, the forerunner of the Messiah in person, be of the proper priestly lineage and authority" (Burning Light, 18).

So we ask, If it was absolutely essential that the one holding the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood in the meridian day be of the proper lineage, would not the same principle hold true in the dispensation of the fulness of all things? And would it not stand as a significant evidence of the divine calling of the Prophet Joseph Smith to discover that he had received a revelation foreshadowing that very thing? Certainly that is the case in the present revelation and in Doctrine and Covenants 107, another great revelation on priesthood (D&C 107:69-70, 76).

68:16 A legal right to the bishopric. As the descendants of Abraham have right by birth to the priesthood, assuming worthiness, so the firstborn son of Aaron and his posterity down through the generations have a right by birth to the office Aaron held. The word bishopric, as used in scripture, simply means "office," and in this case the office of bishop does not have reference to the presidency of three that presides over either the Aaronic Priesthood or wards (Acts 1:20; D&C 114:2).

Parents Are Commanded to Teach the Gospel to Their Children

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 68:25-28

68:25-28 We know of no society in which parents are not held responsible for the well- being of their children. To give life is to assume responsibility for that life. That responsibility reaches well beyond food, shelter, and clothing to embrace acceptable behavior and eventually the ability to provide for themselves. Here the Lord makes it a matter of divine responsibility for parents to teach their children the truths of salvation and to raise them in faith. There can be little surprise in this; they are his children too.

We are a covenant people, and when a man and a woman go to the house of the Lord to receive the promise that their love can be eternalthat they can continue as husband and wife in the worlds to come and that their posterity can surround them, we can only expect that the Author of the covenant will require something of us in return. Certainly that which is required includes the responsibility to plant in the hearts of our children the desire to marry in the temple and the responsibility to raise our sons with a desire to serve as missionaries.

We occasionally hear parents say that it is for their children to decide whether they will attend church, be baptized, abide by the standards of the Church, serve missions, and so forth. We are left to wonder if these same parents give their children the same freedom of choice where their education is concerned, or in the choice of foods they eat, or the medicine they take when ill. That their right of agency must be protected is beyond question. What is not beyond question is the degree of agency or the extent of the choices that are granted to them as children. Is it for the junior high school student to choose not to go to school? Should elementary school children have complete freedom of choice as to the foods they eat or when they go to bed or what is acceptable behavior and what is not? The degree of responsibility to control such decisions in the temporal realm differs little from the responsibility parents have in the realm of spiritual things. Surely we would not want to argue that parents have responsibility for the physical well-being of their children but not their spiritual well- being.

68:27 When eight years old. The first scriptural reference to age eight as the age of accountability is found in the Joseph Smith Translation, Genesis 17:11. It reads, "And I will establish a covenant of circumcision with thee." God is speaking to Father Abraham: "And it shall be my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations; that thou mayest know for ever that children are not accountable before me until they are eight years old." These truths must be understood in light of another revelation on the matter. In September 1830 a revelation was given in which we were told that "little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world" through Christ and that "they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me" (D&C 29:46-47; emphasis added). These revelations do not say that children cannot sin before they are eight years of age. Rather, they tell us that "little children" cannot sin "until they begin to become accountable." Accountability, which comes gradually, begins long before a child is eight. To suppose that a child can do nothing deliberately wrong before the age of eight is simply foolish. It is by becoming increasingly accountable that they prepare themselves for baptism. The unaccountable cannot be baptized.

The Saints Are to Observe the Sabbath, Labor Diligently, and Pray

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 68:29-35

68:29 The inhabitants of Zion shall also observe the Sabbath. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 59.

68:31-32 The principles involved in living the law of consecration, as it was being practiced in Zion (or Missouri) when this revelation was given, are one and the same with the principles upon which our present welfare system functions. In 1936 President Heber J. Grant read a message from the First Presidency that explained, "Our primary purpose was to set up, in so far as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self- respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people to help themselves. Work is to be re-enthroned as the ruling principle of the lives of our Church membership" (Conference Report, October 1936, 3).

68:33 He that observeth not his prayers before the Lord in the season thereof. After having read this text, Joseph Fielding Smith observed that "we ought to be a praying people, and if there are in Zion those who do not observe their prayers in the season thereof, they are amenable to the law of the Church and may be brought before the judge, or in other words, the bishop, and he can try them for their fellowship, because the Lord himself has declared it in these words which I have read unto you" (Conference Report, October 1918, 57).
