Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 70

DATE: 12 NOVEMBER 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

This revelation is directed to members of the Literary Firm. This firm concerned itself with the printing of official Church literature. "On 12 November, 1831, the last day of the Hiram, Ohio conferences, it was decided that inasmuch as Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, John Whitmer, and Martin Harris had played such a conspicuous role in recording, preserving, and preparing the revelations for publication, they should 'have claim on the Church for recompense.' It was therefore voted by those present that the above-named brethren 'be appointed to manage [the sacred writings] according to the Laws of the Church and the Commandments of the Lord.' These men who were to 'manage' the revelations constituted the membership of the Literary Firm. Members of the partnership were consecrated in their respective responsibilities, and the profits from the sale of the Church publications were to benefit both the individual members as well as the Church at large." Publications were to include the Joseph Smith Translation, a Church hymnal, and a Church newspaper (Cook, Revelations, 112-13).

Stewards Appointed to Publish the Revelations

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 70:1-13

70:3 Stewards over the revelations. The brethren named in the first verse of this revelation were responsible before the Lord for the publication of the Book of Mormon and the Book of Commandments (now the Doctrine and Covenants).

70:6 They shall not give these things unto the church, neither unto the world. Neither the Book of Mormon nor the Book of Commandments were to be given away. They were to be sold at a fair price, with any profit from their sale going to compensate the members of the Literary Firm for their efforts and to the bishop's storehouse, where the money would be consecrated to the inhabitants of Zion.

70:10 None are exempt from this law. All who went to Zion were to be bound by the law of consecration.

70:12 Of the labor here involved Joseph Smith observed: "Brother Oliver has labored with me from the beginning in writing, etc. Brother Martin has labored with me from the beginning and Brother John Whitmer and Sidney Rigdon also for a considerable time, and as these sacred writings are now going to the Church for its benefit, that we may have claim on the Church for recompenseif this conference think these things worth prizing to be had on record to show hereafter I feel that it will be according to the mind of the Spirit, for by it these things were put into my heart which I know to be the Spirit of truth" (History of the Church, 1:236).

This revelation recognizes that those who devoted themselves to bringing forth God's revelations for both the edification and salvation of the Saints had claim upon the Church for their temporal sustenance. Of necessity, establishing the kingdom of God required the establishment of a host of different kinds of stewardships. The Prophet and those mentioned in this revelation had a stewardship to publish the revelations and commandments (vv. 1-4), others had been given a stewardship involving the printing house (D&C 104:29-30), some were to work in a mercantile establishment (D&C 104:39-42), and so forth.

The Saints Should Be Equal in Temporal Things

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 70:14-18

70:14 In your temporal things you shall be equal. Again, the revelation is directed to those living the law of consecration as practiced in Zion. Both the laborer and the skilled craftsman would be rewarded according to their needs. The labors of one man were not to be valued above those of another. Each would receive "according to his family, according to his circumstances and his wants and needs" (D&C 51:3).
