Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 71

DATE: 1 DECEMBER 1831

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

This revelation directs Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to set aside the labor of translation on the Bible for a time while they went forth in defense of the restored gospel. This was required by the deluge of falsehoods that had been spread by Ezra Booth, who has the dubious distinction of being the first apostate from the youthful Church to take up the pen against it (Smith, History of the Church, 1:175-221).

Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon Are to Go Forth and Proclaim the Gospel

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 71:1-4

71:1-4 The most effective way to defend the gospel is to declare it. Truth stands on its own and carries within itself the evidence of its own authenticity. As Christ will have the victory over Satan, so every truth will ultimately triumph over its counterpart, whatever its source may be. Knowing that falsehood cannot hold its own against the truth in open display, the ministers of darkness of necessity must first shade or distort the light of heaven. Only then do they dare attack it. It is for this reason that ministers of other faiths will never be found telling their congregations to read the Book of Mormon and then prayerfully ask God if it is true. Nor would they allow the other revelations of the Restoration to be tested by such a standard. For that matter, neither are their own doctrines to be subject to such an examination. Yet did not the apostle Paul counsel us to "prove all things" and hold fast to "that which is good"? (1 Thessalonians 5:21). And again we would ask, should we not hold in suspicion the merchant who will not allow his weights to be inspected?

71:1 Expounding the mysteries thereof out of the scriptures. The meaning of much that is in the scriptures remains a mystery to readers of holy writ. These "hidden treasures" are discovered only with the aid of that same Spirit by which they were originally written. Those things that can properly be understood only by the spirit of revelation are thus spoken of as mysteries.

That portion of Spirit and power which shall be given unto you. The light of heaven descends upon us gradually as we grow in faith and understanding. In sharing the gospel we must learn to let the Spirit direct "that portion [which] shall be meted unto every man" (D&C 84:85), for the truths of heaven are dispensed only according to the preparation that has been made to receive them.

71:2-3 The Prophet recorded that "from this time [4 December 1831] until the 8th or 10th of January, 1832, myself and Elder Rigdon continued to preach in Shalersville, Ravenna, and other places, setting forth the truth, vindicating the cause of our Redeemer; showing that the day of vengeance was coming upon this generation like a thief in the night; that prejudice, blindness and darkness filled the minds of many, and caused them to persecute the true Church, and reject the true light; by which means we did much towards allaying the excited feelings which were growing out of the scandalous letters then being published in the Ohio Star, at Ravenna, by the before-mentioned apostate, Ezra Booth" (History of the Church, 1:241).

On 10 January 1832 a revelation was received directing Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to return to the labor of translating the Bible (D&C 73:3).

71:4 Prepare the way for the commandments and revelations which are to come. Preparations were being made at this time for the publication of the Book of Commandments, the first compilation of revelations received in this dispensation (D&C 67). Virtually from the time of the death of the meridian Twelve Apostles, the historical Christian world began to teach that God no longer speaks, that revelation has ceased, and that no one can add to the canon of scripture. The announcement of a new canon of scripture, one that not only stands as an equal with the revelations of the Old and New Testament but that supercedes them as the voice of God to those of our day, is a spiritual earthquake the likes of which the world has rarely seen. If such a thing be admitted, then every doctrine given birth by either men or devils must "tumble to the dust" (1 Nephi 22:14), as indeed they will. No single doctrine poses a greater threat to priestcraft or false religion in any of its forms than the announcement that God has chosen a new Sinai on the American frontier and a modern Moses by the name of Joseph Smith.

The Enemies of the Saints Shall Be Confounded

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 71:5-11

71:6 "I will give unto the children of men," the Lord said through the prophet Nephi, "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little; and blessed are those who hearken unto my precepts, and lend an ear unto my counsel, for they shall learn wisdom; for unto him that receiveth I will give more; and from them that shall say, We have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have" (2 Nephi 28:30). To the principle taught here by Nephi the Lord now adds the promise of "power," which is to be granted to those willing to hear his voice and continually add to their understanding. It naturally follows that as we grow in the knowledge of the things of the Spirit we will also grow in faith and in spiritual power. Thus our ability to discern and teach the truth will increase, as will the power with which we teach it. And again, by way of contrast, for those who say they have enough, from them shall be taken away even that which they have.

71:7 Confound your enemies; call upon them to meet you both in public and in private. As the experience of tens of thousands of missionaries attests, little, if any, gospel teaching is accomplished when we engage in debate or in "scripture bashing." Nevertheless, in some situations a confrontation may be unavoidable. The circumstances which called forth this revelation are one such instance. The directions given in this verse are understood to be confined to such instances and are not the standard way of presenting the gospel. In his instruction to the Nephites, Christ said: "There shall be no disputations among you, as there have hitherto been; neither shall there be disputations among you concerning the points of my doctrine, as there have hitherto been. . . . For verily, verily I say unto you, he that hath the spirit of contention is not of me, but is of the devil, who is the father of contention, and he stirreth up the hearts of men to contend with anger, one with another. Behold, this is not my doctrine, to stir up the hearts of men with anger, one against another; but this is my doctrine, that such things should be done away" (3 Nephi 11:28-30).

When we forthrightly declare the truths of salvation as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, it will generally have a much greater effect on the hearts of men than if we place our focus on refuting the many falsehoods that have been perpetuated against the Latter-day Saints or against our doctrines.

71:9 No weapon that is formed against you shall prosper. What success can one enjoy when fighting against the kingdom of God or the truths of salvation? Such victories will be but temporary, their glory but for a moment. Satan was granted power to bruise Christ's heel, but the sure promise is that God's Son will crush his head (Genesis 3:15, see fn). None who properly bear the name of Christ go forth with a promise that is less than that. The victory will always rest with truth over falsehood, light over darkness, good over evil, and love over hatred.

Subsequent to this revelation, the Prophet would yet pen these words: "The Standard of Truth has been erected; no unhallowed hand can stop the work from progressing; persecutions may rage, mobs may combine, armies may assemble, calumny may defame, but the truth of God will go forth boldly, nobly, and independent, till it has penetrated every continent, visited every clime, swept every country, and sounded in every ear, till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done" (Smith, History of the Church, 4:540).

71:11 Keep my commandments; they are true and faithful. See Doctrine and Covenants 1:38.
