Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 72

DATE: 4 DECEMBER 1831

PLACE: KIRTLAND, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 72 was the last revelation received in 1831, the year in which more of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants were received than any other. On 1 December Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon received a revelation (D&C 71) directing them to cease their labors on the translation of the Bible for a season. They were instructed to go throughout the "regions round about" to teach the gospel and confute the evil influence of the articles written against the Church by Ezra Booth in the Ohio Star. To that end they went to Kirtland, where on Sunday, 4 December, a number of the Saints assembled to learn their duty and to be instructed. It was in this setting that this revelation was received.

Doctrine and Covenants 72 combines two separate revelations from the "Kirtland Revelation Book"verses 1-8, which deal with the call of Newel K. Whitney to serve as a bishop, and verses 9-26, which deal with the duties associated with that office.

Newel K. Whitney Called As a Bishop

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 72:1-8

72:2 This part of the Lord's vineyard. In February 1831 Edward Partridge was called to serve as a bishop in Kirtland (D&C 41:9) and given responsibility to operate a storehouse to help the poor (D&C 42:30-39) and to administer property transactions connected with the law of consecration (D&C 51). When Missouri was identified as the place for the gathering of the Saints, Bishop Partridge was appointed to labor there (D&C 58:14). This created the need for someone to fill the responsibilities that had been his in the Kirtland area. In August 1831 Newel K. Whitney was called to serve as an agent for the Church (D&C 63:42-45). Now, in this revelation, he is called to the office of bishop. Thus, these two men served as regional or traveling bishops (D&C 20:66), Bishop Whitney in Ohio and the eastern states, and Bishop Partridge in Missouri.

72:3 Steward. A steward is a guardian or keeper of that which belongs to another. In ancient times a steward's tasks could range from tending pigs to supervising the king's stores or leading his armies to battle. In all his actions, a steward was accountable to his master. In the gospel context, we are all stewards of our divine Master and will in a future day be called upon to give an accounting for what we did with the opportunities that were ours. See Doctrine and Covenants 42:32.

72:6 The bishop in Zion. This refers to Edward Partridge, the bishop in Zion, to whom those coming from Ohio were to bring a record certifying that they had faithfully embraced the law of consecration and thus were rightful heirs to an inheritance in Zion.

72:7 The voice of the conference. This refers to the consent of those present, indicated by a sustaining vote. The vote itself which is given by raising the right hand is a form of covenant with two parts: first, the sustaining assures acceptance of those whose names are being presented for approval, and second, it includes the promise of help and support as necessary for them to magnify the office to which they are being called.

Illustrating these principles, John Taylor observed, "We hold up our right hand when voting in token before God that we will sustain those for whom we vote. And if we cannot feel to sustain them, we ought not to hold up our hands, because to do this would be to act the part of hypo crites, And the question naturally arises, how far shall we sustain them? Or in other words, how far are we at liberty to depart from this covenant which we make before each other and before our God? For when we lift up our hands in this way, it is in token to God that we are sincere in what we do, and that we will sustain the parties we vote for. This is the way I look at these things. How far then should we sustain them, and how far should we not? This is a matter of serious importance to us. If we agree to do a thing and do not do it, we become covenant-breakers and violators of our obligations, which are, perhaps, as solemn and binding as anything we can enter into" (Gospel Kingdom, 174-75; Doctrine and Covenants 28:10). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 26:2.

72:8 Through this revelation Newel K. Whitney was identified as one whom the Lord had chosen to serve in the office of bishop. The instructions concerning this office were then given by way of revelation. On 10 February 1832 Hyrum Smith and Reynolds Cahoon were called and ordained as his counselors.

The Duties of the Bishop in Kirtland

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 72:9-26

72:9-23 The duties of the bishop in Kirtland are enumerated in these verses. The bishops involved here were not the bishops of wards. The Saints were not divided into the geographic divisions we know as wards until the Nauvoo period. These men, as noted earlier, were traveling or area bishops. As given here, the duties of Bishop Whitney included keeping the Lord's storehouse and receiving the contributions of the Saints in his jurisdiction. He was to look after the needy and be responsible for the Church's temporal affairs. He was further obligated to see that those who gathered with the Church in Missouri took with them a certificate or recommend (as we would call it today) certifying their faithfulness and right to lay claim upon an inheritance there.

72:9 The law which has been given. This refers to Doctrine and Covenants 42, known as the "law of the Church."

72:10 The first storehouse of the Church was Newel K. Whitney's store, in Kirtland, Ohio: "N. K. Whitney & Co."

72:11 As before has been commanded. See Doctrine and Covenants 42:31-36.

72:14 Shall answer the debt unto the bishop in Zion. See Doctrine and Covenants 42:71-73.

72:17 A certificate. See Doctrine and Covenants 20:64, 84; 72:19, 24-25.

Judge or bishop. A bishop is a "judge in Israel" (D&C 58:17; 64:40).

72:19-21 At a conference held the previous month (see head note to D&C 1) the Lord revealed his will that the Church publish the revelations that Joseph Smith had received in the form of the Book of Commandments. It was also determined that the Literary Firm (D&C 70) would be respon sible for publishing Joseph Smith's New Translation of the Bible, when it was finished, along with a Church hymnal, children's literature, a Church almanac, and a newspaper (Garrett, "Coming Forth," 91).

72:24-25 See Doctrine and Covenants 72:17.
