Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 73

DATE: 10 JANUARY 1832

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

This revelation was given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon at Hiram, Ohio, 10 January 1832. It directed them to resume the labor of translating the Bible. That work had been interrupted for more than a month by the necessity of responding to the letters written by the apostate Ezra Booth. These letters, which were published in the Ohio Star, had caused considerable ill feeling against the Church. Joseph's and Sidney's labors had done much to ameliorate those feelings (Smith, History of the Church, 1:241-42).

Work Is to Begin Again on the Translation of the Bible

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 73:1-6

73:1 Until conference. This refers to the conference appointed to be held 25 January 1832 at Amherst, Ohio.

73:2 By the voice of the conference. This refers to the consent of those in attendance at the conference. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 26:2.

73:3-6 When Ezra Booth fled from Sidney Rigdon's challenge to meet him in public debate, the Ohio Star ceased publication of his scurrilous letters. At the same time the Prophet and Sidney befriended many through their public preaching. The best way to defend the gospel is simply to teach it, as Joseph and Sidney demonstrated in this instance. Such a course is here referred to as a "pattern unto the elders." See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 71.

73:4 Continue the work of translation until it be finished. By divine commission Joseph Smith made the revision or translation of the King James Bible known to us today as the Joseph Smith Translation. He commenced that work in June 1830 and completed the major portion of it by July 1833. The work was constantly interrupted, and the Prophet was still making modifications in the text, while preparing it for publication, at the time of his death in 1844. Changes had been made from Genesis through Revelation. Although this seems to highlight the flaws in the Bible as it has come to us, in a higher sense it should be understood that because revelation is a continuous process among the Lord's people, there is no revelation that could not be amplified by additional light from heaven.

73:6 Gird up your loins. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 27:5.

Be sober. While it is both appropriate and necessary for servants of the Lord to take time to relax and refresh themselves, it is not appropriate for them to be silly or light-minded. Such behavior becomes offensive to the Spirit, causing it to withdraw.
