Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 74

DATE: JANUARY 1832 (AFTER 10 JANUARY AND BEFORE 25 JANUARY)

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

Doctrine and Covenants 73, received 10 January 1832, directed Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to resume the translation of the Bible. The Prophet noted: "Upon the reception of the foregoing word of the Lord, I recommenced the translation of the Scriptures, and labored diligently until just before the conference, which was to convene on the 25th of January. During this period, I also received the following [revelation], as an explanation of [1 Corinthians 7:14]" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:242).

Paul Counsels the Meridian Church Not to Keep the Law of Moses

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 74:1-5

74:1-5 Here Joseph Smith seeks and receives understanding relative to an expression of the apostle Paul that is, at best, difficult for the modern reader to understand. The greater issue Paul was addressing is whether a man or woman who is married to a non-Christian should remain in that marriage. Paul taught that the Christian partner should not in such a case take the initiative in seeking a divorce. If, on the other hand, the unbelieving partner desired to separate, the Christian, Paul felt, was not bound to remain in that union. At this point another question was raised relative to the status of children born of these mixed marriages. On this matter Paul made a statement that suggests that children born outside the faith are both unclean and unholy. His doing so may reflect his own Jewish background. "The Jews considered a child as born out of holiness whose parents were not proselytes at the time of the birth, though afterwards they became proselytes. On the other hand, they considered the children of heathens born in holiness provided the parents became proselytes before the birth. All the children of the heathens were reputed unclean by the Jews; and all their own children holy" (Clarke, Clarke's Commentary, 3:223). Paul's statement would naturally perplex the Prophet because he had already been taught that all little children are whole in Christ, they being incapable of committing sin (Moroni 8:8; D&C 29:46-47).

74:1 Unbelieving husband . . . unbelieving wife. This refers to a non-Christian or nonmember spouse.

The unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife. As a man and a woman become one in the marriage union, all the virtues and blessings of the individual become the virtues and blessings of the union.

Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. This notion (1 Corinthians 7:14), which represents a false tradition among the Jews, is currently used by many Christian commentators as a justification for infant baptism. If Paul, who made it plain that he was speaking by way of personal opinion and not by way of revelation (1 Corinthians 7:6; D&C 74:5), was intimating that a child would be unclean and thus unholy if not born to at least one Christian parent, he was clearly in error (D&C 74:6-7).

Little Children Are Holy and Are Sanctified through the Atonement

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 74:6-7

74:6-7 Among all the children on the face of the earth, not a single one is an enemy of Christ. It is true that countless numbers of their parents have yielded to the enticements of the fleshand some even seek to crucify Christ afresh and put him to an open shameyet even of their little children it can be said that they are holy. "The natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father" (Mosiah 3:19).

Because all little children are clean, pure, and holy, because they have been sanctified by the blood of Christ, if they were to die as children, that is, in this state of holiness, they have the sure promise of the Lord that they are rightful heirs of every blessing that heaven has to bestow (D&C 137:10; Moroni 8).
