Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 75

DATE: 25 JANUARY 1832

PLACE: AMHERST, OHIO

This revelation was given at a conference held in Amherst, Lorain County, Ohio. "At this conference," the Prophet observed, "much harmony prevailed, and considerable business was done to advance the kingdom, and promulgate the Gospel to the inhabitants of the surrounding country." It was at this conference that Joseph Smith was sustained and ordained President of the High Priesthood.

Joseph Smith also observed that "the Elders seemed anxious for me to inquire of the Lord that they might know His will, or learn what would be most pleasing to Him for them to do, in order to bring men to a sense of their condition; for as it was written, all men have gone out of the way, so that none doeth good, no, not one [Romans 3:12]. I inquired and received the following . . ." (History of the Church, 1:242-43).

A Command to Declare the Revelations of the Restoration

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 75:1-5

75:4 Proclaiming the truth according to the revelations and commandments which I have given you. The Church is charged with the responsibility to declare the message of the Restoration among those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. Here, the missionaries are reminded that they are to declare that message from the revelations given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is offensive to the Spirit when missionaries seek refuge and respectability in the Bible rather than declaring the message the Lord gave for our day. The Book of Mormon is the perfect evidence that Joseph Smith is a prophet, not the book of Isaiah, Jeremiah, or Daniel. The testimony of Christ as found in Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John is nothing short of marvelous, yet even their testimonies take on greater meaning when read by the light of modern revelation. While we value that which God spoke to the ancients, we treasure even more the knowledge that he has spoken again in our day, restored his priesthood, and given anew all the ordinances of salvation.

Ours is a testimony of a God who speaks, of prophets who live, of scripture penned in our day, of angels ministering in our midst. Indeed, "we believe in the gift of tongues, prophecy, revelation, visions, healing, interpretation of tongues, and so forth" (Article of Faith 7). Ours is a living Bible; it cannot be sealed; there can be no end to the revelations it contains. We profess ourselves to be Bible Christians in the true sense of the term. "Bible Christians were those who believed in having apostles and inspired prophets among them," Brigham Young explained. "Bible Christians could receive more revelation and add more books to the Bible; Bible Christians could converse with the Lord, and oftentimes beheld the face of Jesus; they could commune with holy angels; they had authority from God to lay hands upon those whom they baptized, for the reception or baptism of the Holy Ghost" (Journal of Discourses, 14:347). There is a spiritual power known to missionaries who teach and testify of the Restoration, doing so from its revelations, that is not experienced by those who seek to justify our doctrines or give credence to our message by the use of Bible texts (D&C 31:1-5; 49:1-4; 84:54-61).

Missionaries Directed to Pray for the Comforter

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 75:6-12

75:6-8 Earlier, William E. McLellin had been commanded in a revelation to go to the eastern states as companion of Samuel Smith (D&C 66:7-8). They served together for about one month. McLellin records that he then became ill and was confined to bed; however, Samuel Smith commented: "'We went a short distance, but because of disobedience, our way was hedged up before us'" (cited in Journals of William E. McLellin, 300; spelling and syntax standardized). Although Samuel does not indicate the nature of the disobedience, in this revelation the Lord chastised William McLellin for the murmurings of his heart. McLellin was re assigned to a new area of labor with Luke Johnson, but during that missionary sojourn, McLellin faltered in the faith. After he preached on the night of 25 February 1831, "McLellin's mind was filled with doubts and he debated whether his call to preach was by man or by 'the fountain of all wisdom.'Unable to resolve his dilemma, the missionary determined that he would 'cease proclaiming until I was satisfied in my own mind.' . . .

"Commenting on this sudden termination of their labors by his companion, Johnson stated, 'Brother McLellin got a situation behind a counter to sell tapes, &c., and I, preferring not to proceed alone, returned to the town of Hiram, and the Prophet appointed Seymour Brunson in his stead, with whom I travelled through Ohio, Virginia and Kentucky'" (Journals of William E. McLellin, 302; spelling and syntax standardized; see D&C 90:35).

75:10 In 3 Nephi we read that the newly called Nephite Twelve "did pray for that which they most desired; and they desired that the Holy Ghost should be given unto them." Further, we find Christ praying that the Holy Ghost would be given to all those who would believe on the words of the Twelve (3 Nephi 19:9, 21). Similarly, in this text those who go forth in the name of the Lord are enjoined to pray for the companionship of the Comforter, who will "teach [them] all things," as Christ promised he would teach the Twelve in the Old World (John 14:26).

That are expedient. See Doctrine and Covenants 18:18; 88:64-65.

Elders to Sit in Judgment on Those Who Reject Their Message

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 75:13-22

75:16 He who is faithful shall overcome all things. Faith in Christ as the Son of God will bring victory over all things. Only through such faith can we obtain victory over all that stands between us and a fulness in the Father. Thus we are told that those who obtain the crown of eternal life are those who "overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise" (D&C 76:53). So it is that the promise of victory is not to those of strength or to those of great intellect but to those of faith.

75:19 Leave your blessing upon that house. This direction is as appropriate for the missionary of the present day as it was for missionaries in 1832. Indeed, the principle is timeless. To Abraham the Lord said, "I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee" (Abraham 2:11). Wherever the servants of the Lord go they should leave their blessing.

75:20-21 The principles here announced find dramatic application in the experience of Samuel Smith, who went forth as the first missionary in this dispensation. Mother Smith records his experience as follows: "On the thirtieth of June, Samuel started on the mission to which he had been set apart by Joseph, and in traveling twenty-five miles, which was his first day's journey, he stopped at a number of places in order to sell his books, but was turned out of doors as soon as he declared his principles. When evening came on, he was faint and almost discouraged, but coming to an inn, which was surrounded with every appearance of plenty, he called to see if the landlord would buy one of his books. On going in, Samuel inquired of him, if he did not wish to purchase a history of the origin of the Indians.

"'I do not know,' replied the host; 'how did you get hold of it?'

"'It was translated,' rejoined Samuel, 'by my brother, from some gold plates that he found buried in the earth.'

"'You liar!' cried the landlord. 'Get out of my houseyou shan't stay one minute with your books.'

"Samuel was sick at heart, for this was the fifth time he had been turned out of doors that day. He left the house and traveled a short distance and washed his feet in a small brook, as a testimony against the man. He then proceeded five miles further on his journey, and seeing an apple tree a short distance from the road, he concluded to pass the night under it; and here he lay all night upon the cold, damp ground. In the morning, he arose from his comfortless bed, and observing a small cottage at no great distance, he drew near, hoping to get a little refreshment. The only inmate was a widow, who seemed very poor. He asked her for food, relating the story of his former treatment. She prepared him victuals, and, after eating, he explained to her the history of the Book of Mormon. She listened attentively and believed all that he told her, but, in consequence of her poverty, she was unable to purchase one of the books. He presented her with one and proceeded to Bloomington, which was eight miles further.

"Here he stopped at the house of John P. Greene, who was a Methodist preacher and was at that time about starting on a preaching mission. He, like the others, did not wish to make a purchase of what he considered at that time to be a nonsensical fable; however, he said that he would take a subscription paper, and if he found anyone on his route who was disposed to purchase, he would take his name, and in two weeks Samuel might call again and he would let him know what the prospect was of selling. After making this arrangement, Samuel left one of his books with him, and returned home. At the time appointed, Samuel started again for the Reverend John P. Greene's, in order to learn the success which this gentleman had met with in finding sale for the Book of Mormon. This time, Mr. Smith and myself accompanied him, and it was our intention to have passed near the tavern where Samuel was so abusively treated a fortnight previous, but just before we came to the house, a sign of small pox intercepted us. We turned aside, and meeting a citizen of the place, we inquired of him, to what extent this disease prevailed. He answered that the tavern keeper and two of his family had died with it not long since, but he did not know that anyone else had caught the disease, and that it was brought into the neighborhood by a traveler who stopped at the tavern overnight" (Smith, History of Joseph Smith, 1996, 225-26).

75:20 Shake off the dust of your feet. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 1:8; 24:15.

Families of Missionaries to Receive Help from the Church

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 75:23-36

75:29 In his instruction to Timothy, Paul wrote, "But if any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel" (1 Timothy 5:8).
