Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76

DATE: 16 FEBRUARY 1832

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

After returning to Hiram from the Amherst conference, Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon resumed their labors on the translation of the New Testament. The vision recorded in Doctrine and Covenants 76 was received while they were translating John 5:29.

Philo Dibble, one of a dozen men present when this vision was received, said that he saw the glory and felt the power but did not see the vision. He described the event by saying:

"Joseph would, at intervals, say: 'what do I see?' . . . Then he would relate what he had seen or what he was looking at. Then Sidney replied, 'I see the same.' Presently Sidney would say, 'what do I see?' and would repeat what he had seen or was seeing, and Joseph would reply, 'I see the same.'

"This manner of conversation was repeated at short intervals to the end of the vision, and during the whole time not a word was spoken by any other person. Not a sound nor motion made by anyone but Joseph and Sidney, and it seemed to me that they never moved a joint or limb during the time I was there, which I think was over an hour, and to the end of the vision.

"Joseph sat firmly and calmly all the time in the midst of a magnificent glory, but Sidney sat limp and pale, apparently as limber as a rag, observing which, Joseph remarked, smilingly, 'Sidney is not used to it as I am'" ("Recollections," 27:303-4).

Adding to that recollection on another occasion, Philo Dibble observed that "Joseph wore black clothes, but at this time seemed to be dressed in an element of glorious white, and his face shone as if it were transparent, but I did not see the same glory attending Sidney. Joseph appeared as strong as a lion, but Sidney seemed as weak as water, and Joseph, noticing his condition smiled and said, 'Brother Sidney is not as used to it as I am'" ("Philo Dibble's Narrative," 81).

"Nothing could be more pleasing to the Saints upon the order of the kingdom of the Lord, than the light which burst upon the world through the foregoing vision. Every law, every commandment, every promise, every truth, and every point touching the destiny of man, from Genesis to Revelation, where the purity of the scriptures remain unsullied by the folly of men, go to show the perfection of the theory [of different degrees of glory in the future life] and witnesses the fact that that document is a transcript from the records of the eternal world. The sublimity of the ideas; the purity of the language; the scope for action; the continued duration for completion, in order that the heirs of salvation may confess the Lord and bow the knee; the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: 'It came from God.'" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:252-53).

Initially, the revelation was not as well received by the Saints as would be supposed. Brigham Young explained, "When God revealed to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon that there was a place prepared for all, according to the light they had received and their rejection of evil and practice of good, it was a great trial to many, and some apostatized because God was not going to send to everlasting punishment heathens and infants, but had a place of salvation, in due time, for all and would bless the honest and virtuous and truthful, whether they ever belonged to any church or not" (Journal of Discourses, 16:42).

On 1 February 1843 there appeared in the Times and Seasons (4:81-85) a short poem by W. W. Phelps addressed to Joseph Smith, entitled Vade Mecum ("go with me"), which was an appeal that in death he and the Prophet might go together to the paradise of God to find refuge there. Accompanying Vade Mecum was a much longer poetic response by the Prophet, A Vision, which consisted of a poetic rephrasing of Doctrine and Covenants 76 with some interpretive commentary. The Prophet's poetic response is perhaps the most authoritative and helpful commentary we have on this revelation (see page 540).

The Greatness of God

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:1-4

76:1 Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth. This revelation is for the inhabitants of both heaven and earth. The gospel is the same among the living and the dead. God is the same, the principles of salvation are the same, the necessity of faith, repentance, and baptism are the same, and the system by which those principles are taught is the same. Thus the revelation of those principles must also be the same. As the fulness of the gospel goes forth to those of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people by the Book of Mormon, so it must go forth in the same manner among their kindred dead. Indeed, its testimony is announced to be "a voice of gladness for the living and the dead" (D&C 128:19). The dead cannot be blessed by the authority restored to the living unless they are also blessed by the doctrines restored to them. So it is that "the dead speak forth anthems of eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained, before the world was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for the prisoners shall go free" (D&C 128:22; Isaiah 1:2; Deuteronomy 32:1).

The Lord is God. Jesus Christ is God. The God of the prophets of the Old Testament, the Lord Jehovah, was the promised Savior, Redeemer, Deliverer, and Messiah of the New Testament. He was and is the Lord Jesus Christ. This same truth is sustained by the prophets of the Book of Mormon. For instance, Nephi prophesied that when "the very God of Israel" dwelt among men, they would "set him at naught, and hearken not to the voice of his counsels" and would themselves "be scourged by all people, because they crucify the God of Israel" (1 Nephi 19:7, 13). A perfect witness that Israel's God and Mary's Son were one and the same was borne by the resurrected Jesus to the Nephites in these words: "I am Jesus Christ. . . . Come forth unto me, that ye may thrust your hands into my side, and also that ye may feel the prints of the nails in my hands and in my feet, that ye may know that I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world" (3 Nephi 11:10-14).

Beside him there is no Savior. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:14, 22, 23-24.

76:4 From eternity to eternity he is the same. "From eternity to eternity means from the spirit existence through the probation which we are in, and then back again to the eternal existence which will follow. Surely this is everlasting, for when we receive the resurrection, we will never die. We all existed in the first eternity. I think I can say of myself and others, we are from eternity; and we will be to eternity everlasting, if we receive the exaltation. The intelligent part of man was never created but always existed. That is true of each of us as well as it is of God, yet we are born sons and daughters of God in the spirit and are destined to exist forever. Those who become like God will also be from eternity to eternity" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 1:12).

"In other words Christ, as an eternal, exalted Being, never varies; from one eternity to the next he is the same. From pre-existence to pre- existence his course goes on in one eternal round, and so will it be with all exalted beings. Those who become gods will then be from eternity to eternity, everlastingly the same, always possessing the fullness of all things and multiplying their race without end" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 240).

All Things to Be Revealed to the Faithful

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:5-10

76:5-10 Those who serve God in righteousness and truth become heirs to the riches of his kingdom. The rewards he promises include an understanding of those things held to be of greatest worth in the heavenly realm. No mention is made here of the kind of things so often envied by those whose hearts are set upon the honors and riches of this world. Rather, the promise of heaven centers in a knowledge of things past and future as they pertain to the kingdom of God. Such knowledge embraces the wonders of eternity and the glory of things to come. It centers in wisdom beyond that known to the wisest and most prudent of men. The treasure least known to the world, and yet that which is of greatest worth, is that knowledge that comes only by way of revelation. It is God's alone to give, and he has promised the wisdom of heaven in full measure to his faithful servants. Truly, the "glory of God is intelligence" (D&C 93:36).

This promise extends to all faithful Saints. It stands independent of office or position, of gender or of age. Whether our position be high or low, whether we stand in the public view or are entirely shielded from it, it is the purity of our soul and of our service, not the position we hold, that opens the windows of heaven to us. To be righteous is to be justified; it is to follow a course that is approved by the Lord. It will be recalled, for instance, that Christ was baptized "to fulfil all righteousness" (Matthew 3:15). Those who are righteous comply with all the laws and ordinances of the gospel. They do the right thing for the right reason. They act out of a proper understanding of gospel principles. One cannot serve the Lord in ignorance or error. We must serve in "truth," that is, according to the light of heaven and in a course that is constant or steadfast. Those serving after this pattern will enjoy the companionship of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of revelation, and will have the heavens opened to them.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie illustrated the principles involved by sharing this experience: "When I was a mission president in Australia, I once said to those of my missionaries in Tasmania: 'Tomorrow we shall climb Mt. Wellington and hold our missionary meeting on the top. We shall there seek to commune with the Lord and partake of his Spirit.'

"We made the climb, and while on top of the peak we visited a television broadcasting station. A bright young man explained to us in words I had never heard, and using principles I could not and do not understand, how the sounds and scenes of television were broadcast into the valley below.

"That night, back in the city of Hobart, my two young sons and I sat before a television set that was tuned to the proper wave band, and we saw and heard and experienced what had been described to us in words.

"Now I think this illustrates perfectly what is involved in the receipt of revelation and the seeing of visions. We can read about visions and reve lations in the records of the past, we can study the inspired writings of people who had the fullness of the gospel in their day, but we cannot comprehend what is involved until we see and hear and experience for ourselves.

"This Tabernacle is now full of words and music. Handel's Messiah is being sung, and the world's statesmen are propagandizing their people. But we do not hear any of it.

"This Tabernacle is full of scenes from Vietnam and Washington. There is even a picture of men walking on the surface of the moon. But we are not seeing these things. The minute, however, in which we tune a radio to the proper wave band and tune a television receiving set on the proper channel, we begin to hear and see and experience what otherwise remains completely unknown to us.

"And so it is with the revelations and visions of eternity. They are around us all the time. This Tabernacle is full of the same things which are recorded in the scriptures and much more. The vision of the degrees of glory is being broadcast before us, but we do not hear or see or experience because we have not tuned our souls to the wave band on which the Holy Ghost is broadcasting. . . .

"How this is done we do not know. We cannot comprehend God or the laws by which he governs the universe. But that it does happen we know because here in the valley below, when we attune our souls to the Infinite, we hear and see and experience the things of God.

"The laws governing radio and television have existed from the time of Adam to the present moment, but only in modern times have men heard and seen and experienced these miraculous things. And the laws have always existed whereby men can see visions, hear the voice of God, and partake of the things of the Spirit. But millions of people everywhere live and die without tasting the good word of God, because they do not obey the laws which implant the revelations of the Lord in their souls" (Conference Report, April 1971, 98-99).

76:5 Fear me. The fear of God has nothing to do with fright. It is rather a reverential awe that elicits the highest behavior from humankind.

Here the Lord tells us that he is "merciful and gracious" to those who fear him and serve him in "righteousness and in truth" to the end of their lives. The text attests that neither God's mercy nor his grace is unconditional. As to God's mercy, Alma testified that "whosoever repenteth shall find mercy," and again that "God is merciful unto all who believe on his name" (Alma 32:13, 22). From ancient times the Lord has promised his mercy to those who love him and keep his commandments (Exodus 20:6; Deuteronomy 5:10). We are told that the Lord showed mercy to David "according as he walked before [him] in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart" (1 Kings 3:6). Standing before the altar of the Lord, Solomon declared, "Lord God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart" (1 Kings 8:23). As the Psalmist noted, "All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies" (Psalm 25:10). Christ himself, speaking to his newly called apostles, said, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy" (Matthew 5:7). Thus to enjoy the graciousness of God is to be blessed and favored by him.

76:7 Will I reveal all mysteries. In the theological sense, a mystery is something known by revelation. In some instances rituals are also referred to as mysteries because participation in them has the effect of unlocking the heavens. Without revelation, everything that pertains to God, to his kingdom, or to the life beyond this mortal sphere remains a mystery.

In the Prophet Joseph Smith's inspired poem A Vision, the stanza standing opposite this verse reads:

From the council in Kolob, to time on the earth. And for ages to come unto them I will show My pleasure & will, what my kingdom will do: Eternity's wonders they truly shall know. (Times and Seasons, 4:82)

From this it would appear that the Grand Council in Heaven took place on Kolob, which we learn from the book of Abraham is the planet nearest to the throne of God (Abraham 3:3; Facsimile 2, Explanation, Figure 1). This stanza may suggest that Kolob was our place of residence during our premortal estate.

The Resurrections of the Just and the Unjust

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:11-18

76:13 Who was in the bosom of the Father. Christ was "Beloved and Chosen from the beginning" (Moses 4:2) because he "was in the bosom of the Father"; that is, he was perfectly at one with the Father.

76:14 The record which we bear is the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ. All that Joseph Smith taught in his role as a prophet, seer, and revelator about Christ becomes part of his testimony of Christ. Testimony is knowledge. One's competence as a witness is predicated on his or her knowledge. The fulness of Joseph Smith's testimony of Christ embraces all that the Prophet revealed, all that he taught, and all that he understood about the Only Begotten of the Father. Thus Joseph Smith becomes the great revelator, testator, and teacher of Christ for this dispensation. No man of whom we have record has revealed and taught more truth about Christ than Joseph Smith. The composite of all that he taught constitutes his testimony of Christ. This revelation (D&C 76) adds substantially to that testimony, particularly by the manner in which it extends his saving role to the inhabitants of worlds without number (v. 24).

With whom we conversed. To converse may also mean to dwell with or to associate with, as well as to have dialogue with.

76:15 The work of translation. This refers to the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible.

76:16 Son of Man. Jesus Christ is the Son of Man, meaning the Son of "Man of Holiness," or God the Father (Moses 6:57; 7:35).

76:18 This caused us to marvel. As Joseph Smith worked on his inspired translation of the Bible, he read that those who had done "good" would come forth in the resurrection "of life," while those who had done "evil" were to come forth in the resurrection "of damnation" (John 5:29). At the bidding of the Spirit, the word life was changed to read just and the word damnation was changed to read unjust. Apparently it was this change that caused Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon to marvel. The context of the next verse suggests that they made the change at the direction of the Spirit without knowing why. Desirous to understand the reason for this change, they "meditated upon these things" (v. 19) and were granted this revelation. This in turn indicates that the Prophet's explanation in the introduction to this revelation that it was self-evident that much had been lost or taken from the writings of the ancient prophets before the Bible was compiled and that "Heaven" must include more kingdoms than one was the result of later reflection and not necessarily clear to him when this revelation was received.

The Atonement of Christ Applies to Other Worlds

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:19-24

76:21 Holy angels, and them who are sanctified. In his poetic rendering of this verse the Prophet wrote:

I beheld round the throne, holy angels and hosts, And sanctified beings from worlds that have been, In holiness worshipping God and the Lamb, Forever and ever, amen and amen! (Times and Seasons, 4:82)

The reference to sanctified beings in this text thus seems to refer to the faithful of other worlds who, in their resurrected state, continue to worship both the Father and the Son.

76:22 Last of all. This phrase means "most recently." There is no suggestion here that this would be the last time that the Father and the Son would manifest themselves to men in the flesh. The whole purpose of the vision is to testify otherwise. It both begins and ends with the promise that the glories of eternity, including the vision of God, will continue to be manifest to those who serve him in truth and righteousness (vv. 5-10, 116-18).

76:23-24 That Christ, under the direction of the Father, created worlds without number, which were inhabited by the sons and daughters of God, was first revealed to Joseph Smith in June 1830 when he labored on the book of Moses (Moses 1:29-35). It could be reasoned that if Christ was their Creator he of necessity must be their Redeemer also. We need not rely only on reason, however. This revelation plainly states that through Christ the inhabitants of those worlds "are begotten [born again] sons and daughters unto God" (v. 24). In his poem A Vision, the Prophet stated the matter thus:

By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad, Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons, By the very same truths, and the very same pow'rs. (Times and Seasons, 4:83)

In harmony with this doctrine, this revelation also emphatically teaches that "the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior" (v. 1). The poetic counterpart (stanza 2) reads, "And besides him there ne'er was a Saviour of men." Verse 13, which refers to Christ as the "Only Begotten Son," is changed in the poem to read, "Jesus the Maker and Saviour of all" (stanza 12).

Lucifer Fell and Became Perdition

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:25-27

76:25 With this verse the scene changes from the throne of the Father and Son, where they were worshiped by holy angels and sanctified beings, to that of our premortal estate.

In this setting in the Grand Council in Heaven, we find Lucifer, a son of the morning, rebelling against the Father and his Firstborn Son, who had been chosen to redeem men from their fallen state. Our understanding of these events has been restored to us line upon line. While trans lating the book of Genesis, the Prophet learned that Satan (here referred to as Lucifer) sought to be born into mortality as the Son of God and thus become the Redeemer of all humankind. His plan was to do so by contravening the principle of agency, promising that not one soul would be lost; then, having saved all, he would claim for himself the honor of God. In contrast, he who is referred to as the Beloved and Chosen of the Father stood forth and said, "Father thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." Thus the Father explained, "Wherefore, because that Satan rebelled against me, and sought to destroy the agency of man, which I, the Lord God, had given him; and also, that I should give unto him mine own power; by the power of mine Only Begotten I caused that he should be cast down; and he became Satan. Yea, even the devil, the father of all lies, to deceive, and to blind men, and to lead them captive at his will, even as many as would not hearken unto my voice" (JST Genesis 3:4-5; Moses 4:1-4). In a revelation given shortly after the Prophet received this inspired translation of Genesis, attention was returned to these events when the Lord said, "He [Satan] rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven turned he away from me because of their agency; and they were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels; and, behold, there is a place prepared for them from the beginning, which place is hell" (D&C 29:36-38).

To that which had been revealed, this text adds the knowledge that Satan had been "in authority" in our premortal estate, meaning that an organization of some kind existed in which he held a position of considerable importance. Of this the inspired poetic version states:

And I saw and bear record of warfare in heav'n; For an angel of light, in authority great, Rebell'd against Jesus and sought for his pow'r, But was thrust down to woe from his Godified state.

Of Christ the revelation simply says that he was "in the bosom of the Father," meaning that there was a closeness or oneness of purpose that existed between them.

Three years later, more of the story would be revealed in the book of Abraham. Here we learn that in the heavenly council our Father, having explained the necessity of a Redeemer, asked, "Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first. And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him" (Abraham 3:27-28).

76:26 Perdition. To be called perdition means one is hopelessly and irredeemably lost. It is to be so given up to wickedness and so filled with hatred of the gospel cause and of the Father and the Son that even the Atonement cannot extend the hope of salvation. Of those who come to the point of perdition, the Prophet said, "You cannot save such persons; you cannot bring them to repentance; they make open war, like the devil, and awful is the consequence" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 358; D&C 132:27-28). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:35.

Lucifer. The name means "the Shining One" (Bible Dictionary, 726). Before his fall the devil was one of the great luminaries of heaven.

Sons of Perdition Suffer Eternal Damnation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:28-49

76:29 He maketh war with the saints of God. The war that commenced in heaven now finds its battlefield on earth. Satan's animosity is toward the Saints of God, those who, like Christ, seek to do the will of the Father. One result of this ongoing war is that the truth of all things is established in the mouth of two witnesses: the quiet and peaceful whisperings of the Spirit, and, in opposition, the loud, ugly ranting of the adversary. He leaves unopposed no principle that leads to heaven.

76:30 Sufferings. Earlier renderings of this verse read "eternal suffering." This was also the case in verse 49 (Woodford, "Historical Development," 949, 950).

76:31 Only those who have known the power of God and once were partakers thereof can be numbered among the children of perdition. They must deny the truth, having a sure knowledge of it, and then defy or war against it. These are they who seek the blood of the Lord's anointed. They are partakers of that spirit that filled those who crucified Christ (v. 35).

76:35 Having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it. The issue here is denying the Holy Ghost. Christ said: "All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come" (Matthew 12:31-32; Mark 3:29).

A perfect knowledge of the gospel comes only by the spirit of revelation, meaning the Holy Ghost. Those who are entrusted with such knowledge and then choose to deny it, coming out in open rebellion against God and his servants, will suffer perdition. These unite themselves with the legions of the devil who warred against God and Christ in the councils of heaven. For such a sin there is no forgiveness in this world or the world to come (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 358). So it is that the Lord told the Jews that eventuallyeither in this world or in the world to comeall sins would be forgiven except blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is the unpardonable sin.

Forgiveness of sin, as this revelation teaches, does not in and of itself open the gate to the celestial kingdom. In the world to come the wicked will suffer until they choose to obey Christ, repent of their sins, and obtain forgiveness. Only then will they be resurrected, after which they will inherit the telestial kingdom (vv. 81-107). Those who have committed the unpardonable sin will not be redeemed from the devil, and after their resurrection, they will be cast out with the devil and his angels into everlasting darkness.

To commit the unpardonable sin, a person must receive the gospel, gain from the Holy Ghost by revelation the absolute knowledge of the divinity of Christ, and then deny "the new and everlasting covenant by which he was sanctified, calling it an unholy thing, and doing despite to the Spirit of grace" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 128). He thereby commits murder by assenting unto the Lord's death, that is, having a perfect knowledge of the truth, he comes out in open rebellion and places himself in a position wherein he would have crucified Christ, knowing perfectly that he was the Son of God. Christ is thus crucified afresh and put to open shame. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 132:27.

The Prophet further explained: "What must a man do to commit the unpardonable sin? He must receive the Holy Ghost, have the heavens opened unto him, and know God, and then sin against him. After a man has sinned against the Holy Ghost, there is no repentance for him. He has got to say that the sun does not shine while he sees it; he has got to deny Jesus Christ when the heavens have been opened unto him, and to deny the plan of salvation with his eyes open to the truth of it; and from that time he begins be an enemy. This is the case with many apostates of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints.

"When a man begins to be an enemy to this work, he hunts me, he seeks to kill me, and never ceases to thirst for my blood. He gets the spirit of the devilthe same spirit that they had who crucified the Lord of Life the same spirit that sins against the Holy Ghost" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 358).

76:36 Fire and brimstone is a figure of speech representing the anguish associated with sin.

76:37 The second death. The second death is separation from the presence of God. The only souls throughout all eternity who will know no glory, no light, nor the presence of God in any form suffer perdition; they are hopelessly lost.

76:38 Shall not be redeemed. To be redeemed is to be freed from the dominion and power of Satan. Only those who become children of perdition are left without redemption.

After the sufferings of his wrath. Those who inherit the telestial kingdom will do so only after suffering the wrath of God and making full payment for their sins. All who inherit a degree of glory must eventually be free from sin. The children of perdition remain everlastingly without glory.

76:39 For all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead. This passage appears to say that sons of perdition will not be resurrected, yet that is not the case. Paul stated the matter succinctly: "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Corinthians 15:22). The Book of Mormon repeatedly affirms that the resurrection is universal (2 Nephi 9:15, 22; Alma 11:42; 33:22; 40:4-5). Early manuscripts resolve this difficulty. For instance, The Evening and The Morning Star, the "Kirtland Revelation Book," and the "Book of Commandments, Laws, and Covenants," Book B, all read: "Who [or They] shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead," thus affirming that those who are destined to suffer perdition will be resurrected (Woodford, "Historical Development," 949-50). The poetic version of this verse reads:

While all the rest are, through the triumph of Christ, Made partakers of grace, by the power of his word. (Times and Seasons, 4:83)

Thus, "all of the rest"those inheriting celestial, terrestrial, or telestial gloryare redeemed from the second death, even spiritual death, through the resurrection. Samuel the Lamanite explained: "For behold, he surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord.

"Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual.

"But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord.

"Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness" (Helaman 14:15-18).

76:43 Who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him. Before a person can become one of the children of perdition, the Father and the Son must manifest themselves to them. They must have a perfect knowledge of the truthfulness of the gospel which they knowingly deny. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:35.

76:44 Their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. This imagery is chosen to dramatize the endless or eternal nature of the punishment that will be known only to those who will join the devil and his angels in their never-ending punishment. This expression was used both by Isaiah (Isaiah 66:24) and by Christ (Mark 9:44-49). In this mortal world, the worms that prey upon the carcass of the dead must also die, as do fires when there is nothing left to fuel them. Conversely, in the place of eternal torment neither worm nor fire will ever die; that is, the torment will never end.

76:48 Ordained. The meaning of the word ordained as used in this instance is "appointed" (Webster, Dictionary, 1828). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 20:2.

Exaltation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:50-70

76:50-70 These verses are descriptive of the rewards known to exalted beings. In a subsequent revelation it would be made known to Joseph Smith that within the celestial kingdom are three degrees of glory (D&C 131). These verses are descriptive of the highest of those three degrees (see commentary on D&C 76:71). Of the other two degrees within the celestial kingdom, we know only that their inhabitants will be ministering servants to those who have obtained the fulness of the Father, which can be done only through the ordinance of eternal marriage (D&C 132:15-19).

76:50-53 "We are not preaching a salvation for the inhabitants of the terrestrial or the telestial kingdoms. All of the ordinances of the gospel pertain to the celestial kingdom, and what the Lord will require by way of ordinances, if any, in the other kingdoms he has not revealed" (Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, 2:329).

76:50 We saw and heard. Not only were Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon permitted to see this marvelous vision, but they were also privileged to hear the voice of the Father testify that he who sat on his right hand was his Only Begotten Son.

The resurrection of the just. Two great resurrections await the inhabitants of the earth: the resurrection of the just and the resurrection of the unjust. These could also correctly be called the resurrection of the justified and the resurrection of the unjustified. The justified are those who stand approved of God and are thus heirs of his kingdom and his glory. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:97-104.

These are they that arise in their bodies of flesh, When the trump of the first resurrection shall sound; These are they that come up to Mount Zion, in life, Where the blessings and gifts of the spirit abound. (Times and Seasons, 4:84)

76:51 Received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name. Two separate concepts are mentioned here. First, those who obtain a place in the celestial world will do so on the strength of their testimony of Christ. In addition to that testimony, they must also believe on the name of Christ. That is, they must also accept and reverence those who come in the authority, or the name, of Christ. They must respect the authority of the priesthood and all of its offices. Not only must they have accepted Christ, but they must also have complied with all the laws and ordinances of his gospel. They must accept and sustain the president of the Church, the Twelve Apostles, and all those who have been called to preside over them in the government of the kingdom of God. In the true and proper sense of things, one cannot accept Christ and at the same time reject those he has sent to act in his name. In the meridian day one could not truly profess to accept Christ while rejecting Peter, James, and John. Similarly, in our day people cannot genuinely profess to accept Christ but reject the testimony of Joseph Smith or his lawful successors in the presidency of the Church, nor can they reject the ordinances of salvation as they are found in that Church. Only by accepting these things can one take upon themselves the name of Christ or truly believe in his name.

Baptized after the manner of his burial. There is no true baptism except by immersion. Paul explained the symbolism of this sacred ordinance by saying, "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin" (Romans 6:3-6).

76:52 By keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins. It is supposed by many that the remission of sins comes in the waters of baptism. Independent of keeping the commandments, this is not and cannot be the case. Moroni said in teaching this principle, "Baptism cometh by faith unto the fulfilling the commandments; and the fulfilling the commandments bringeth remission of sins" (Moroni 8:25). Baptism of water precedes the baptism of the Spirit, in which we are sanctified or cleansed. "Be baptized in my name," the Savior said, "that ye may be sanctified by the reception of the Holy Ghost, that ye may stand spotless before me at the last day" (3 Nephi 27:20).

76:53 Who overcome by faith. In an earlier revelation the Lord had said, "He that endureth in faith and doeth my will, the same shall overcome" (D&C 63:20). Only those of proven faith will inhabit the celestial kingdom. They will have met and conquered the great challenges of this mortal probation through faith in Christ (JST Genesis 14:30-32).

Sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise. It is not enough to receive an ordinance. For any ordinance to be valid, it must be ratified by the Holy Ghost, making it of efficacy, virtue, or force in and after the resurrection. For an ordinance and its promised blessings to stand approved in the eternal world it must pass a threefold test. First, it must have a divine originit must be of God's making, not of man's; second, it must be performed by one in authority, under the direction of the keys or presidency of the appropriate priesthood; third, it must receive the seal of the Holy Spirit of promise. That is, the Holy Ghostwho cannot be deceivedmust attest that the one seeking the promised blessing lived in compliance with the terms of the covenant he or she made. "All covenants, contracts, bonds, obligations, oaths, vows, performances, connections, associations, or expectations" that we desire to have in a future world must be approved by the Holy Ghost (D&C 132:7).

This principle assures that there will be no unearned blessings in the heavenly realms. One might deceive a bishop or other ecclesiastical leader and thereby obtain the promise to a blessing in mortality for which he or she is not worthy (for instance, baptism, priesthood, the endowment, temple marriage), but no one will deceive the Holy Ghost. The promises given to those unworthy to receive them will have no effect on the other side of the veil, for the performance involved will not bear the approving seal of the Holy Ghost.

On the other hand, those who have received all the ordinances of salvationeach of them bearing the seal of the Holy Spirit of promise have the sure promise of salvation. The Holy Ghost may place his approving seal on the various ordinances of salvation as we enter into them; then when we have received all the ordinances of salvation and have received the seal on all those ordinances, we have essentially received the sure promise of exaltation.

The poetic rendering of this verse reads:

For these overcome, by their faith and their works, Being tried in their life-time, as purified gold, And seal'd by the spirit of promise, to life, By men called of God, as was Aaron of old. (Times and Seasons, 4:84)

Of this phrase, as it was used by Paul, Clarke's Commentary observes with surprising insight: "The Holy Spirit, which is promised to them who believe on Christ Jesus, was given to you, and thus you were ascertained to be the children of God, for God has no child who is not a partaker of the Holy Ghost, and he who has this Spirit has God's seal that he belongs to the heavenly family. It was customary among all nations, when a person purchased goods of any kind, to mark with his seal that which he had bought, in order that he might know it, and be able to claim it if mixed with the goods of others; to this custom the apostle may here allude but it was also customary to set a seal upon what was dedicated to God, or what was to be offered to him in sacrifice" (Clarke, Clarke's Commentary, 3:434; emphasis in original).

76:54 Church of the Firstborn. As baptism is the gate to the Church, celestial marriage is the gate to the Church of the Firstborn. Its membership is spoken of as "the inner circle of faithful saints who are heirs of exaltation and the fulness of the Father's kingdom" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 139). Members of the Church of the Firstborn are those who have been sealed by the Holy Spirit as described in the previous verse and in Doctrine and Covenants 88:3-5 (see also D&C 78:21). Those members of the Church of the Firstborn who dwell in heaven abide in the presence of God and are heirs of the fulness of the Father (D&C 107:19). They will be numbered with the church of Enoch and will "come down out of heaven" with them to possess the earth (JST Genesis 9:23).

They are they, of the church of the firstborn of God, And unto whose hands he committeth all things; For they hold the keys of the kingdom of heav'n And reign with the Saviour, as priests, and as kings. (Times and Seasons, 4:84)

76:55 Given all things. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:59, 94-95; see also Doctrine and Covenants 93:19, 20, 28.

76:56 Who are priests and kings. "Holders of the Melchizedek Priesthood have power to press forward in righteousness, living by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God, magnifying their callings, going from grace to grace, until through the fulness of the ordinances of the temple they receive the fulness of the priesthood and are ordained kings and priests. Those so attaining shall have exaltation and be kings, priests, rulers, and lords in their respective spheres in the eternal kingdoms of the great King who is God our Father (Rev. 1:6; 5:10)" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 425).

It naturally follows that if such privileges are accorded to men, women of similar faith will be endowed with similar blessings. Indeed, no man can become a king and priest without an eternal companion at his side, a wife who is a queen and priestess. President Joseph Fielding Smith observed that "women do not hold the priesthood, but if they are faithful and true, they will become priestesses and queens in the kingdom of God, and that implies that they will be given authority" (Doctrines of Salvation, 3:178). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 132:20.

It is in the house of the Lord that a husband and wife are prepared for such offices and callings, though the realization of the blessings will not come until after the resurrection.

76:57 After the order of Melchizedek. See Doctrine and Covenants 107:1-4; see also commentary on Joseph Smith Translation Genesis 14:26-40, page 331.

76:58 They are gods. This verse stands at the heart of Mormonism. It sets us apart from the world. It ennobles and exalts beyond the imagination of man. At the commencement of this revelation the Lord promised to reveal "the wonders of eternity," even wisdom and understanding that would "reach to heaven" and that would cause the wisdom of the worldly wise and prudent to "come to naught" (vv. 8-9). It is in such verses as this that the heavens are opened and we are invited to see as prophets saw. What soul can remain unstirred by such a vision! "God himself was once as we are now," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and is an exalted man, and sits enthroned in yonder heavens! That is the great secret. If the veil were rent today, and the great God who holds this world in its orbit, and who upholds all worlds and all things by his power, was to make himself visible I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form like yourselves in all the person, image, and very form as a man; for Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God, and received instruction from, and walked, talked and conversed with him, as one man talks and communes with another" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 345).

This verse immediately brings to mind the declaration of the Psalmist, who declared, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High" (Psalm 82:6). And again, the Psalmist asks, "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels [gods], and hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet" (Psalm 8:4-6).

So it is that we are the children of God, who is himself an exalted, glorified man. And thus it is our divine destiny as his heirs to stand at his side and become as he is. Such is the purpose of the plan of salvation, and for that purpose the faith of the ancients has been restored again in our time, in the dispensation of the fulness of all dispensations.

76:59 All things are theirs. "All those who keep his commandments shall grow up from grace to grace, and become heirs of the heavenly kingdom, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ; possessing the same mind, being transformed into the same image or likeness, even the express image of him who fills all in all; being filled with the fullness of this glory, and become one in him, even as the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are one" (Smith, Lectures on Faith, 5:2; see also D&C 84:38).

76:60 They shall overcome all things. In and through the atonement of Christ, the faithful and obedient will overcome all that is not rightfully a part of the celestial kingdom. Christ reconciles us not only to God but also to the fulness of his glory. Thus it is said of the man and woman who obtain that glory, "Then shall they be gods, because they have no end; therefore shall they be from everlasting to everlasting, because they continue; then shall they be above all, because all things are subject unto them. Then shall they be gods, because they have all power, and the angels are subject unto them" (D&C 132:20).

76:63 When Christ returns to rule and reign upon the earth, he will bring with him all who have lived upon the earth who are worthy of a celestial glory (Joseph Smith-Matthew 1:1). Those living upon the earth who are worthy of that same glory will be caught up to meet them, as will their righteous counterparts in the world of spirits (D&C 88:96-98; 1 Thessalonians 4:13-17). Speaking of this same event, Jude quoted Enoch as promising that the "Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints" (Jude 1:14).

76:64-65 The first resurrection is synonymous with the resurrection of the just. Patriarchal blessings commonly use the expression "morning of the first resurrection" to identify those who will be exalted. Doctrine and Covenants 45:54 indicates that heathens who knew no law shall come forth in the first resurrection. This resurrection, which is spoken of as being "tolerable," could properly be thought of as the afternoon of the first resurrection.

Abinadi said the first resurrection consisted of "all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God." These, he said, would come forth with Christ in his resurrection (Mosiah 15:22). In like manner, Alma defined the first resurrection as the "resurrection of all those who have been, or who are, or who shall be, down to the resurrection of Christ from the dead" (Alma 40:16). Another resurrection, also termed a first resurrection, will include the righteous down to the time of Christ's return. Those righteous souls who are living when Christ returns, as well as the righteous who are born thereafter, will also come forth in what can properly be called a first resurrection (D&C 132:19). The idea conveyed in the use of the expression "first resurrection" is that the righteous are resurrected first. The resurrection represents the order of heaven, which demands that the just be resurrected first and only thereafter will they who have been unjust be brought forth.

76:66 Mount Zion. In ancient days, Jerusalem, or the holy city, was sometimes referred to as Mount Zion, the place where God dwelled (Psalm 48:1-2). Thus the heavenly abode of God was also referred to as Mount Zion, or "the heavenly Jerusalem" (Hebrews 12:22). In the latter days the Lord revealed that he and his saints would "stand upon Mount Zion, which shall be the city of New Jerusalem. Which city shall be built, beginning at the temple lot, which is appointed by the finger of the Lord, in the western boundaries of the State of Missouri" (D&C 84:2-3; see also 133:18).

76:67 An innumerable company of angels. It is a false notion, one not worthy of the gospel of Jesus Christ, that only a few of God's children will be saved in the kingdom of God. In his vision of the redemption of the dead, President Joseph F. Smith saw an "innumerable company of the spirits of the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they lived in mortality" (D&C 138:12). All these awaited a glorious resurrectionand their number was limited to those who had lived from the days of Adam to the time of the crucifixion of Christ. Similarly, Alma spoke of "many, exceedingly great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God" (Alma 13:12). Paul told the faithful of his day that they would join "an innumerable company of angels" in the heavenly place (Hebrews 12:22), while Daniel numbered the righteous who would stand before God as a "thousand thousands" who ministered to him, "and ten thousand times ten thousand" who stood before him (Daniel 7:10).

When Christ said, "In my Father's house [kingdom] are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you" (John 14:2; see also Smith, History of the Church, 4:184), he was not suggesting that there were various degrees of glory. At that moment he was speaking to the Twelve, and though one of them would betray him, he was giving them the assurance that there was room for them and as many as would believe on their word in his Father's kingdom. There is no boundary to the heavenly city, no limit that needs to be put on its population. There is room in his Father's kingdom for every one of his children, if they will but choose to abide there. Were this not the case, were it true that God did not desire to save all of his children, Christ said, "I would have told you" (John 14:2).

The general assembly and church of Enoch. All those caught up into heaven with Enoch and his city will be numbered among those who eventually inhabit the celestial world. At the same time, all those who inherit the celestial kingdom will also come to a union with the people, or church, of Enoch.

Church . . . of the Firstborn. See commentary on verse 54.

76:69 Just men made perfect through Jesus. A just man is one whose course is justified or approved by the Holy Ghost; in the resurrection he will be made perfect because of the atonement of Christ. Thus the inhabitants of paradise are referred to as "just men made perfect" (D&C 129:3).

76:70 Whose glory is that of the sun. Speaking of those who will come forth in the morning of the first resurrection to inherit the celestial kingdom, Joseph Smith said, "They shall rise again to dwell in everlasting burnings in immortal glory, not to sorrow, suffer, or die any more; but they shall be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. What is it? To inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation, until you arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 347).

Those Who Shall Inherit the Terrestrial Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:71-80

76:71 Fulness of the Father. This verse affirms that the description in the previous verses (50-70) applies exclusively to the highest of the three degrees in the celestial kingdom (D&C 131). Only there do we find members of the Church of the Firstborn and those who have received the fulness of the Father.

76:72 Died without law. The law referred to here is the law of the gospel. Another four years would pass before Joseph Smith learned that the gospel will be taught to those who die without the opportunity to hear it in mortality. Among their number will be many who accept and live it. They, of course, will inherit the celestial kingdom. This phrase describes those who died without hearing the gospel and who did not accept it when it was taught to them in the spirit world, yet who lived worthy of a terrestrial glory. Every person will be rewarded according to the law he or she chooses to live. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:21-24; 137:7-9.

76:73-74 Those who rejected the gospel in mortality will have the opportunity to hear it again in the spirit world. Thus they receive a second chance to accept it. By so doing they are, of course, blessedbut not with the fulness of the Father. Rather, they receive the glory of the terrestrial order.

They receiv'd not the truth of the Savior at first; But did, when they heard it in prison, again. (Times and Seasons, 4:84)

76:73 Spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the gospel unto them. Peter told us that Christ preached the gospel to the "spirits in prison" who had been disobedient in an earlier age (1 Peter 3:19). He also said that the gospel was preached to them that are dead, that they might be judged by the same law or the same standard as those who heard the gospel while in the flesh (1 Peter 4:6). Notwithstanding the plainness of these expressions, most within the historical Christian world reject the idea that the gospel is taught in the spirit world. These verses, however, confirm the plain meaning of Peter's language though they are greatly amplified in Joseph F. Smith's vision of the redemption of the dead. That vision affirms that all the dead, whether good or evil, are in spirit prison, for all are subject to the effects of Adam's fall, chief among them being death itself. Thus, though we learn in that vision that Christ did not go in person to the wicked, sending others in his name, he nonetheless preached to the spirits in prison, for the righteous too are prisoners who look upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage. See Doctrine and Covenants 138:50.

76:75 Only honorable men and women will inherit the terrestrial kingdom. Among their number will be those who were blinded to the message of the Restoration, either by their allegiance to the theories of men or because both the example and doctrines of apostate Christianity closed their minds to the possibility that such a thing as true religion could exist.

76:77 Those of the terrestrial order will be permitted to enjoy the glory of Christ's presence, but they will not have the privilege of becoming as he is.

76:78 The nature of our glory in the eternal worlds is determined by the nature of our bodies. As a celestial body is necessary to inherit the glories of a celestial world, so a terrestrial body is necessary to enjoy the glories of a terrestrial world and a telestial body those of a telestial world. All three degrees of glory are beyond the capacity of a mortal or fallen body to experience unaided by the power of God. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:21-32.

76:79 It is one thing to know the truth and quite another to accord one's life with it. In like manner, it is one thing to have a testimony of Christ and quite another to live true and faithful to that knowledge. There will be those with testimonies who fail to live up to them and who find place in the terrestrial kingdom.

To be valiant is to be courageous, brave, and bold in the testimony of Jesus. It is to be valorous, gallant, and intrepid in that testimony. It is to be fully committed to the doctrines of the kingdom and the cause of Zion. Those who are not willing to give all their heart, might, mind, and strength in the service of their God will not be numbered in the worlds to come with those who do.

Those Who Shall Inherit the Telestial Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:81-91

76:84-85 The citizenry of the telestial kingdom will at death be consigned to hell, where they must pay in full measure for their sins. Thereafter, they will come forth in the resurrection of the unjust to take their place in the telestial or lowest of the degrees of glory. "You cannot take a murderer, a suicide, an adulterer, a liar, or one who was or is thoroughly abominable in his life here, and simply by the performance of an ordinance of the gospel, cleanse him from sin and usher him into the presence of God,"explained President Joseph F. Smith. "God has not instituted a plan of that kind, and it cannot be done. He has said you shall repent of your sins. The wicked will have to repent of their wickedness. Those who die without the knowledge of the gospel will have to come to the knowledge of it, and those who sin against light will have to pay the uttermost farthing for their transgression and their departure from the gospel, before they can ever get back to it. Do not forget that. Do not forget it, you elders in Israel, nor you, mothers in Israel, either; and, when you seek to save either the living or the dead, bear it in mind that you can only do it on the principle of their repentance and acceptation of the plan of life. That is the only way in which you can succeed" (Gospel Doctrine, 95).

76:86-87 Those in this kingdom will be ministered to by those in the terrestrial kingdom, who will be enlightened by the Holy Ghost. Those in the terrestrial kingdom, in turn, are ministered to by celestial beings.

76:89 The glory of the telestial, which surpasses all understanding. Here we are told that the glory of the telestial world will exceed anything known to this earth. In so saying, it is not the purpose of this revelation to encourage satisfaction in obtaining this rather than a greater glory. Instead, this promise evidences the love of God even for his errant children and his willingness to bless them with all that they are willing to receive. What are the blessings of this kingdom? Satan and his legions will have no power here. Death and suffering will be unknown. Hunger and pain will no longer exist. Oppression and injustices will have no place. Through Christ, all the effects of Adam's fall will have been rectified. This alone will create a world the glory and goodness of which will surpass all understanding. The nature of this world will be much like the one known to Adam and Eve prior to the fall.

The Glories of the Telestial, Terrestrial, and Celestial Kingdoms Contrasted

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:94-98

76:94-95 These verses speak of the glories to be enjoyed by all who inherit the celestial kingdom. They are heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ. Explaining this phrase, Joseph Smith taught that they would "inherit the same power, the same glory and the same exaltation" as that enjoyed by Christ "until [they] arrive at the station of a God, and ascend the throne of eternal power, the same as those who have gone before. What did Jesus do? Why; I do the things I saw my Father do when worlds came rolling into existence. My Father worked out his kingdom with fear and trembling, and I must do the same; and when I get my kingdom, I shall present it to my Father, so that he may obtain kingdom upon kingdom, and it will exalt him in glory. He will then take a higher exaltation, and I will take his place, and thereby become exalted myself. So that Jesus treads in the tracks of his Father, and inherits what God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the salvation and exaltation of all his children" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 347-48).

76:94 Church of the Firstborn. Faithful Saints who have received the fulness of temple blessings are members of the Church of the Firstborn. They are heirs of exaltation and of the fulness of the Father's kingdom. With the faithful of ages past, they become joint-heirs with Christ in receiving all that the Father has. See Doctrine and Covenants 93:20-22; see also commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:54.

They see as they are seen, and know as they are known. Those who obtain a celestial glory will no longer see and know in part. All things will be opened to their understanding. Developing this same thought, Paul said, "For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known" (1 Corinthians 13:12). The word glass in this text refers to a mirror, which in that ancient day was made of polished metal that often gave an imperfect or distorted image. By analogy Paul is saying that in this life we often have an imperfect or distorted view of eternal things, but in a future day we will see things as they really are. The Living New Testament renders Paul's words thus, "We can understand only a little about God now, as if we were peering at his reflection in a poor mirror; but someday we are going to see him in his completeness, face to face" (1 Corinthians 13:12). In that day we will come to understand the majesty and glory with which God has endowed all his creations.

The Telestial Kingdom

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:99-113

76:99-101 The telestial kingdom is full of religions and priests and ministers of every kind. It is a battleground of ideas and ideologies. Professing Christians there will include self- claimed disciples of Paul declaring the gospel of salvation by grace alone; those loyal to Apollos, or the learning of men, as articulated by the suave and sophisticated; and those claiming to follow Peter (Cephas) and the church of Rome in thoughtless submission. "These are they who say they are some of one and some of another" (v. 100), some of Christor so they profess some of John and the mystery of apocalypse, others of Moses and the law that he brought, some of Elias, and of Esaias, and of Isaiah, of Enoch and still more

These are they that came out for Apollos and Paul; For Cephas and Jesus, in all kinds of hope; For Enoch and Moses, and Peter, and John; For Luther and Calvin, and even the Pope.

For they never received the gospel of Christ, Nor the prophetic spirit that came from the Lord; Nor the covenant neither, which Jacob once had; They went their own way, and they have their reward. (Times and Seasons, 4:85)

Mischief and the profession of piety have always gone hand in hand, as has the practice of picking and choosing among heaven's truths to find those that fit the professing believer's appetites and fancies. At the same time, such people turn a blind eye to the principles of sacrifice and obedience. So it is that living prophets are ignored in preference to dead ones and the spirit of revelation denied while the Bible is enshrined.

76:112 The question is often asked, Throughout the endless expanses of eternity will there eventually be advancement from degree to degree? That is, can those whose glory is telestial progress to a terrestrial order, while those of a terrestrial order become celestial? Though conflicting opinions have been given by men in positions of authority, the question is answered, in the judgment of the writers, by the very nature of the resurrection itself. If the resurrection is the inseparable union of body and spirit (Alma 11:45; D&C 138:17), then that which is telestial cannot be changed so that it could endure or abide a terrestrial law, "worlds without end," and that which is terrestrial for the same reason could not become celestial. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 88:17-32.

All the Faithful May See the Vision of the Degrees of Glory

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 76:114-19

76:114-19 Doctrine and Covenants 76 stands unrivaled as the greatest revelation of our dispensation. No other revelation reveals more of eternity past and eternity future than this revelation does. From it we learn of the role of Christ as creator and Savior of countless worlds, of the premortal life and the war in heaven, of the destiny of those who become children of perdition, and of the glories of the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial kingdoms. This combination of visions given to the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon stands unsurpassed in teaching the doctrine of heirship, with its testimony that mortal man in the course of the eternities can become equal in power, might, and dominion with God himself! The boldness of such a doctrine assures that we as a people will forever stand alone among those professing a faith in Christ. None want fellowship with us on doctrinal grounds, nor would we have reason to seek it with them. Plainly we stand alone. Yet in it all, no doctrine in this revelation matches in greatness the promise that every faithful soul is a rightful heir to all the mysteries of the kingdom, to every revelation and vision given or shown to the prophets, even to the manifestation of Christ himself.

There is but one gospel, and by that gospel all humankind will be saved or condemned. If that gospel allows one man to repent, it must in like manner allow all men the same privilege; and if it grants the visions of eternity to one man, it must, by the same principle, grant that same vision to all worthy Saints who seek it. Thus it is for each of us to choose that portion of heaven's light in which we will stand.

76:115 He commanded that we should not write. Joseph Smith later explained, "I could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 305).

76:118 Bear his presence in the world of glory. This revelation, which began with the promise that the faithful Saints may have the "wonders of eternity" (v. 8) revealed to them now, concludes with the promise that they might stand in the presence of God "while in the flesh." It is fundamental to our faith that if the God of heaven extends the promise of salvation to so much as a single soul he must in justice extend it to every soul on the same terms and conditions. If one can receive a remission of sins through faith, repentance, and baptism, so can all; if one can receive an answer to his prayers, so can all; if one can entertain angels, so can all; if one can stand in his presence while in the flesh, so can all. Such is the promise of the restored gospel; such is the declaration of this text. We do not have one gospel for prophets and another for their followers. There is but one gospel, and its covenants and promised blessings are alike for all.

A Vision

The Prophet's Response to a Poem by W. W. Phelps February 1843

1 I will go, I will go, to the home of the Saints, Where the virtue's the value, and life the reward; But before I return to my former estate I must fulfil the mission I had from the Lord.

2 Wherefore, hear, O ye heavens, and give ear O ye earth; And rejoice ye inhabitants truly again; For the Lord he is God, and his life never ends, And besides him there ne'er was a Saviour of men.

3 His ways are a wonder; his wisdom is great; The extent of his doings, there's none can unveil; His purposes fail not; from age unto age He still is the same, and his years never fail.

4 His throne is the heavens, his life time is all Of eternity now, and eternity then; His union is power, and none stays his hand, The Alpha, Omega, for ever: Amen.

5 For thus saith the Lord, in the spirit of truth, I am merciful, gracious, and good unto those That fear me, and live for the life that's to come; My delight is to honor the saints with repose;

6 That serve me in righteousness true to the end; Eternal's their glory, and great their reward; I'll surely reveal all my myst'ries to them, The great hidden myst'ries in my kingdom stor'd

7 From the council in Kolob, to time on the earth. And for ages to come unto them I will show My pleasure & will, what my kingdom will do: Eternity's wonders they truly shall know.

8 Great things of the future I'll show unto them, Yea, things of the vast generations to rise; For their wisdom and glory shall be very great, And their pure understanding extend to the skies:

9 And before them the wisdom of wise men shall cease, And the nice understanding of prudent ones fail! For the light of my spirit shall light mine elect, And the truth is so mighty 't will ever prevail.

10 And the secrets and plans of my will I'll reveal; The sanctified pleasures when earth is renew'd, What the eye hath not seen, nor the ear hath yet heard; Nor the heart of the natural man ever hath view'd.

11 I, Joseph, the prophet, in spirit beheld, And the eyes of the inner man truly did see Eternity sketch'd in a vision from God, Of what was, and now is, and yet is to be.

12 Those things which the Father ordained of old, Before the world was, or a system had run, Through Jesus the Maker and Saviour of all; The only begotten, (Messiah) his son.

13 Of whom I bear record, as all prophets have, And the record I bear is the fulness,yea even The truth of the gospel of Jesusthe Christ, With whom I convers'd, in the vision of heav'n.

14 For while in the act of translating his word, Which the Lord in his grace had appointed to me, I came to the gospel recorded by John, Chapter fifth and the twenty ninth verse, which you'll see. Which was given as follows: "Speaking of the resurrection of the dead, "Concerning those who shall hear the voice of "the son of man "And shall come forth: "They who have done good in the resurrection "of the just. "And they who have done evil in the resurrection of the unjust."

15 I marvel'd at these resurrections, indeed! For it came unto me by the spirit direct: And while I did meditate what it all meant, The Lord touch'd the eyes of my own intellect:

16 Hosanna forever! they open'd anon, And the glory of God shone around where I was; And there was the Son, at the Father's right hand, In a fulness of glory, and holy applause.

17 I beheld round the throne, holy angels and hosts, And sanctified beings from worlds that have been, In holiness worshipping God and the Lamb, Forever and ever, amen and amen!

18 And now after all of the proofs made of him, By witnesses truly, by whom he was known, This is mine, last of all, that he lives; yea he lives! And sits at the right hand of God, on his throne.

19 And I heard a great voice, bearing record from heav'n, He's the Saviour, and only begotten of God By him, of him, and through him, the worlds were all made, Even all that career in the heavens so broad.

20 Whose inhabitants, too, from the first to the last, Are sav'd by the very same Saviour of ours; And, of course, are begotten God's daughters and sons, By the very same truths, and the very same pow'rs.

21 And I saw and bear record of warfare in heav'n; For an angel of light, in authority great, Rebell'd against Jesus, and sought for his pow'r, But was thrust down to woe from his Godified state.

22 And the heavens all wept, and the tears drop'd like dew, That Lucifer, son of the morning had fell! Yea, is fallen! is fall'n, and become, Oh, alas! The son of Perdition; the devil of hell!

23 And while I was yet in the spirit of truth, The commandment was: write ye the vision all out; For Satan, old serpent, the devil's for war, And yet will encompass the saints round about.

24 And I saw, too, the suff'ring and mis'ry of those, (Overcome by the devil, in warfare and fight,) In hell-fire, and vengeance, the doom of the damn'd; For the Lord said, the vision is further: so write.

25 For thus saith the Lord, now concerning all those Who know of my power and partake of the same; And suffer themselves, that they be overcome By the power of Satan; despising my name:

26 Defying my power, and denying the truth; They are theyof the world, or of men, most forlorn, The Sons of Perdition, of whom, ah! I say, 'Twere better for them had they never been born!

27 They're vessels of wrath, and dishonor to God, Doom'd to suffer his wrath, in the regions of woe, Through the terrific night of eternity's round, With the devil and all of his angels below:

28 Of whom it is said, no forgiveness is giv'n, In this world, alas! nor the world that's to come; For they have denied the spirit of God, After having receiv'd it: and mis'ry's their doom.

29 And denying the only begotten of God, And crucify him to themselves, as they do, And openly put him to shame in their flesh, By gospel they cannot repentance renew.

30 They are they, who must go to the great lake of fire, Which burneth with brimstone, yet never consumes, And dwell with the devil, and angels of his, While eternity goes and eternity comes.

31 They are they, who must groan through the great second death, And are not redeemed in the time of the Lord; While all the rest are, through the triumph of Christ, Made partakers of grace, by the power of his word.

32 The myst'ry of Godliness truly is great; The past, and the present, and what is to be; And this is the gospelglad tidings to all, Which the voice from the heavens bore record to me:

33 That he came to the world in the middle of time, To lay down his life for his friends and his foes, And bear away sin as a mission of love; And sanctify earth for a blessed repose.

34 'Tis decreed, that he'll save all the work of his hands, And sanctify them by his own precious blood; And purify earth for the Sabbath of rest, By the agent of fire, as it was by the flood.

35 The Savior will save all his Father did give, Even all that he gave in the regions abroad, Save the Sons of Perdition: They're lost; ever lost, And can never return to the presence of God.

36 They are they, who must reign with the devil in hell, In eternity now, and eternity then, Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quench'd; And the punishment still, is eternal. Amen.

37 And which is the torment apostates receive, But the end, or the place where the torment began, Save to them who are made to partake of the same, Was never, nor will be, revealed unto man.

38 Yet God shows by vision a glimpse of their fate, And straightway he closes the scene that was shown: So the width, or the depth, or the misery thereof, Save to those that partake, is forever unknown.

39 And while I was pondering, the vision was closed; And the voice said to me, write the vision: for lo! 'Tis the end of the scene of the sufferings of those, Who remain filthy still in their anguish and woe.

40 And again I bear record of heavenly things, Where virtue's the value, above all that's pric'd Of the truth of the gospel concerning the just, That rise in the first resurrection of Christ.

41 Who receiv'd and believ'd, and repented likewise, And then were baptis'd, as a man always was, Who ask'd and receiv'd a remission of sin, And honored the kingdom by keeping its laws.

42 Being buried in water, as Jesus had been, And keeping the whole of his holy commands, They received the gift of the spirit of truth, By the ordinance truly of laying on hands.

43 For these overcome, by their faith and their works, Being tried in their life-time, as purified gold, And seal'd by the spirit of promise, to life, By men called of God, as was Aaron of old.

44 They are they, of the church of the first born of God, And unto whose hands he committeth all things; For they hold the keys of the kingdom of heav'n, And reign with the Savior, as priests, and as kings.

45 They're priests of the order of Melchisedek, Like Jesus, (from whom is this highest reward,) Receiving a fulness of glory and light; As written: They're Gods; even sons of the Lord.

46 So all things are theirs; yea, of life, or of death; Yea, whether things now, or to come, all are theirs, And they are the Savior's, and he is the Lord's, Having overcome all, as eternity's heirs.

47 'Tis wisdom that man never glory in man, But give God the glory for all that he hath; For the righteous will walk in the presence of God, While the wicked are trod under foot in his wrath.

48 Yea, the righteous shall dwell in the presence of God, And of Jesus, forever, from earth's second birth For when he comes down in the splendor of heav'n, All these he'll bring with him, to reign on the earth.

49 These are they that arise in their bodies of flesh, When the trump of the first resurrection shall sound; These are they that come up to Mount Zion, in life, Where the blessings and gifts of the spirit abound.

50 These are they that have come to the heavenly place; To the numberless courses of angels above: To the city of God; e'en the holiest of all, And the home of the blessed, the fountain of love:

51 To the church of old Enoch, and of the first born: And gen'ral assembly of ancient renown'd, Whose names are all kept in the archives of heav'n, As chosen and faithful, and fit to be crown'd.

52 These are they that are perfect through Jesus' own blood, Whose bodies celestial are mention'd by Paul, Where the sun is the typical glory thereof, And God, and his Christ, are the true judge of all.

53 Again I beheld the terrestrial world, In the order and glory of Jesus, go on; 'Twas not as the church of the first born of God But shone in its place, as the moon to the sun.

54 Behold, these are they that have died without law; The heathen of ages that never had hope, And those of the region and shadow of death, The spirits in prison, that light has brought up.

55 To spirits in prison the Savior once preach'd, And taught them the gospel, with powers afresh; And then were the living baptiz'd for their dead, That they might be judg'd as if men in the flesh.

56 These are they that are hon'rable men of the earth; Who were blinded and dup'd by the cunning of men: They receiv'd not the truth of the Savior at first; But did, when they heard it in prison, again.

57 Not valiant for truth, they obtain'd not the crown, But are of that glory that's typ'd by the moon: They are they, that come into the presence of Christ, But not to the fulness of God, on his throne.

58 Again I beheld the telestial, as third, The lesser, or starry world, next in its place, For the leaven must leaven three measures of meal, And every knee bow that is subject to grace.

59 These are they that receiv'd not the gospel of Christ, Or evidence, either, that he ever was; As the stars are all diff'rent in glory and light, So differs the glory of these by the laws.

60 These are they that deny not the spirit of God, But are thrust down to hell, with the devil, for sins, As hypocrites, liars, whoremongers, and thieves, And stay 'till the last resurrection begins.

61 'Till the Lamb shall have finish'd the work he begun; Shall have trodden the wine press, in fury alone, And overcome all by the pow'r of his might: He conquers to conquer, and save all his own.

62 These are they that receive not a fulness of light, From Christ, in eternity's world, where they are, The terrestrial sends them the Comforter, though; And minist'ring angels, to happify there.

63 And so the telestial is minister'd to, By ministers from the terrestrial one, As terrestrial is, from the celestial throne; And the great, greater, greatest, seem's stars, moon, and sun.

64 And thus I beheld, in the vision of heav'n, The telestial glory, dominion and bliss, Surpassing the great understanding of men, Unknown, save reveal'd, in a world vain as this.

65 And lo, I beheld the terrestrial, too, Which excels the telestial in glory and light, In splendor, and knowledge, and wisdom, and joy, In blessings, and graces, dominion and might.

66 I beheld the celestial, in glory sublime; Which is the most excellent kingdom that is, Where God, e'en the Father, in harmony reigns; Almighty, supreme, and eternal, in bliss.

67 Where the church of the first born in union reside, And they see as they're seen, and they know as they're known; Being equal in power, dominion and might, With a fulness of glory and grace, round his throne.

68 The glory celestial is one like the sun; The glory terrestr'al is one like the moon; The glory telestial is one like the stars, And all harmonize like the parts of a tune.

69 As the stars are all different in lustre and size, So the telestial region, is mingled in bliss; From least unto greatest, and greatest to least, The reward is exactly as promis'd in this.

70 These are they that came out for Apollos and Paul; For Cephas and Jesus, in all kinds of hope; For Enoch and Moses, and Peter, and John; For Luther and Calvin, and even the Pope.

71 For they never received the gospel of Christ, Nor the prophetic spirit that came from the Lord; Nor the covenant neither, which Jacob once had; They went their own way, and they have their reward.

72 By the order of God, last of all, these are they, That will not be gather'd with saints here below, To be caught up to Jesus, and meet in the cloud: In darkness they worshipp'd; to darkness they go.

73 These are they that are sinful, the wicked at large, That glutted their passion by meanness or worth; All liars, adulterers, sorc'rers, and proud; And suffer, as promis'd, God's wrath on the earth.

74 These are they that must suffer the vengeance of hell, 'Till Christ shall have trodden all enemies down, And perfected his work, in the fulness of times: And is crown'd on his throne with his glorious crown.

75 The vast multitude of the telestial world As the stars of the skies, or the sands of the sea; The voice of Jehovah echo'd far and wide, Ev'ry tongue shall confess, and they all bow the knee.

76 Ev'ry man shall be judg'd by the works of his life, And receive a reward in the mansions prepar'd; For his judgments are just, and his works never end, As his prophets and servants have always declar'd.

77 But the great things of God, which he show'd unto me, Unlawful to utter, I dare not declare; They surpass all the wisdom and greatness of men, And only are seen, as has Paul, where they are.

78 I will go, I will go, while the secret of life, Is blooming in heaven, and blasting in hell; Is leaving on earth, and a budding in space: I will go, I will go, with you, brother, farewell.

JOSEPH SMITH. Nauvoo, February 1843. (Times and Seasons, 4:81-85)
