Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77

DATE: MARCH 1832

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

In the form of questions and answers, the Prophet unlocked the book of Revelation by the spirit of revelation. He recorded that "in connection with the translation of the Scriptures, I received the following explanation of the Revelation of St. John" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:253).

Beasts Have Spirits and Shall Dwell in Eternal Felicity on an Immortal Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77:1-4

77:1 The sea of glass was shown to John in vision when "a door was opened in heaven" (Revelation 4:1), revealing God sitting upon a throne. "And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal" (Revelation 4:6). John described heaven using earthly elements as likenesses. The Prophet Joseph Smith later explained that "angels do not reside on a planet like this earth; but they reside in the presence of God, on a globe like a sea of glass and fire, where all things for their glory are manifest, past, present, and future, and are continually before the Lord. The place where God resides is a great Urim and Thummim. This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's" (D&C 130:6-9). The Lord revealed that the earth "must needs be sanctified from all unrighteousness, that it may be prepared for the celestial glory; for after it hath filled the measure of its creation, it shall be crowned with glory, even with the presence of God the Father" (D&C 88:18-19). John was privileged to see in vision that future day when the Father and the Son will crown the earth with the glory of their presence. This will take place after the Millennium, when the earth becomes the celestial kingdom for those who are worthy of that glory (D&C 88:17-20).

77:2 The four beasts. John's revelation reads: "Round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they were full of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come" (Revelation 4:6-8). Animals not only find place in the celestial kingdom but also demonstrate an attitude of worship. Such worship is meaningful only to the extent that it represents an intelligent expression of faith on the part of the creatures involved. Animals, therefore, may have a natural intelligence beyond what has generally been supposed and may have the capacity to consciously choose to conform to the law by which their respective kingdoms are governed. They are very much a part of the gospel plan. They were created by God and occupied an important place in the earth's Edenic state. When Adam fell, animals fell too and thus stood as much in need of salvation through Christ as did our first parents. The restored gospel extends our understanding of the length and breadth of the Atonement to include all living things, not just the offspring of Adam and Eve.

John uses figurative expressions in describing heaven. The beasts shown to him represent different classes of beings. "John saw the actual beast in heaven," declared the Prophet Joseph Smith, "showing to John that beasts did actually exist there. . . . John saw curious looking beasts in heaven; he saw every creature that was in heaven,all the beasts, fowls and fish in heaven,actually there, giving glory to God. How do you prove it? (See Rev. 5:13.) 'And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto Him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.'

"I suppose John saw beings there of a thousand forms, that had been saved from ten thousand times ten thousand earths like this,strange beasts of which we have no conception: all might be seen in heaven. The grand secret was to show John what there was in heaven. John learned that God glorified Himself by saving all that His hands had made, whether beasts, fowls, fishes or men; and He will glorify Himself with them.

"Says one, 'I cannot believe in the salvation of beasts.' Any man who would tell you that this could not be, would tell you that the revelations are not true. John heard the words of the beasts giving glory to God, and understood them. God who made the beasts could understand every language spoken by them. The four beasts were four of the most noble animals that had filled the measure of their creation, and had been saved from other worlds, because they were perfect: they were like angels in their sphere. We are not told where they came from, and I do not know; but they were seen and heard by John praising and glorifying God" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 291-92).

It should be noted that not all beasts seen by John in vision were actual beasts dwelling in heaven. The Revelator, like Daniel and other prophets, was shown earthly events that were to come. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that the fierce- looking beasts of the book of Revelation represented corrupt kingdoms on the earth: "When God made use of the figure of a beast in visions to the prophets He did it to represent those kingdoms which had degenerated and become corrupt, savage and beast-like in their dispositions, even the degenerate kingdoms of the wicked world; but He never made use of the figure of a beast nor any of the brute kind to represent His kingdom.

"Daniel says (chap. 7, v. 16) when he saw the vision of the four beasts, 'I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this,' the angel interpreted the vision to Daniel. . . . You there see that the beasts are spoken of to represent the kingdoms of the world, the inhabitants whereof were beastly and abominable characters; they were murderers, corrupt, carnivorous, and brutal in their dispositions. The lion, the bear, the leopard, and the ten- horned beast represented the kingdoms of the world, says Daniel; for I refer to the prophets to qualify my observations which I make" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 289).

The spirit of man in the likeness of his person. The mortal body was created in the image of the spirit body, or as this verse states, "that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual." The premortal Christ explained to the brother of Jared: "Seest thou that ye are created after mine own image? Yea, even all men were created in the beginning after mine own image. Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh" (Ether 3:15-16). Further, the spirit of each individual is in the likeness of God because "man, as a spirit, was begotten and born of heavenly parents, and reared to maturity in the eternal mansions of the Father" (Clark, Messages, 4:205). All things produce after their own kind whether in obtaining a body of spirit or a body of flesh.

The spirit of the beast, and every other creature. Each form of animal life is created after the image of a spirit body that, like humankind, existed before the temporal existence in mortality. In 1909 the First Presidency declared regarding God's creations: "By His almighty power He organized the earth, and all that it contains, from spirit and element, which exist co-eternally with Himself. He formed every plant that grows, and every animal that breathes, each after its own kind, spiritually and temporally'that which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal, and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual.' He made the tadpole and the ape, the lion and the elephant but He did not make them in His own image, nor endow them with Godlike reason and intelligence. Nevertheless, the whole animal creation will be perfected and perpetuated in the Hereafter, each class in its 'distinct order or sphere,' and will enjoy 'eternal felicity.' That fact has been made plain in this dispensation (Doctrine and Covenants 77:3)" (Clark, Messages, 4:206). Because creatures that fulfill the measure of their creation are resurrected in glory, it seems to follow that they will have power to beget spirits of their kind. The Prophet Joseph Smith reasoned, "Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son? Whenever did a tree or anything spring into existence without a progenitor? And everything comes in this way" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 373).

77:5 Four and twenty elders. We are told in verse five that these elders, who "had on their heads crowns of gold" (Revelation 4:4), were still in the paradise of God, waiting the day of their resurrection to crowns of glory. It would appear that John saw things in this instance not as they are but as they will be. Doctrine and Covenants 137 follows this same pattern. In this revelation, Joseph Smith saw a vision of his father and mother in the celestial kingdom, even though they were still living (v. 5).

This Earth Has a Temporal Existence of Seven Thousand Years

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77:5-7

77:5 The seven churches. John addressed his account of the revelation received on the isle of Patmos to "the seven churches which are in Asia" (Revelation 1:11).

77:6-7 These verses help us understand when the events in the book of Revelation will be fulfilled. The book held "in the right hand of him that sat on the throne" (Revelation 5:1) contained the works of God from the time of Adam through the end of the Millennium. Each thousand-year period is represented by its respective seal. "John had the curtains of heaven withdrawn," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith, "and by vision looked through the dark vista of future ages, and contemplated events that should transpire throughout every subsequent period of time, until the final winding up scene" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 247). Further, the Lord's revealed timetable of John's vision indicates that most of the tribulations described by John will take place after the opening of the seventh seal, or during the seventh thousand years.

Various Angels Restore the Gospel and Minister on Earth

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77:8-10

77:8 The four angels. John recorded, "I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree" (Revelation 7:1).

They who have the everlasting gospel to commit to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. The restoration of the fulness of the gospel came to pass during the sixth thousand years through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Various angels appeared to him, restoring keys and knowledge in opening the dispensation of the fulness of times.

77:9 Till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. Concerning this sealing, the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Four destroying angels holding power over the four quarters of the earth until the servants of God are sealed in their foreheads, which signifies sealing the blessing upon their heads, meaning the everlasting covenant, thereby making their calling and election sure. When a seal is put upon the father and mother, it secures their posterity, so that they cannot be lost, but will be saved by virtue of the covenant of their father and mother" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 321).

This is Elias. "According to the plan and program of the Lord," Elder McConkie explained, "the dispensation of the fulness of times is 'the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.' (Acts 3:21.) This restoration is to be effected by Elias. Before the winding up of the Lord's work, the promise is: 'Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things.' (Matt. 17:11.) With these ancient scriptures before us, these questions arise: Who is the promised Elias who was to come and restore all things? Has this work of restoration taken place? Or is it something that is yet future?

"Correcting the Bible by the spirit of revelation, the Prophet restored a statement of John the Baptist which says that Christ is the Elias who was to restore all things. ([JST] John 1:21-28.) By revelation we are also informed that the Elias who was to restore all things is the angel Gabriel who was known in mortality as Noah. (D&C 27:6-7; Luke 1:5-25; Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157.) From the same authentic source we also learn that the promised Elias is John the Revelator. (D&C 77:9, 14.) Thus there are three different revelations which name Elias as being three different persons. What are we to conclude?

"By finding answer to the question, by whom has the restoration been effected, we shall find who Elias is and find there is no problem in harmonizing these apparently contradictory revelations. Who has restored all things? Was it one man? Certainly not. Many angelic ministrants have been sent from the courts of glory to confer keys and powers, to commit their dispensations and glories again to men on earth. At least the following have come: Moroni, John the Baptist, Peter, James, and John, Moses, Elijah, Elias, Gabriel, Raphael, and Michael. (D&C 13; 110; 128:19-21.) Since it is apparent that no one messenger has carried the whole burden of the restoration, but rather that each has come with a specific endowment from on high, it becomes clear that Elias is a composite personage. The expression must be understood to be a name and a title for those whose mission it was to commit keys and powers to men in this final dispensation. (Doctrines of Salvation, vol. 1, pp. 170-174.)" (Mormon Doctrine, 221).

The Sealing of the 144,000

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77:11

77:11 High priests, ordained unto the holy order of God. Those inheriting celestial glory are high priests or "priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek" (D&C 76:57).

Ordained out of every nation. The twelve tribes of Israel have been "scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations" (1 Nephi 22:3). The gathering of Israel through the Restoration includes Saints of every nation who receive the highest ordinances of the priesthood. Temple blessings will be administered to these Saints by those of their own nation and in their own tongue (Revelation 5:9-10; D&C 90:11).

To bring as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn. Confirmed members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints have been baptized and have received the gift of the Holy Ghost. Members of the Church of the Firstborn have received, in addition to these ordinances, all of the ordinances of the house of the Lord. They have entered into the new and everlasting covenant of marriage, which has been "sealed unto them by the Holy Spirit of promise" (D&C 132:19). They are therefore "sealed up unto eternal life . . . through the power of the Holy Priesthood" (D&C 131:5). The 144,000 high priests mentioned in this verse are set apart to minister the highest ordinances of the house of the Lord, bringing "as many as will come to the church of the Firstborn." The Prophet Joseph Smith taught: "It is not only necessary that you should be baptized for your dead, but you will have to go through all the ordinances for them, the same as you have gone through to save yourselves. There will be 144,000 saviors on Mount Zion, and with them an innumerable host that no man can number. Oh! I beseech you to go forward, go forward and make your calling and your election sure" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 366). "They who are the church of the Firstborn . . . are priests and kings . . . who overcome by faith and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise" (D&C 76:53-54, 56).

Christ Will Come in the Beginning of the Seventh Thousand Years

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77:12-14

77:12 John recorded that "when he [Christ] had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them were given seven trumpets" (Revelation 8:1-2).

Judge all things, and shall redeem all things. Final judgment occurs for each person in the resurrection. All that are resurrected during the beginning of the seventh thousand years will be judged and receive either celestial or terrestrial glory.

Except that which he hath not put into his power. The atoning blood of the Lamb does not cleanse the wicked, who will not be redeemed from the dead until after the Millennium. Those who come forth from their graves after the Millennium will inherit a telestial glory or will be sons of perdition. The only people to enjoy the millennial peace will be the righteous.

The sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work. The seven angels announce desolation and wars at the sounding of their trumps. The destruction attendant to the return of the Lord both finishes his work in mortality among the wicked and prepares the world for the Millennium.

77:13 The ninth chapter of Revelation contains John's vision of wars and plagues. The Revelator saw that by this destruction "was the third part of men killed" (Revelation 9:18).

77:14 The little book which was eaten by John. The apostle John recorded, "And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the little book. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey. And I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings" (Revelation 10:8-11).

By eating the book containing the word of God, John, in a symbolic sense, was eating the bread of life; he was feasting upon the word, which was in his "mouth sweet as honey." Yet it made his "belly bitter"; in other words, the judgments and plagues promised those who failed to eat that same word caused him great sorrow. "How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth!" (Psalm 119:103.) Such is the exulting cry of the psalmist. Conversely, how bitter is the penalty for rebellion and disobedience. Ezekiel in like circumstance had been commanded to eat a book, which was in his mouth "as honey for sweetness," but in the writing there was found "lamentations, and mourning, and woe" (Ezekiel 3:1-3; 2:6-10).

It was a mission, and an ordinance, for him to gather the tribes of Israel. John requested of the risen Lord that he might have "power over death, that I may live and bring souls unto thee" (D&C 7:2). The Savior granted John his desire and promised him that he would "prophesy before nations, kindreds, tongues and people" (D&C 7:3). John's mission is to work with the scattered house of Israel in whatever capacity is necessary to prepare them to receive the restoration of the gospel. In that manner he will gather the family of Jacob. Remarks by the Prophet Joseph Smith indicate that John has been actively engaged in this commission. In June 1831 he declared "that John the Revelator was then among the Ten Tribes of Israel who had been led away by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, to prepare them for their return from their long dispersion" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:176n).

The three Nephite disciples were given a similar mission. "And behold they will be among the Gentiles, and the Gentiles shall know them not. They will also be among the Jews, and the Jews shall know them not. And it shall come to pass, when the Lord seeth fit in his wisdom that they shall minister unto all the scattered tribes of Israel, and unto all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, and shall bring out of them unto Jesus many souls, that their desire may be fulfilled, and also because of the convincing power of God which is in them" (3 Nephi 28:27-29). Neither an account of John's work nor of the Nephite disciples' labor among the dispersed of Israel has yet been made known.

This is Elias. See commentary on verse 9, "This is Elias."

The Two Prophets Who Are to Be Slain in Jerusalem

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 77:15

77:15 The Lord revealed to John that "I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. . . . And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. . . . And after three days and an half the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them" (Revelation 11:3, 5-9, 11-12).

Two prophets. The necessity of two prophets is to comply with the law of witnesses, which requires that the truth of all things be established by the testimony of two or more competent witnesses. These prophets will also of necessity have been called and commissioned by him who stands at the head of the earthly church and kingdom of God. Having established his Church once again upon the earth, the Lord has promised us that no true prophet will be called to function independent of that order he has established (D&C 42:11; Article of Faith 5).

Raised up to the Jewish nation. The two prophets do not come from the Jewish nation but are to prophesy to the Jewish nation. Similar to the biblical account of Jewish prophets such as Isaiah and Amos warning the other tribes of Israel, in the last days prophets will be sent to the Jews. The two witnesses will be like John the Baptist, preparing the Jewish people for the coming of the Messiah. Following their ministry the Lord will set his foot upon the Mount of Olives to personally minister to his people.

The mention of a Jewish nation in itself is prophetic. At the time of this revelation no Jewish nation existed in Palestine. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 45:48.

Built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers. As the seed of Joseph is destined to build the city of New Jerusalem with its temple in the New World, so the seed of Judah is destined to build the city of Jerusalem with its temple in the Old World. This is to be done under the direction of the prophet who holds the keys of the gathering of Israel and the leading of the ten tribes from the lands of the North. Both cities with their temples must be built before Christ returns; nevertheless, the building of both cities will also continue after his coming.
