Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 78

DATE: BETWEEN 29 FEBRUARY AND 4 MARCH 1832

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

During the early part of 1832, the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon continued the work of revising the scriptures. At the time this revelation was given Joseph Smith was still residing at the home of John Johnson at Hiram, Ohio. This revelation was given to members of the "high priesthood" of the Church. They were assembled to impart instructions relative to the "united order," or "order of Enoch," the basis on which the promised Zion was to be built. The Lord had revealed that it was only through obedience to his heavenly order that Zion could be established.

The Saints Should Organize and Establish a Storehouse

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 78:1-4

78:1 Ordained unto the high priesthood of my church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 84:29.

78:3-4 These verses are best understood in their immediate historical context. In earlier manuscript copies of this revelation, the phrase "in regu lating and establishing the affairs of the storehouse for the poor of my people" (v. 3) was absent. The original words called for the organization of "the Literary and Mercantile establishments of my church." The Literary Firm referred to the group of elders that consecrated their property and talents for printing the scriptures and other Church publications (D&C 70:1-5). Further, the Lord called for the establishment of what is officially referred to in Church records as the United Firm, and later, the united order. Legal title to Church property and buildings was held in the name of the United Firm. It eventually included about a dozen Church leaders, specified by the Lord in revelation to receive responsibility as his stewards. Members of the order were governed by principles of the law of consecration. Surplus profits were used to operate the Church and to purchase lands for the inheritance of the Saints in Zion and Kirtland.

The decision was made to include several revelations received during councils of the Literary and United Firms in the first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, published in 1835. By that time the United Firm, or United Order, had been reorganized with individual members receiving specific properties as stewardships (D&C 104). This reorganization took place after a mob in Jackson County, Missouri, destroyed much of the property owned by the firm and after an apostate named Doctor Philastus Hurlburt drained profits in Kirtland, Ohio, with a lawsuit to obtain firm- owned property. Additional financial burden stemmed from debt the Saints accrued on property purchased for the building of the houses of the Lord in Kirtland (D&C 94; 96). To protect firm members from claims against them, it was decided that references to the United Firm in the revelations be changed to refer to an order and that names of firm members and locations be replaced with unidentifiable designations, such as Enoch, Pelagoram, Mahemson, Shinehah, etc. Reflecting the changes made for the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, the revelations continue to refer to the literary and mercantile establishments as "mine order" (D&C 96:4), "my order" (D&C 104:40), "the order" (D&C 104:1, 10, 21, 71), "this order" (D&C 78:8; 82:20; 92:2), and "united order" (D&C 92:1; 104:1, 47, 53). The prin ciples of stewardship emphasized in the revelations continue to guide the Church today in supplying funds for its operation and in providing for those in need.

78:3 Both in this place and in the land of Zion. This place refers to Ohio, specifically Kirtland, and Zion refers to Independence, Missouri.

78:4 The salvation of man. God instituted the principles of the law of consecration for the blessing and welfare of the poor. These principles deal with temporal salvation. The attitude and spirit in which these principles are applied, however, is inseparably connected with the spiritual welfare of the Lord's people. Only when the Saints are of one heart and one mind can they dwell in righteousness having no poor among them (Moses 7:18).

Wise Use of Their Properties Will Lead to Salvation

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 78:5-12

78:5 Equal in the bonds of heavenly things. Elder Marion G. Romney explained the spiritual and temporal significance of the principles of the law of consecration as implemented in the welfare programs of the Church in bringing equality and unity among the Saints: "Church welfare is more than just a plan to provide for the physical needs of the Saints. I am convinced that in addition to being a way of economic salvation in the days of necessity, it has deep spiritual significance; and that should other means always be available with which to supply the physical needs of the people, still the welfare plan, or some similar plan sponsored by the Church under the inspiration of the Lord, requiring us to serve and minister to one another in temporal affairs, would be necessary in order to bring us to that oneness, equality, and 'union required by the law of the celestial kingdom.' (D&C 105:4.)

"Unity, above all else, is the one thing characteristic of the Church of Christ. The burden of the Master's great prayer 'in the hour of his approaching death was, that the oneness subsisting between himself and the Father should also subsist between himself and his apostles, and . . . between them and all those who should receive the gospel through their teachings.' (B. H. Roberts, The Falling Away, 1-2.)

"The way to this oneness and unity has always been mutual consideration and helpfulness to one another. This the Lord declared to ancient Israel when he said, 'thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself' (Leviticus 19:18), and during his earthly ministry he reaffirmed this command as one of the two great requirements upon which hang all the law and the prophets. (Matthew 22:37-39; Mark 12:29-31; Luke 10:27.)

"In this dispensation, the Lord has made it clear that loving one's neighbor as oneself includes administering to his temporal needs. He said to the members of the Church before it was a year old: 'be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine.' (D&C 38:27.) . . .

"Keep in mind that this organization was to be built around a storehouse from which the needs of the poor among the Lord's people were to be supplied. Some folk regard this as a menial temporal activity; but the Lord said its purpose was to advance the cause which the saints had espoused for the salvation of men and to the glory of their Father in heaven. (D&C 78:4.) He thus associated it with his loftiest endeavor, that of bringing to pass the immortality and the eternal life of man, which he has declared to be his work and his glory. (Moses 1:39.)

"Who but the Lord himself could devise a way by which the members of his Church, rich and poor alike, can be so motivated that by the exercise of their own free agency they will administer to each other's needs in such a spirit of love as to move toward these great objectives? . . .

"To us and for our day, the Lord has given the welfare plan whereby we may demonstrate to him through mutual consideration and helpfulness to one another in temporal things, that we do love our neighbors as ourselves, rich and poor alike, and thereby move toward the equality, oneness, and unity which the Lord requires of us. This plan is not meant for any one class alone. We all need the training it affords. The day for the ushering in of the great millennium approaches, and for that day we must be prepared to live as one in perfect unity. We cannot come suddenly to that happy state. It will take training" (Conference Report, October 1945, 157-59).

78:9 The three brethren mentioned in verse 9 were the original members of the United Firm. They left to organize the firm in Missouri on 1 April 1832 accompanied by Peter Whitmer Jr. and Jesse Gause. The Prophet Joseph Smith suffered great persecution in the Hiram, Ohio, area previous to leaving in accordance with the Lord's counsel. A week earlier, on the evening of 24 March 1832, a mob came to the John Johnson home and dragged the Prophet from his bedroom. The mob had previously taken Sidney Rigdon from his home. After tarring and feathering the two men, the mob left them for dead. That evening Emma and Joseph had been taking turns caring for twin babies who were seriously ill with measles. Emma had nursed the children, and Joseph slept in the trundle bed with a baby boy lying on his chest. The mob took the Prophet, but left little Joseph behind to the ravages of the cold that swept into the room. On 29 March, due to the effects of the cold and the measles, the baby boy died. At the time the men departed for Missouri, others in Joseph's and Sidney's families were ill with the measles. The Prophet Joseph Smith wrote concerning the labor undertaken when "leaving our families in affliction amidst of death upon the mercy of mobs and of brethren who you know sometimes are found to be unstable, unbelieving, unmerciful and unkind and in this trying situation to keep the commandment of God we took our lives in our hands and traveled through every combination of wickedness to your country for your salvation" (Jessee, Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 245; spelling standardized). The efforts of these men to fulfill the Lord's command to travel to Zion demonstrated their faith and diligence.

78:12 Lose his office and standing in the church. These brethren were given the responsibility to manage the finances of the Church. Any dishonesty in the use of the Lord's funds would bring a release from their calling and excommunication from the Church. Few matters in the Church today bring a more swift punishment than misuse of Church funds.

Delivered over to the buffetings of Satan. Elder Bruce R. McConkie explained: "To be turned over to the buffetings of Satan is to be given into his hands; it is to be turned over to him with all the protective power of the priesthood, of righteousness and of godliness removed, so that Lucifer is free to torment, persecute, and afflict such a person without let or hindrance. When the bars are down, the cuffs and curses of Satan, both in this world and in the world to come, bring indescribable anguish typified by burning fire and brimstone. The damned in hell so suffer" (Mormon Doctrine, 108).

"Apostates exhibit varying degrees of indifference and of rebellion," Elder McConkie further expounded, "and their punishment, in time and in eternity, is based on the type and degree of apostasy which is involved. Those who become indifferent to the Church, who simply drift from the course of righteousness to the way of the world, are not in the same category with traitors who fight the truth, and with those whose open rebellion destines them to eternal damnation as sons of perdition. All apostates are turned over to the buffetings of Satan in one degree or another, with the full wrath of Satan reserved for those who are cast into outer darkness with him in that kingdom devoid of glory.

"In this dispensation, those saints who broke the covenant of consecration by which they were bound in the united order were turned over to the buffetings of Satan. (D&C 78:3-12; 82:15-24; 104:1-10)" (Doctrinal New Testament Commentary, 3:75).

The day of redemption. Refers to the resurrection (D&C 88:16). This does not mean that those who are delivered to the buffetings of Satan will inherit celestial glory. Rather, they will be redeemed from hell to inherit a glory of which they are worthy. Those who become sons of perdition in mortality will be redeemed from Satan only in the sense that they will have power over him because they have resurrected bodies, for Satan is a personage of spirit.

The Church Should Be Independent of Earthly Powers

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 78:13-15

78:14-15 Joseph Fielding Smith wrote: "By the keeping of the covenant of consecration the Lord promised that the Church would stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world. It is the will of the Lord, that eventually, the Church may take its rightful place above all other creatures upon the earth, or other spheres that are not celestial. This is the destiny of the Church, but the destiny of each of us individually depends on whether or not we will accept in faithfulness the covenants and obligations which are given us. The promise is that if we will be obedient we shall come up and be made rulers over many kingdoms. Those who receive the celestial exaltation will, without doubt, be made rulers over many kingdoms, and they will have power and authority to direct and to counsel those of lesser glories. Moreover, they will have the privilege of exaltation and of becoming creators in their own right as the sons of God" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:308).

78:14 That the church may stand independent. The temporal survival of the kingdom of God is not to be dependent on the success of worldly markets and merchandising. Neither is the ability of the Church to provide for the poor contingent on the ability of worldly governments to rebound from natural or manmade disasters. In recent years the strength of the kingdom has been evident in its independent capacity to reach areas of turmoil and catastrophe quickly and in an organized manner. Part of the latter-day mission of the Church is to demonstrate to the world that the Church has the ability to provide help to those in need.

As the Church is to stand independent in a temporal sense, so it must stand independent spiritually. The Church will not become part of the various ecumenical movements that unite the churches of men. It will join with other churches in helping the needy but will not seek agreement on the terms and conditions of salvation. We have no borrowed doctrines or authority. We are not beholden to other churches for our faith, nor do we seek favor or approval for any of our practices. In all things we stand independent.

78:15 Be made rulers over many kingdoms. The Lord declared, "To him who overcometh, and keepeth my commandments unto the end, will I give power over many kingdoms; and he shall rule them with the word of God" (JST Revelation 2:26-27). The faithful will be made rulers, not over earthly empires but in the household of God. They will inherit celestial glory and be made kings and queens, presiding over their posterity in eternity.

Adam-ondi-Ahman. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 116.

Michael (Adam) Serves under the Direction of the Holy One (Christ)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 78:16

78:16 Michael. Adam, the first man, is the archangel Michael (D&C 107:54).

Given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel and direction of the Holy One. Adam has the responsibility to supervise and direct the work of God on earth through all generations. "The Priesthood was first given to Adam," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith; "he obtained the First Presidency, and held the keys of it from generation to generation. He obtained it in the Creation, before the world was formed, as in Genesis 1:26, 27, 28. He had dominion given him over every living creature. He is Michael the Archangel, spoken of in the Scriptures. Then to Noah, who is Gabriel; he stands next in authority to Adam in the Priesthood; he was called of God to this office, and was the father of all living in his day, and to him was given the dominion. These men held keys first on earth, and then in heaven.

"The Priesthood is an everlasting principle, and existed with God from eternity, and will to eternity, without beginning of days or end of years. The keys have to be brought from heaven whenever the Gospel is sent. When they are revealed from heaven, it is by Adam's authority" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 157).

Adam presides over the entire human family on this earth under the direction of the Savior. Jesus Christ presides over all the Father's children on many earths. The Lord revealed to Moses: "Worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten. And the first man of all men have I called Adam, which is many. But only an account of this earth, and the inhabitants thereof, give I unto you" (Moses 1:33-35). The Lord has not revealed the order of the priesthood on any but this earth, but this text suggests that each world is presided over by the first man placed thereon. Further, Jesus Christ presides over each of these creations, giving his servants keys to preside under his direction.

Regarding Adam's position in the priesthood and his relationship to the priesthood order in the various dispensations of the gospel on earth, the Prophet Joseph Smith stated: "Commencing with Adam, who was the first man, who is spoken of in Daniel as being the 'Ancient of Days,' or in other words, the first and oldest of all, the great, grand progenitor of whom it is said in another place he is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fullness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning to Christ, and from Christ to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed. . . .

"Therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. . . . These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord. . . .

"This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency of them all, even Adam; and Adam receiving his Presidency and authority from the Lord, but cannot receive a fullness until Christ shall present the Kingdom to the Father, which shall be at the end of the last dispensation" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 167-69).

The Prophet Joseph Smith and others who hold the keys of the kingdom in the last days are presided over by Adam. In a future day Adam will return to the earth and hold a council of those who have held keys. This meeting will be held at Adam-ondi- Ahman in northwest Missouri in preparation for the millennial reign of Jesus Christ. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 116.

Blessed Are the Faithful, for They Shall Inherit All Things

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 78:17-22

78:17-22 Saints who endure faithfully will return to the earth with the Savior "to reign on the earth over his people" during the Millennium (D&C 76:63). In eternity they will inherit all that the Father has and become "joint-heirs with Christ" (Romans 8:17). The Lord revealed further, "Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God" (D&C 76:58). Such promises seem far from our immediate reach. "When you climb up a ladder," explained the Prophet Joseph Smith, "you must begin at the bottom, and ascend step by step, until you arrive at the top; and so it is with the principles of the Gospelyou must begin with the first, and go on until you learn all the principles of exaltation. But it will be a great while after you have passed through the veil before you will have learned them. It is not all to be comprehended in this world; it will be a great work to learn our salvation and exaltation even beyond the grave" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 348).

78:20 Son Ahman. This is the name of Jesus Christ in the pure language given to Adam. Orson Pratt stated: "There is one revelation that this people are not generally acquainted with. I think it has never been published, but probably it will be in the Church History. It is given in questions and answers. The first question is, 'What is the name of God in the pure language?' The answer says, 'Ahman.' 'What is the name of the Son of God?' Answer, 'Son Ahman'" (Journal of Discourses, 2:342). Elder McConkie explained, "In the pure language spoken by Adamand which will be spoken again during the millennial era (Zephaniah 3:9)the name of God the Father is Ahman, or possibly Ah Man, a name-title having a meaning identical with or at least very closely akin to Man of Holiness (Moses 6:57). God revealed himself to Adam by this name to signify that he is a Holy Man, a truth which man must know and comprehend if he is to become like God and inherit exaltation (1 John 3:1-3; D&C 132:19-24)" (Mormon Doctrine, 29). "Since Ahman is the name of God the Father in the pure language spoken by Adam, Son Ahman is the name of his Only Begotten Son" (McConkie, Mormon Doctrine, 740).

78:21 Church of the Firstborn. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 76:54-60, 94.

He will take you up in a cloud. The Lord revealed that at his coming "the saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be quickened and be caught up to meet him. And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven" (D&C 88:96-97).
