Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 79

Jared Carter Is Called to Preach the Gospel by the Comforter

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 79:1-4

79:1 Jared Carter should go again into the eastern countries. Brother Carter had returned from serving a six- month mission (September 1831 through 29 February 1832) in this very area just a few weeks before this revelation was received. His new mission, which began 25 April 1832, took him to eastern New York and Vermont. He taught many relatives and friends on these missions.

The power of the ordination wherewith he has been ordained. Earlier, according to revelation, Jared Carter was ordained to the office of a priest in the Aaronic Priesthood (D&C 52:38). He received the Melchizedek Priesthood and was ordained an elder prior to leaving on his first mission. After having received this revelation, he recorded: "The word of the Lord came forth that showed that it was his will that I should go forth to the Eastern country as in the power of ordinance where with I had been ordained, which was to the high privilege of administering in the name of Jesus Christ even to seal on earth, to build up the Church of Christ and to work miracles in the name of Christ" (Journal of Jared Carter; spelling standardized). It appears from Jared Carter's entry that he was ordained a high priest at this time (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 20-21).

79:2 The Spirit of God may direct missionaries to the doors of those who are honest in heart and ready to hear the message of the Restoration.

79:3 I will crown him again with sheaves. Sheaves represent the fruits of missionary labor. The Lord emphasized the blessings that awaited Jared Carter if he would return to teach in the East. His experience in responding to this call illustrates the blessings that may come to those who are called to repeat assignments in the Church. After his service in this call ended, he recorded in his journal: "Now while I make this record, I remember the goodness of the Lord to me in the mission that I have lately been to in the East. I have enjoyed my health continually and the Lord, not withstanding the great opposition to the glorious work, has blessed me . . . in this mission in which I have been gone six months and two days. The Lord has permitted me to administer the gospel to 79 souls and many others by my instrumentality have been convinced of this most glorious work, where I have been in this mission" (Journal of Jared Carter; spelling standardized).
