Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 81

DATE: 15 MARCH 1832

PLACE: HIRAM, OHIO

As this revelation currently reads, Doctrine and Covenants 81 calls Frederick G. Williams to serve as a counselor in the presidency of the Church. It was originally given, however, to Jesse Gause, who failed to live worthy of the appointment. Because the First Presidency had not yet been organized, this revelation became an important precursor to that event. Brother Williams was ordained to this office 18 March 1833.

The Keys of the Kingdom Are Always Held by the First Presidency

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 81:1-2

81:1 To be a high priest in my church, and a counselor unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun. At a conference of the Church held at Amherst, Ohio, 25 January 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith was sustained and then ordained president of the high priesthood, which ordination recognized his right to preside over the priesthood and serve as president of the Church. Jesse Gause and Sidney Rigdon were chosen as his counselors in the First Presidency and were ordained high priests on 8 March 1832.

Frederick G. Williams was subsequently called in the stead of Jesse Gause, at which time this revelation was addressed to Frederick G. Williams.

81:2 Keys of the kingdom. Keys, which are "the right of presidency," belong to those called to preside over the quorums of the priesthood (D&C 107:8). The kingdom is the church of God as established on the earth. Thus the "keys of the kingdom" constitute the authority to preside over the Church. The "right of presidency," or the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood, were restored to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist 15 May 1829 (Joseph Smith History 1:69). John the Baptist told Joseph and Oliver that he acted under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who held the "keys" of the Melchizedek Priesthood (Joseph SmithHistory 1:72). "Unto you three," the Savior had promised Peter, James, and John, "I will give this power and the keys of this ministry until I come" (D&C 7:7). Peter, James, and John constituted the First Presidency in the meridian dispensation and they alone could restore that authority to those of our day. So it was that the meridian presidency appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, "declaring themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 128:20), which keys they committed to these two men (D&C 27:12-13; 132:45). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 128:10, "The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven."

Presidency of the High Priesthood. To hold the "Presidency of the High Priesthood" is to preside over the high priests or to preside over all who hold the priesthood, be it Aaronic or Melchizedek. "The Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have a right to officiate in all the offices of the church" (D&C 107:9). They "form a quorum of the Presidency of the Church" (D&C 107:22). Groups that have broken from the Church, claiming keys of a greater nature than those conferred on the Prophet or keys conferred to them through secret ordina tions, are at odds with these revelations.

Joseph Fielding Smith explained the relationship between the "Presidency of the High Priesthood" and the presidency of the Church: "There is a difference between the office of President of the Church and President of the High Priesthood; however, these two offices cannot be separated and must be held by the same person duly appointed and sustained by proper vote. As President of the Church the presiding officer presides over all the membership of the Church. As President of the High Priesthood he presides over all the Priesthood of the Church and has authority to regulate it, for he holds the keys of that Priesthood. . . .

". . . The President of the Church holds the supreme authority. . . . He, it is, who holds the right of decision and the right of revelation for the Priesthood and for the Church" (Church History and Modern Revelation, 1:311-12).

If Frederick G. Williams Is Faithful in His Ministry, He Shall Have Eternal Life

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 81:3-7

81:3 I acknowledge him and will bless him. The Lord promised the Prophet Joseph Smith that he would inspire him "to move the cause of Zion in mighty power for good" (D&C 21:7).

81:6 If thou art faithful. No salvation is found in the holding of a particular office. All officers in the Church must work out their salvation "with fear and trembling" according to the same terms and covenants as all other members. In the Church and kingdom of God all are equal as to their rights to draw upon the blessings and powers of heaven.

The story of Jesse Gause is instructive. This man, called to a position of trust, simply did not answer the call. Invited to stand among the noble and great ones, he simply refused. Today his name is remembered by none but those who have a special love for the details of the history of the Church. Jesse Gause is no different from countless others who have also been called to write their names in the Lamb's book of life, thereby ensuring themselves a place of honor among their posterity, but who also refused the call.

Of Jesse Gause we know that he had been a member of the Shaker communities in Hancock near Pittsfield, and possibly in North Union, Ohio. No record of his baptism or ordination to the priesthood has survived. It was not until 8 March 1832, when he was called to be a counselor to Joseph Smith, that his name even appeared in extant Church records. The notation in the "Kirtland Revelation Book" reads: "March 8, 1832. Chose this day and ordained brother Jesse Gause and Broth[er] Sidney to be my councellors of the ministry of the presidency of the high Priesthood."

The following week a revelation confirmed Gause's calling, giving further direction to him. Two manuscript copies of this revelation exist: one in the "Kirtland Revelation Book," located in the Church Historical Department; the other in the library of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. In both these revelations Jesse Gause's name has been crossed out and Frederick G. Williams's name written above it. Since that time, all published copies of this revelation list Frederick G. Williams as the one to whom it was directed. Since this revelation contains instructions, duties, and promised blessings to the one called as counselor to the Prophet, the revelation rightly belonged to the one holding the office.

"After Jesse Gause was ordained, he appeared in a leading role in the Church for only a short time. In April 1832, he accompanied Joseph Smith, Newel K. Whitney, and Peter Whitmer Jr. on a trip to Missouri. They arrived 24 April and began holding conferences with the Saints in Zion on the 26th. In the minutes of a meeting of the Literary Firm held on Monday, 30 April, Jesse Gause was listed as a counselor to Joseph Smith. Joseph left Independence that day to return again to Kirtland, and Jesse Gause remained behind to conduct further business. On his return trip home he stopped at North Union, Ohio, to retrieve his wife from the society of the Shakers there. An elder of this Shaker community, Matthew Houston, wrote a letter to his friend, Seth Y. Wells, who was a member of the Shaker bishopric at New Lebanon, about Jesse Gause's vain attempt to reunite with his wife. Part of his letter reads as follows:

"'And sure enough I presume you was acquainted with Jesse Gause from Hancock he was here a few days since after his wife Minervashe utterly refused being his slave any longer he had to go away without her. altho he tryed what the law could do for him he was very much inraged threatened to take away Minerva's childshe presented it to him but he went away without it and herhe is yet a Mormon& and is second to the Prophet or SeerJoseph Smith this state of exaltation may tend to steady him or keep him away from us a little longerfor which I am heartily glad for he is certainly the meanest of men.

"'But Minerva certainly conducts herself cleverly so far We find no fault with herat any rate she cut off Old Jesse verry handsomely& he felt it to his gizzard.'

"One important item in the letter is the reference to Jesse Gause's being 'second to the Prophet or SeerJoseph Smith.'

"Upon his return to Kirtland, Jesse was called to serve a mission with Zebedee Coltrin. They began their journey on 1 August 1832, and traveled until the 19th, at which time Coltrin decided to return to Kirtland because of severe pains in his head. After praying with and for each other, they parted. Jesse Gause continued east and walked right out of the history of the Church, never again to return. There appears to be no other record of the man either in or out of the Church" (Woodford, "Notes and Comments," 363-64).
