Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 82

DATE: 26 APRIL 1832

PLACE: JACKSON COUNTY, MISSOURI

In obedience to the Lord's command to "sit in council with the saints which are in Zion" (D&C 78:9), the Prophet Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Newel K. Whitney, and Jesse Gause arrived in Jackson County, Missouri, 24 April 1832. The purpose of this visit was to establish a branch of the United Firm in Missouri according to the Lord's command (see commentary on D&C 78:3-4). At this time Joseph met with the brethren in a council of high priests. After the Prophet "Joseph Smith [was] acknowledged by the High Priests in the land of Zion to be President of the High Priesthood" (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 44), Sidney Rigdon read the commandment of God to organize the United Firm in both Ohio and Missouri. The Prophet recorded that "during the intermission, a difficulty or hardness which had existed between Bishop Partridge and Elder Rigdon, was amicably settled, and when we came together in the afternoon, all hearts seemed to rejoice and I received the following" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:267).

Where Much Is Given, Much Is Required

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 82:1-4

82:1 Inasmuch as you have forgiven one another your trespasses. The Lord taught, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy" (Matthew 5:7). "For if ye forgive men their trespasses who trespass against you," the Savior taught further, "your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses" (JST Matthew 6:16).

As mentioned in the introduction, prior to the reception of this revelation Sidney Rigdon and Bishop Partridge were reconciled after months of misunderstanding and hard feelings. The previous November, Brother Rigdon had written a letter to Saints in Missouri, charging Bishop Partridge with defrauding funds, insulting the Prophet, and assuming authority over him. Bishop Partridge confessed his faults in a special conference in Missouri, 10 March 1832. At his request, the council of high priests of the Church in Missouri wrote a letter to Brother Rigdon answering the charges and asking for forgiveness of those whom the bishop had offended, with assurance that he would confess his errors to Sidney when the occasion presented itself (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 40-42).

82:2 Refrain from sin, lest sore judgments fall upon your heads. The Spirit of the Lord cannot dwell in unclean tabernacles. "He that repents not," the Lord declared, "from him shall be taken even the light which he has received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man" (D&C 1:33). Those that sin will always reap as they have sown. So it was that the Saints in Zion were warned that if they did not repent the Lord would visit them according to their works with "sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire" (D&C 97:26).

A critical spirit that embraced evil speaking of the Lord's anointed became common, as evidenced by the following letter written by the Prophet to W. W. Phelps after his return to Ohio. "We received a letter from brother John Carl [Corrill] by the hand of Broth[er] [Sidney] Gilbert after we arrived home from Indiana who arrived here before us, but what did it contain . . . we learned by Broth[er] John's letter that the devil had set to work to reward us by stirring up your hearts (I mean those who were engaged in this wickedness) by raking every fault, which those eyes that are filled with beams could see in looking for motes in the eyes of those who are laboring with tender and prayerful hearts continually for their salvation" (Jessee, Personal Writings of Joseph Smith, 245; spelling standardized).

Such problems among the Saints eventually led to their expulsion from Jackson County, Missouri. Although the brethren in Zion appeared to have repented of their ill feelings against the Prophet Joseph Smith and the leaders in Ohio, they did not heed the Lord's warning in this revelation and allowed Satan to have influence over them. A later revelation warned "that they shall repent of their former evil works; for they are to be upbraided for their evil hearts of unbelief, and your brethren in Zion for their rebellion against you at the time I sent you" (D&C 84:76). Orson Hyde and Hyrum Smith identified the particulars of the problems in a letter they wrote to Church leaders in Missouri: "At the time Joseph, Sidney, and Newel left Zion, all matters of hardness and misunderstanding were settled and buried (as they supposed), and you gave them the hand of fellowship; but, afterwards, you brought up all these things again, in a censorious spirit, accusing Brother Joseph in rather an indirect way of seeking after monarchial power and authority. . . . We are sensible that this is not the thing Brother Joseph is seeking after, but to magnify the high office and calling whereunto he has been called and appointed by the command of God, and the united voice of this Church" (in Smith, History of the Church, 1:318-19). This spirit of faultfinding and ill feelings eventually contributed to the expulsion of the Saints from Zion. Once the spirit of evil entered the hearts of the Saints and prompted them to speak against the Prophet, it also led the Missouri Saints to find fault with each other. The Lord referred to these problems in a parable concerning a people who failed to build a watch tower, explaining why the Saints suffered such severe persecutions in Jackson County, which were "sore judgments" indeed: "And while they were at variance one with another they became very slothful, and they hearkened not unto the commandments of their lord" (D&C 101:50). The judgments of God did fall upon the Missouri Saints and gravely chastened them. The Lord's counsel in this verse serves as a sober warning to all Saints of any day that the Lord is not pleased with those who misjudge the motives of others and harbor bad feelings in their hearts, preventing the Spirit of the Lord from abiding with them.

82:3-4 "Members of the Church are sometimes guilty of the same sins that afflict fallen man generally," said Elder Bruce R. McConkie. "When they are, their condemnation is greater than it otherwise would be because of their greater light and knowledge. In addition, many acts become sinful for the saints that would not be so considered had they not taken upon themselves the obligations of the gospel" (New Witness, 225). Concerning those who sin against greater light, the Book of Mormon teaches, "Thus we can plainly discern, that after a people have been once enlightened by the Spirit of God, and have had great knowledge of things pertaining to righteousness, and then have fallen away into sin and transgression, they become more hardened, and thus their state becomes worse than though they had never known these things" (Alma 24:30).

Darkness Reigns in the World

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 82:5-7

82:5 The adversary spreadeth his dominions. This is a day of great iniquity as Satan seeks to extend his power throughout the world in opposition to the kingdom of God. Speaking of the latter days, Nephi wrote: "At that day shall he rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good. And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell" (2 Nephi 28:20-21).

82:7 Unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return. Elder Spencer W. Kimball explained: "To return to sin is most destructive to the morale of the individual and gives Satan another hand- hold on his victim. Those who feel that they can sin and be forgiven and then return to sin and be forgiven again and again must straighten out their thinking. Each previously forgiven sin is added to the new one and the whole gets to be a heavy load.

"Thus when a man has made up his mind to change his life, there must be no turning back. Any reversal, even in a small degree, is greatly to his detriment" (Miracle of Forgiveness, 170).

The Lord Is Bound When We Do What He Says

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 82:8-10

82:10 Both parties must meet the terms agreed upon for a covenant to be of efficacy and force. If one of the parties should break the covenant, the other party is under no obligation to honor the promises made. If the Saints are to receive the blessings of establishing Zion, they must be obedient to that law upon which those blessings are predicated.

Zion Must Increase in Beauty and Holiness

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 82:11-16

82:11 The next day the council of brethren to whom this revelation was given reconvened and determined that the names of the branches of the United Firm in Ohio and Missouri would be "Gilbert, Whitney & Company in Zion. And Newel K. Whitney & Company in Kirtland Geauga Co. Ohio" (Cannon and Cook, Far West Record, 45).

Beginning with the first printing of this revelation in 1835, the names of the individuals in this verse were not published. Their identities were veiled by the use of unusual names in place of their own. Elder Orson Pratt explained, "The names that were incorporated when it was printed, did not exist there when the manuscript revelations were given, for I saw them myself. Some of them I copied. And when the Lord was about to have the Book of Covenants given to the world, it was thought wisdom, in consequence of the persecutions of our enemies in Kirtland and some of the regions around, that some of the names should be changed" (Journal of Discourses, 16:156). Editions of the Doctrine and Covenants prior to 1981 gave the following names in place of those of the brethren: Alam (Edward Partridge); Ahashdah (Newel K. Whitney); Mahalaleel (Sidney Gilbert); Pelagoram (Sidney Rigdon); Gazelam (Joseph Smith); Horah (John Whitmer); Olihah (Oliver Cowdery); Shalemmanasseh (W. W. Phelps); Mahemson (Martin Harris).

Except judgment shall immediately follow. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:12.

82:13 A stake to Zion. This is the first designation of a stake to Zion in the Restoration. "In prophetic imagery," explained Elder McConkie, "Zion is pictured as a great tent upheld by cords fastened securely to stakes. Thus Isaiah, envisioning the latter-day glory of Israel, gathered to her restored Zion, proclaimed: 'Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left. . . . For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee.' (Isa. 54:2-7.) And of the millennial Zion, Isaiah exulted: 'Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: . . . a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.' (Isa. 33:20.)

"In keeping with this symbolism, the great areas of church population and strength, which sustain and uphold the restored Zion, are called stakes. They are the rallying points and the gathering centers for the remnants of scattered Israel" (Mormon Doctrine, 764). See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 94:1, "The city of the stake of Zion."

82:14 Isaiah's words were "awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city" (Isaiah 52:1). In a later revelation the Lord explained that Isaiah "had reference to those whom God should call in the last days, who should hold the power of priesthood to bring again Zion, and the redemption of Israel; and to put on her strength is to put on the authority of the priesthood, which she, Zion, has a right to by lineage; also to return to that power which she had lost" (D&C 113:8). For the borders of Zion to be enlarged is to have the kingdom of God extend beyond its current boundaries. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 105:5.

Every Man Should Seek the Interest of His Neighbor

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 82:17-24

82:17-19 The redemption of Zion awaits a truly covenant people. To be such we must come to the understanding that we are not saved separately or singly. Salvation is a community affair. We must learn to bear one another's burdens, strengthen each other, and use the talents and means with which the Lord has blessed us to bless others. We must come to realize that we have no sins that affect only ourselves, for each of our shortcomings detracts from the strength of the whole. Only in unity can we create a Zion community.

82:20 An everlasting order unto you, and unto your successors. The principles upon which a Zion society rest are everlastingly the same. It matters not whether we live in the days of Enoch, Joseph Smith, or the future, the principles remain unchanged.

82:21 According to the laws of my church. "He that sinneth and repenteth not shall be cast out" of the Church (D&C 42:28).

Delivered over to the buffetings of Satan. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 78:12.

82:22 Make unto yourselves friends with the mammon of unrighteousness. In all of our interaction with those not of our faith we seek to make friends. Until he, whose right it is to reign, returns with equity and justice, laws and ordinances that affect the Church's ability to accomplish its mission will be administered by worldly people. We will be much more successful in the work of the Lord as friends to these people than as their enemies. Certainly, the Lord was not commanding us to partake of the wicked and dishonest practices of the world in this admonition. Rather, we are to freely associate with others in our business and social transactions, exhibiting the light of the gospel in all our dealings.
