Craig J. Ostler, Joseph Fielding McConkie, Revelations of the Restoration (Salt Lake City, UT: Deseret Book Company, 2000)

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 83

DATE: 30 APRIL 1832

PLACE: INDEPENDENCE, MISSOURI

"On the 27th, we transacted considerable business for the salvation of the Saints, who were settling among a ferocious set of mobbers, like lambs among wolves. It was my endeavor to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship, and mutual love.

"On the 28th and 29th, I visited the brethren above Big Blue river, in Kaw township, a few miles west of Independence, and received a welcome only known by brethren and sisters united as one in the same faith, and by the same baptism, and supported by the same Lord. The Colesville branch, in particular, rejoiced as the ancient Saints did with Paul. It is good to rejoice with the people of God. On the 30th, I returned to Independence, and again sat in council with the brethren, and received the following" (Smith, History of the Church, 1:269).

Women and Children Have Claim upon Their Husbands and Fathers for Their Support

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 83:1-4

83:1 In addition to the laws of the church. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 42:30-39.

83:2-4 Women have claim on their husbands . . . children have claim upon their parents for their maintenance. The apostle Paul wrote: "If any provide not for his own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel" (1 Timothy 5:8). "This is the divine right of a wife and mother," explained President Ezra Taft Benson. "While she cares for and nourishes her children at home, her husband earns the living for the family, which makes this nourishing possible.

"In a home where there is an able-bodied husband, he is expected to be the breadwinner. Sometimes we hear of husbands who, because of economic conditions, have lost their jobs and expect the wives to go out of the home and work, even though the husband is still capable of providing for his family. In these cases, we urge the husband to do all in his power to allow his wife to remain in the home caring for the children while he continues to provide for his family the best he can, even though the job he is able to secure may not be ideal and family budgeting may have to be tighter" (Conference Report, October 1987, 60).

President Howard W. Hunter gave further counsel to the brethren of the Church: "You who hold the priesthood have the responsibility, unless disabled, to provide temporal support for your wife and children. No man can shift the burden of responsibility to another, not even to his wife. The Lord has commanded that women and children have claim on their husbands and fathers for their maintenance (D&C 83; 1 Timothy 5:8.) President Ezra Taft Benson has stated that when a husband encourages or insists that his wife work out of the home for their convenience, 'not only will the family suffer in such instances, . . . but (his) own spiritual growth and progression will be hampered.'

"We urge you to do all in your power to allow your wife to remain in the home, caring for the children while you provide for the family the best you can. We further emphasize that men who abandon their family and fail to meet their responsibility to care for those they have fathered may find their eligibility for a temple recommend and their standing in the Church in jeopardy. In cases of divorce or separation, men must demonstrate that they are meeting family support payments mandated by law and obligated by the principles of the Church in order to qualify for the blessings of the Lord" (Conference Report, October 1994, 69).

83:3 They may remain upon their inheritances according to the laws of the land. In the original manuscript copies of this revelation, transgressors were not allowed to retain property that was received as a stewardship from the Church. As done previously, instructions in this revelation were adapted to the laws of the land. See commentary on Doctrine and Covenants 51:5.

Widows and Orphans Have Claim upon the Church for Their Support

DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS 83:5-6

83:5 They have claim upon the church. These instructions have particu lar application within the laws of consecration as practiced at that time. Children were expected to provide for their own temporal welfare when sufficiently mature to do so. If their parents had means to provide an inheritance for them, they were to receive property from them. Those that entered into adulthood without any means of providing for themselves had claim upon the properties of the Church to receive an inheritance within the law of consecration.

"When one comes to a bishop and asks for assistance because of his or her straitened circumstances," explained Joseph F. Smith, "the first thing the bishop should do is to inquire if he or she is a tithe- payer. He should know whether the name is on the book of the law of the Lord, and if not on the book, if he or she has been derelict and negligent in relation to this principle of tithing, he or she has no claim upon the bishop, neither have their children; and if, under those circumstances, the bishop assists him, it will simply be out of pure charity and not because such have any claim upon the Church. That is why the widow who receives assistance from the Church should pay her tithing, so that her name may be on the records of the Church. It is not a law that is applicable to one and not to another. If the rich may not receive blessings because their names are not on the record, then neither shall the poor receive blessings in the house of God, if their names are not recorded. So long as a poor person receives his or her support through the tithings of the people, they should be willing to observe the law themselves in order that they may be entitled to what they receive. They should show by their observance of the law that they are law- keepers and not law- breakers. Our children, as soon as they become old enough to earn means, should be taught to pay their tithing, that their names may be written in the book of the law of the Lord, so that if perchance their father die and they are left orphans, their names as well as the names of their parents, will be found upon the records and they will, as God lives, be entitled to their support and to their education. It is our duty to look after these children and see that they have an equal chance with those who are most favored with parents to look after them" (Gospel Doctrine, 231).

83:6 Widows and orphans shall be provided for. "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this," wrote James, "to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction" (James 1:27). In ancient Israel the Lord commanded that special care be given to looking after the needs of widows. Those who provided for the widow were promised that they would be blessed in all of their affairs (Deuteronomy 14:29).
