B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE I

Blue Print Plan of General Discussion

ST. PAUL: "Be not soon shaken in mind or troubled, * * as that the day of Christ is at hand [his second and glorious coming]; * * * for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition" (II Thessalonians 2:2, 3).

THE CHRIST TO HIS DISCIPLES: "If he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican" (Matthew 18:15-17).

INTRODUCTORY

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I give you all hail, and bid you welcome to this hearing. I desire to express, so far as one can in words, an appreciation of the opportunity that is to be mine, in the next several weeks, of addressing you upon an important subject. That subject is "The 'Falling Away', or The World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church". To this may be added, later, the pertinent inquiry: If there has been such a "Falling Away", by what means could the "Christian Religion and Church" be re-established among men? High themes, these, you will agree! Bold, beyond measure, some of you may think, since the mere statement of the title of the treatise is a challenge to all "Christendom" equally. Let it stand so. "Christendom" from conditions that obtain within the realm it holds in the world, leaves it open to such a challenge.

CHIEF CHARACTERISTIC OF THE RELIGION AND CHURCH OF CHRIST

The one thing characteristic above all else in the religion and church established by the Christ and the apostles—true Christianity—was oneness. That oneness starts with "I and my Father are one" (St. John 10:30). That "oneness" was so complete that the Christ said, "He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father" (St. John 14:9). And again: "I am in the Father, and the Father in me" (Id. x). The burden of the Christ's desire in the hour of his approaching death was, that the oneness subsisting between himself and the Father should also subsist between himself and his apostles. And no only between them and himself, but between them and all who should receive God's message through their teaching. The prayer for this union is almost pathetic, as well as eloquent. It was offered in the hour of agony and blood-sweat in Gethsemane. Listen:

"I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world [the apostles]: * * * I pray for them: * * * Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are. * * * Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, are in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. * * * That they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one": or in "oneness".—Jesus to the Father (St. John 17).

Surely the plea of pleas, this, for oneness! For perfect oneness, and that all down the line: from the Father to the Son; from the Son to the apostles; from the apostles to those who would believe in the Christ on their word—those who should be made disciples to the Christ, the members of the church; and oneness of the whole church, which would include the church in all lands, and in all times. This means one in doctrine; in conceptions of God, and of the Christ, and of the Holy Ghost; agreement in ordinances to be obeyed, which do but display the true symbols of the redeeming graces and the saving powers of the gospel; union in church authority and commission and organization, and government, and the spirit thereof; one righteousness—God's law and the whole volume of it. Oneness, I say, is the chief characteristic of the true Religion and Church of Jesus Christ. And this oneness is to be the evidence to the world that God had sent the Christ into the world, as quoted above: "That they all may be one [including the apostles as one with the Christ; and the whole church membership as one with the apostles, and hence one with one another]—as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me".

In view of oneness being the master sign of the Religion and Church of the Christ, have we not the right to challenge the claims of alleged modern "Christendom"—all divisions and sects of it—to being the true descendant and heir, under God's law, to the Religion and Church of Jesus Christ, since that "Christendom" manifests an entire absence of the chief characteristic of that religion and that church?

Three great divisions exist in Christendom, with scores of subdivisions, each assuming a different attitude towards, and giving a different interpretation to, the Religion and Church of the Christ. These are the Roman Catholic, the Greek Church, and the Protestant Churches; the latter with very many offshoots and subdivisions.

THE CLAIMS OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

The Roman Catholic Church claims for herself that she is the very church in direct succession and identical with the church founded by Jesus Christ and the apostles; and forms with the primitive Church of Christ and the apostles "one living, identical body, which carries on and transmits the mission which the apostles had from the Christ, and is the only true and abiding messenger sent by Christ for the guidance of men to eternal salvation" (Catholic Belief, Very Rev. Joseph Faa D. Bruno, D.D., chapter xxxii, p. 162. The work has the endorsement of Cardinal Henry E. Manning, of England, Catholic Archbishop of Westminster, edition of 1884).

Again, in reference to an alleged unbroken succession of lawfully ordained pastors of the Church of Rome, this author says: "In the Catholic Church alone, from the time of the apostles until now there has been an unbroken succession of pastors, lawfully ordained and sent". And on the page following (p. 164) is commenced a list of Roman popes from the bishop said to have been ordained bishop of Rome by St. Peter, one Linus, native of Valteria, to Pope Leo XIII (1878-1903); and, of course, the popes since Leo XIII's death, including the present reigning pope, are held in the same high dignity. And so an identity of the Roman Catholic Church of today is claimed with the Church of the Apostles and of the Christ.

To these several statements respecting the Roman Catholic Church's attitude towards the "Christian" religion and church, and her position in the religious world at large, all Roman Catholic authorities are agreed. And of these several things we may say that for Roman Catholics, and for the world, they represent tremendous "facts"—IF they are "facts"—IF true!

CLAIMS OF THE GREEK CHURCH

But the claims of the Roman Catholic Church to being the original church, or the continuation of the church founded by Jesus Christ and the apostles, "and forming one living, identical body, which carries on and transmits authority and the mission which the apostles had from Christ"; and being the "only true and abiding messenger sent by Christ for the guidance of men to eternal salvation"—all this goes not unchallenged. I recall with what unction and majesty the Most Rev. Dionysios Latis, Arch-bishop of Zante, and the representative of the Orthodox Greek Church at the World's Parliament of Religions, held at Chicago, 1893, set forth the counter claims of the Greek Church to being the original, and hence the "Mother Christian Church of the World". I quote from his speech on that occasion:

"The Greeks, immediately after the coming of Christ, undertook and developed Christendom, and formed and systematized a Christian Church, which is the church of the east, the primitive church, which for this reason may be called the Mother of the Christian churches, and consequently the church in which the first doctrines and the fundamental Christian truths are kept in store, pure and chaste, from which all good was to originate in this world, and on which the happiness of the nations is consequently based. * * * The original establishment of the Greek Church is directly referred to Jesus Christ and his apostles".

Then after a somewhat lengthy review of the cultural and doctrinal development of Christianity, especially throughout the Greek centers of the world, he said:

"It sufficeth me to say that no one of you, I think, will deny in the presence of these historical documents [which he had reviewed in his remarks], that the original Christian Church was the Greek Church, which for this reason may be called the Mother of the Christian churches" (The World's Parliament of Religions, John Henry Barrows, D.D., chairman of the Parliament, at the Columbia Exposition of 1893, Chicago, vol. I, pp. 352-359).

It may be said that in the many controversies between the eastern and the western churches during the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries, that the popes of Rome excommunicated the patriarchs and bishops of the Greek Church, and that the Greek Church, therefore, became a schismatical and a separated church from Rome; but it is also an historical fact that the Greek Church, through the centuries during which these controversies lasted, as often excommunicated the bishops of Rome; and thus the Church of Rome became as much a schismatical church to the Greeks, as the much an excommunicated church to the Greek, as the Greek to the Roman. These mutual excommunications between eastern and western churches became final in the year 1054, A. D., since when they have been mutually separated, and mutually heretical one to the other.

THE POSITION OF THE PROTESTANT CHURCHES

The position of the Protestant or Reformed subdivisions of "Christendom" may not be as readily treated as the Roman Catholic or the Greek Church; because, first, of the large number of the divisions and subdivisions of them; and, second, because of the divergencies that exist—the very babel of confusion that abounds among them.

THE EPISCOPAL CHURCH OF ENGLAND

The most powerful of these subdivisions of Protestant Christendom, the Episcopal Church of England, and her branches in the United States and the commonwealths which make up the British Empire, makes an effort, and more especially of late years, to establish for herself as being of "apostolic origin", both on account of thus acquiring a greater dignity of origin, and also as an escape from the odium that attaches to the popular notion that the Church of England had its beginning in the defection of King Henry VIII from the pope and Church of Rome, and the creative acts of the English parliament determining her "Thirty-nine Articles of Religion". It will have to be confessed, however, that the "apostolic origin" of the Church of England is of doubtful historicity; and it will also have to be admitted, that subsequent to any visitation of an apostle of England, that the Church of England, for a number of centuries, was practically at one with Rome, in doctrine and administration; that she received missions of the pope's appointing, and had other connections that established her identity with the Church of Rome in fellowship, was, in a word, fully identified with her.

But what does it really matter in respect to the claims for the Church of England, whether she is of apostolic origin, or identified with Rome, since in an official homily (Against the Perils of Idolatry) she declares that "laity and clergy, learned and unlearned, all ages, sects, and degrees of men, women, and children of whole Christendom (an horrible and most dreadful thing to think!) have been at once drowned in abominable idolatry, of all other vices most detested of God, and most damnable to man, and that by the space of eight hundred years and more" (Perils of Idolatry, part iii, p. 216, American edition, 1855).

Such description of the status of Christianity for "eight hundred years and more", would include the antecedents of the Church of England to be in such condition, though she was of apostolic origin, as well as the antecedents of the Church of Rome; and how it came to be thought that the English Reformers could proceed to resurrect by acts of king and parliament a church endowed with divine authority, with apostolic sanctions and missions, from such a state of "abominable idolatry", running through a period of "eight hundred years and more", and participated in by "laity and clergy, all sects and degrees of Christendom"—passes all understanding.

POSITION OF THE REFORMED CHURCHES OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE AND THEIR OFFSHOOTS

The "Reformed Churches" of the nations of continental Europe, and those churches which sprang from them, came directly or indirectly from the revolt of Luther against the authority of the pope and the Church of Rome. Luther rebelled against the authority of the pope and the Romish Church; denounced the pope as "anti-Christ", the developed "man of sin" of St. Paul's scriptures. He denied the Church of Rome any power of excommunication, or other effective powers. For him she was in a state of apostasy and could confer nothing upon him; and could take nothing from him; hence he, Dr. Martin Luther, on his own initiative and with the Bible in hand as interpreted by himself, would declare anew the "Christian doctrine", and bring into existence the true "Church of Christ"!

Of course, Luther and his immediate associates were excommunicated by the Roman Church; and it follows that if Rome was a true "Church of Christ", of divine appointment and of true and unbroken succession and authority from the apostles, then her act of excommunication was of effect and stripped Luther and his associates, and his later following, of all divine authority and commission. So that when Luther and his associates created churches, and established doctrines of religion, they did so without any authority they previously held from Rome; and as they did not even claim that a new commission by revelation had been conferred upon them, they stand merely as self-appointed teachers, with no higher authority than their own human wisdom and presumption to proceed with the organization of divine things—the things of God! Either way, then, whether Rome was in the times of Luther an apostate church, "anti-Christ" manifested in the world, or a true church, Luther and his following were left without a shred of authority for their procedure beyond that which was of human authority, and self-assumed.

THE CHRIST'S PROCEDURE IN CONTRAST WITH HUMAN

This disposes of a very large section of "Christendom" as having no higher origin than that of human wisdom in the self-appointed teachers and leaders of the so-called "Reformation". How all this stands in sharp contrast with the procedure of the Christ who said to his disciples: "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you" (St. John 20:21): This immediately following his resurrection. Again: "Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you" (St. John 15:16). That is, he had given them authority to act in his name in the matters pertaining to the salvation of men. So he commissioned all his apostles: "Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel, he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not [and therefore will not be baptized, nor do any of the other commandments of God] shall be damned" (St. Mark 16:15, 16).

So far the Christ. St. Paul lays down what this general law of God is to be respecting those who are to act "for men in things pertaining to God" as follows:

"Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. * * * And no man taketh this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto him, thou art my Son, today have I begotten thee: * * * Thou art a Priest forever after the order of Melchizedek."

Compare this with the sayings of the Christ quoted above—"As the Father hath sent me, even so send I you"; and, "ye have not chosen me but I have chosen you, and ordained you"; and then judge ye, in the light of these strongly asserted principles concerning the transmitted authority from God to man—where stand those of "Christendom" who are but self-appointed religious teachers and ministers?

OTHER THAN "CHURCHLY" VIEWS OF "CHRISTIANITY"

There is yet another class of "Christians" and of alleged "Christian" churches to be considered, viz.: those who do not hold that "authority", or the designation of men to act for men in things pertaining to God, enters into religion at all; and least of all into the Christian religion. Religion for them is an inward motion of the individual soul toward God. This in the Christian religion as in all religions. Christ for them is merely one of the world's greatest religious teachers, perhaps "the greatest"! But they refuse to believe that he founded "a plan of salvation", or of "religion", based upon authority; or that he dogmatically defined the terms of salvation; or organized, or authorized to be organized, a church to bear his name and teach definite terms of salvation. They question if he recognized "institutional religion" at all. They scorn the notion that the Christ made atonement for the sins of men by the sacrifice of himself. If saved by "the blood of the Christ", if recognized at all, then it is to be understood as meaning that the "blood" is the symbol of "life"; and therefore to be saved by the "blood of the lamb", that is, "of the Christ", is to be saved by the "life" of the Christ; taking his life as an example, and walking in his moral and spiritual footsteps. Men are to be saved so. Such is to be the power of the Christ unto salvation. Christ the Savior of men, because he is the exemplar for men. With such "Christians" the gospel is not a "plan of salvation", but a "life"; the life of the Christ, and such as may imitate him. These "Christians" affect a scorn of the notion of a "church" as an authorized body in which God has deposited his doctrine, and to which he has given authority to teach that doctrine and administer in its ordinances: that they denominate as mere "Churchanity", rather than "Christianity". A "church" for them is merely a voluntary association of like-minded people, held together by a common sympathy in moral and spiritual sentiments, and accepting the highly moral and spiritual "life" of the Christ as the objective to which they should move, and therein find their own life. Strongly esthetical this; also ethical and individual.

Increase in the number of those who accept these views may be regarded as the strongest trend in modern "Christianity". More and evermore it increases; and much of that increase is among the youth, and is due to their growing disgust at the confusion that abounds in "institutional Christianity".

EFFECT OF DIVIDED CHRISTIANITY ON MODERN YOUTH

The manner in which the everlasting differences of a divided and confused "Christianity" affects the youth of America, and perhaps the youth of other lands also, was recently set forth in rather a masterly fashion by the younger Mr. Rockefeller at the dedication of the new University of Chicago Chapel donated by John D. Rockefeller, and endowed by the "Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Foundation". This memorial chapel for the promoting of the "religious idealism of the students of the University" is to serve all sects who wish to avail themselves of it. With the chapel goes an endowment from the above "foundation" funds of $1,000,000, to promote the aforesaid "idealism" of the students. In the course of his remarks Mr. Rockefeller, speaking at the dedication of the chapel in November 1928, said in substance, first, that the stress on "theology" rather than upon "religion", so confused the minds of youth that it stands aghast at the contradiction. "In the light of experience and passing years", continued Mr. Rockefeller, "a broader and more tolerant religious spirit has been developing in this land and in others. But while the present generation is not infrequently repelled rather than attracted by religion, as it often finds expression in the bewildering variety of churches of today; and while it [i. e. the youth] has an ever lessening interest in what men say about Christ, it is vitally interested in Christ himself".

"In spite of the progress which has been made, [he continued] youth finds itself confused and irked as it stands at life's threshold and is confronted with an almost infinite variety of religions and sects. It stands aghast at the sorry and unchristian spectacle of good men and women hurling anathemas at each other because of differences of theological belief and denominational partizanship. Is it strange, then, that the younger generation, from being at first confused and irked by our multiform theologies, stand aghast at the unchristian attitude of so-called religious people, and is tempted to say to itself: 'If this is religion, to insist on sectarian differences and to quibble about non-essentials, when sin is rampant in the world and evil is omnipresent; if church members are more interested in whom they will keep out of their religious bodies because of theological differences than they are in helping people to be strong in body, clean in mind and pure in heart, we will waste our time with nothing so hypocritical and useless; rather will we give all religion a wide berth and have none of it'. And to the extent that such a conclusion is reached, the intolerant sectarians of our churches are largely to blame. If Christ were on earth today I fancy there would be but one church—the Church of the Living God".

And so the indifference of our modern youth toward Christianity; and so in many cases, their rejection of it; the turning away from "institutional Christianity"—the church of authority and of God's power—to esthetical and supposedly ethical conceptions of Christ as one of the world's religious teachers grows apace out of a disunited "Christendom", a confused crying of lo here! and lo there! until the "oneness" contemplated by, and prayed for by the Christ, that "the world might know" from that "oneness" among his followers, that "God had sent him" into the world, is entirely absent from "Christendom", bearing melancholy witness to the world's loss of the Christian Religion and Church.

DID THE CHRIST ESTABLISH A CHURCH?

This brings us to the necessary question: did the Christ really found a church to teach his truth and perfect the lives of those who should receive that truth? As the first evidence of the fact that the Christ established a church I quote the second text at the head of this discourse—Christ's own appeal to an existing church while he was yet living: "If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault * * * If he will not hear thee then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church but if he neglect to hear the church let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican" (Matthew 18:15-17). Here is a direct allusion by the Christ to an existing church in his day that contemplates the exercise of a power to judge between brethren offended with each other; to determine wherein the fault lies and to render decision as to what shall be done by the one found in fault, and if he refuse to abide the decision then he is to be cast out of the church, or "become as an heathen man and a publican". The New Testament documents also report the Master's choosing his special apostles or witnesses to teach his truth and administer the ordinances which give visible entrance to his church, to be born of water by baptism, to be born of the spirit through confirmation by the imposition of the hands of his duly commissioned servants (Matthew 10). Also he chose groups of disciples, seventy in each group, to be his ministers and to perform a like mission as that given to the twelve apostles (cf. Matthew 10, St. Luke 10; and St. Matthew 28:16-20; St. Mark 16:17-20).

ST. PAUL'S DESCRIPTION OF THE CHURCH

In the later unfolding of this church as an organization, we have St. Paul saying that "God gave some apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints and the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ [the church], till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ" (Ephesians 4:11-16).

In a more elaborate description St. Paul likens the church to the body of a man; and as a man is made up of many members, and yet is one man; so it is with the organization of the Christ's Church. "But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body as it hath pleased him. * * * and God hath set some in the church, first apostles; secondarily, prophets; thirdly, teachers; after that miracles; then gifts of healings; helps; governments: diversity of tongues, etc". (I Corinthians 12). Note the language: "God—[meaning the Christ] hath set some in the church; first apostles", and so following.

It would be easy to multiply texts on this head, but I take it to be unnecessary here, for there is such direct allusion to the fact that the Christ organized a church and commissioned it to teach his truth in all the world and administer the ordinances essential to the salvation of men, that there can be no reasonable doubt of it! And there was an expectation of its perpetuation.

A SUMMARY

The foregoing I shall ask you to consider as a rough sketch or "blue print" of the introductory part only of the theme set down for consideration. I shall ask you to consider it as established that the Christ did found a church to teach his doctrine and administer the ordinances necessary to man's salvation; that the chief characteristic of this church is "oneness", in which all who receive it would participate; and this "oneness"—the union of all its membership would be the evidence of God to the world that he—God the Eternal Father—had sent the Christ into the world. Conversely the lack of this "oneness" and the confusion because of its absence, would necessarily be a witness of the truth to be developed, viz., that the world has lost the Christian Religion and Church.

THE SPIRIT OF THE TREATISE

In the treatment of this theme, however, let us have some plain understanding about the spirit in which the investigation is to be prosecuted. Naturally to proclaim the loss of the Religion and Church of Christ by the world seems and ungracious task. Let it be understood, however, that it is not my purpose to prosecute that investigation in any spirit of harshness. Certainly there will be no bitterness in it; and no vindictive attack upon any one of the divisions or subdivisions of "Christianity". I shall not manifest, for I do not entertain, any bitterness against any one of those divisions or subdivisions of "Christendom"; nor do I summon any one of them more than another to the bar of inquiry to denounce it; nor to say there is nothing good in any one of them or all of them. I intend to seek only the establishment of the truth, and this in the interest and for the welfare of "Christendom", and the world. In holding that there has been a "falling away" from the whole and complete authoritative Religion and Church of the Christ and the apostles, I do not intend to infer that there is nothing good in the so-called "Christian" world. This theme as I intend to treat it, while necessarily holding that the sun of true "Christianity" set many centuries ago, yet, as when our sun of the day sinks behind some western range of mountains, and disappears from vision, as we turn to the eastern mountains we find them lighted with the sunshine still lingering on their summits. Or, it may be that cumulus clouds are floating in the sky, and these touched by the rays of the vision-departed sun are turned to purple and gold; to crimson here and there; and then opalescent lights are seen through broadening rifts, giving glory to departing day and creating a twilight that holds in check the blackness of the night:—so when official and formal authoritative Christianity was lost to the nations, yet, some of the light which Christianity brought into the world lingered for the blessing of mankind with a knowledge of the spirit and moral truths she left in her scriptures and traditions; and these, though fragments, were seized upon by men of good will and perpetuated, and have blessed the world, and bless it now.

My mission while here proclaiming the "Falling Away" will be pursued in this spirit; and while I must needs make clear the melancholy truth that there came to pass the predicted "Falling Away", yet also it is to be my pleasing task to announce, at least, that this but prepares the way for the recognition of the New Dispensation that shall restore all things, and end in that salvation of man which God from the beginning designed for him.
