B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE II

Why Should a "Falling Away" Be Thought Incredible?

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: This address is a continuance of my general theme, "The 'Falling Away', or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church", and I invite your attention to the following texts of scripture:

(1) ST. PAUL: "That day" [i.e. meaning as we learn from the context of the passage—the second and glorious coming of the Christ]—"That day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshiped, so that he as God sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God * * And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time, for the mystery of iniquity doth already work. Only he who now letteth [hindereth] will let [hinder] until he be taken out of the way. And then shall that Wicked be revealed, [the son of perdition,] whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming" (II Thessalonians 2:3-8).

(2) THE CHRIST: "And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying: Tell us when shall these things be [i.e. the destruction of the Jerusalem Temple, which he had just prophesied would come to pass]? And what shall be the sign of thy coming, and the end of the world? And Jesus answered and said unto them: Take heed that no man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many." They should hear of wars and rumors of wars, famines, pestilences and earthquakes. These would be "the beginning of sorrows". * * * "Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another. And many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure to the end [individuals], the same shall be saved. And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations and then shall the end come" (St. Matthew 24).

With these texts for a background I am submitting to you the question: Why should it be thought a thing incredible to you that there would be a "falling away" from the Christian religion and church? A "falling away" from the truth of God by mankind is not a novel thing. It is something that had often happened in times previous to the Christian age.

THE "FALLINGS AWAY" FROM ADAM TO NOAH

There were such "fallings away" from the days of Adam to Noah, and the wickedness of man was so great in the earth that "every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually". And the "falling away" in that age ended in the cataclysm of the flood; which, save for Noah and his family, destroyed the race. Those "fallings away", too, were "fallings away" from the gospel—from true religion. And the only reason why that truth is not more clearly revealed in Genesis is because of the fragmentary character of that ancient scripture. To Adam and his posterity, however, the coming of a Redeemer was known. The "Seed of the woman"—i.e. the Christ—would "bruise" the serpent's—i.e. Lucifer's—head (Genesis 3:15). Undoubtedly also Adam and his sons understood the significance of the sacrifice the law of God required—the sacrifice of the firstlings of their flocks. The reason for Abel's sacrifice of the firstlings of their flocks. The reason for Abel's sacrifice being acceptable is perfectly understandable. Abel's offering was a true symbol of the sacrifice of the Son of God—a blood sacrifice—such as would be the atonement of the Son of God—the Only Begotten of the Father. But Cain's offering. "the fruit of the ground", possessed no element and represented no symbol of the future sacrifice for sin. Hence "the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering; but unto Cain and his offering he had not respect" (Genesis 4).

Such righteousness was developed in this period, from Adam to Noah, that Enoch, "the seventh from Adam", so learned "to walk with God" that "he was not; for God took him" (Genesis 5:23, 24). St. Paul tells us that Enoch was so far saved by the gospel "of his day that he was translated that he should not see death"; but before he was translated, "he had this testimony that he pleased God" (Hebrews 11:5). That period also developed righteous Noah, not only was he righteous himself, but "a preacher of righteousness"; "a just man, and perfect in his generation"; and "Noah walked with God" (Genesis 6:8, 9). And yet such were the "fallings away" from God in the anti-deluvian world, that it culminated in the judgment of the flood.

THE "FALLING AWAY" FROM NOAH TO THE CALLING OF ABRAHAM AND THE COMING OF MOSES

From Noah to the "calling of Abraham" was another period of "falling away". St. Paul informs us that the "gospel was preached unto Abraham"! "The scripture forseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith preached before the gospel to Abraham. * * * To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He saith not, 'and to seeds', as of many; but as of one, 'and to thy Seed', which is the Christ" (Galatians 3:8, 16). Fortunately it is in this same Epistle that St. Paul lays down the doctrine that there is but "one gospel". "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him [the Christ] which called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel: which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed". This he repeats for emphasis (Galatians 1:6-9). So that when St. Paul says "the gospel was preached to Abraham", we know what gospel it was. It was the gospel of Christ without doubt, "for there is but one". "Wherefore then serveth the law"? he inquires a moment later. That is, since the gospel—the one and only gospel—was preached unto Abraham how came later the law meaning the law given to Moses? St. Paul's answer is: "It was added because of transgression till the Seed [i.e. the Christ] should come to whom the promise was made. * * * Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come we are no longer under a schoolmaster" (Galatians 3:19-25).

MELCHIZEDEK

In the days of Abraham we have a brief reference made to that "high priest of God", Melchizedek; said to be a type of the greater High Priest then to be—the Son of God! It is even said that the Christ was made an High Priest after the order of Melchizedek. This high priest was known as "King of Righteousness", that being the interpretation of his name; and second, "King of Salem", which also by interpretation is "King of Peace". Abraham returning from the battle of the kings met this priest and "paid him tithes of all"; and Melchizedek "brought forth bread and wine" to the patriarch. Beyond doubt it was a ritualistic service of great significance. The whole circumstance of the meeting of the patriarchs gives evidence of larger and deeper knowledge of the gospel than on the surface appears.

MOSES

Even under Moses the "gospel" was offered to Israel. "Brethren", says St. Paul, "I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and did eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them; and that Rock was Christ" (I Corinthians 10:1-4).

Again St. Paul, speaking of Israel of old who had offended by hardening their hearts, says: "But with whom was he [the Lord] grieved forty years? Was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness? And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not": to those who had "fallen away"! "So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief". The next chapter opens with St. Paul's warning to the people of God of his own day, intimating that the same fate might overtake them: "Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. For unto us was the gospel preached, as well as unto them [i.e. Ancient Israel]: But the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it" (Hebrews 3:17; and iv:1-2). That is, the gospel had been preached to Melchizedek, and to Abraham; also a dispensation of it had been given to Moses, but as there had come a "falling away" in Ancient Israel, the law of Moses had to be "added" to that gospel (i.e. given in place of it) that the lesser law might act as a "schoolmaster" to bring Israel to Christ.

THE DISPENSATION UNDER THE CHRIST—THE MERIDIAN DISPENSATION

And now the Christ came; and with him had come a dispensation or out-giving of the gospel. And was there to be no more "falling away"? Behold the words of warning of the Christ in the text at the beginning of this discourse: I summarize it: "Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying I am Christ, and shall deceive many; * * * they shall deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you; * * * Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake; * * * Then shall many be offended, and betray one another, and shall hate one another; and many false prophets shall rise and deceive many. And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold". Not a very pleasing prospect for the reception of the gospel, or for the treatment of those who would receive it, and carry it to the world. Remember that these are the forewarnings of the Christ.

St. Paul's view is no more promising: "Take heed therefore unto yourselves", said he, to the elders at Ephesus, "and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. And also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them". If this was said directly to the elders of Ephesus, as it was, yet there was not a church or a branch of one, where the same thing, with equal truth, could not be said at that time; and hence it represents a universal condition.

CHARACTER OF THE EARLY CHRISTIANS

The very general mistake is made of regarding the early Christians as so far removed from the possession of common weaknesses of humanity, as to preclude the possibility of their "falling away" from the Christian faith and church. Inquiry into the character of the early saints, however, will disclose that they were very human, and men and women of like passions with ourselves.

The mother of Zebedee's two sons exhibited a rather ambitious spirit when she begged the Master that they might sit the one on his right hand and the other on his left, in his kingdom (Matthew 20:20-24). And the two brethren themselves gave much offense to their fellow apostles by aspiring to be so placed. Even Peter, the chief apostle, exhibited his full share of human weakness when he thrice denied his Lord in the presence of his enemies, through fear; and even confirmed that denial by cursing and swearing (Matthew 26:69-75). It was a heated controversy, too, that arose in the early Christian Church as to whether those who accepted the Christian faith were still bound to the observance of the law of Moses, and more especially to follow the rite of circumcision. Although there seems to have been an amicable and authoritative settlement of that question by the decision of what has been called "the first general council of the church", held by the apostles and elders at Jerusalem (Acts 15); yet the old difficulty broke out again and again, not only between the Jewish saints and the Gentile converts, but even among the apostles themselves, leading to serious accusations one against another, the straining of friendship between fellow workmen in the ministry through criminations and recriminations.

THE AFFAIR AT ANTIOCH

After the settlement of this question by the council at Jerusalem, St. Peter went down to Antioch and at first mingled unreservedly with both Gentile and Jewish converts without distinction, accepting both Jew and Gentile in perfect fellowship, departing entirely from the restraints placed on a Jew by the law of Moses, which rendered it, according to their traditions, unlawful for one who was a Jew to have such unrestricted fellowship with the Gentiles. But when certain ones came down from James, who resided at Jerusalem, and who is generally recognized as the head of the Judaizing party, then St. Peter, fearful of offending "them which were of the circumcision," suddenly withdrew his fellowship from the Gentile converts. Other Jewish brethren did the same; Barnabas, the friend of St. Paul, being among the number. Whereupon St. Paul, as he himself testifies, withstood St. Peter "to the face because he was to be blamed"; and directly charging him before all the brethren with "dissimulation", saying: "If thou being a Jew, livest after the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews" (Galatians 2)? St. Paul seems to have been triumphant in that issue, for he boasts of that occasion, saying that Titus who was with him, and "being a Greek", was not compelled to be circumcised; notwithstanding the presence of false brethren brought in unawares, who came in privily to spy out their "liberty which they had in Christ." "To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour", he continues, "that the truth of the gospel might continue with you" (Galatians 2:3-5). Yet this same St. Paul, notwithstanding his loyalty to the Gentile converts on that occasion, and his zeal for the decision rendered by the council of the church at Jerusalem, and notwithstanding his usually strong, moral courage, subsequently showed by his conduct, that he, too, was not beyond the weakness of "becoming all things to all men"; for a short time after the incident with St. Peter at Antioch, when in the province of Lycaonia, St. Paul took Timothy and circumcised him, because it was well known there that while his mother was a Jewess, his father was a Greek; and all this for fear of the Jews (Acts 16:1-4; Id. xiv:6). Agitation of this question seemed especially to follow close upon the footsteps of St. Paul in his missionary journeys; and in Galatia, at least, turned the saints of that province "from the grace of Christ unto another gospel, perverting the Gospel of Christ" (Galatians 1:6, 7).

THE SEPARATION OF ST. PAUL AND BARNABAS

There was also the withdrawal of John Mark from the ministry while accompanying St. Paul and Barnabas on their first mission in Asia Minor (Acts 13:13). Subsequently, when Barnabas desired to take John Mark again into the ministry, St. Paul seriously objected; and so pronounced was the quarrel between them that these two friends and fellow yokemen in the ministry parted company. It is just possible also that in addition to this misunderstanding about John Mark, the severe reproof which St. Paul administered to Barnabas in the affair of "dissimulation" at Antioch, had somewhat strained their friendship.

DETAILS OF CHARACTER OF THE EARLY SAINTS

Turning from these misunderstandings and criminations among the leading officers of the church, let us inquire how it stood with the members. The Epistle of St. Paul to the church at Corinth discloses the fact that there were serious schisms among them; some boasting that they were of Paul, others that they were of Apollos, others of Cephas, and still others of Christ; which led St. Paul to ask sharply, "Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you" (I Corinthians 1:12, 13)? There were endless strifes as well as divisions among them, which caused St. Paul to denounce them as "carnally minded" (I Corinthians 3:3, 4). Among them also was such fornication as was not named among the Gentiles, "that one should have his father's wife"! And this shameful sin had not humbled the church at Corinth, for St. Paul denounced the members for being puffed up in the presence of such a crime, rather than having mourned over it (I Corinthians 5:1-3). They were in the habit of going to law one with another, and that before the world in violation of the teachings of Jesus Christ (I Corinthians 6:1-20; Matthew 18:15, 17). They desecrated the ordinance of the Lord's Supper by their drunkenness, for which they were sharply reproved by the apostle (I Corinthians 11:2-22 and 29, 30). They ate and drank unworthily, "not discerning the Lord's body"; for which cause many were sickly among them, "and many slept", that is, died. There were heresies also among them (I Corinthians 11:19), some denying the resurrection of the dead, while others possessed not the knowledge of God, which the apostle declared was their shame (I Corinthians 15:12-34). This sharp letter of reproof made the Corinthian saints "sorry," and brought them to a partial repentance; but in his second Epistle the apostle could still charge that there were many in the church who had not repented of the uncleanness and fornication and lasciviousness which they had committed (II Corinthians 12:21). From this second letter, also, we learn that there were many in the church at large who corrupted the word of God (II Corinthians 2:17); that there were those, even in the ministry, who were "false prophets, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ" (II Corinthians 11:12-14).

Throughout the province of Galatia there was an invasion by Judaizing Christian ministers who were turning away the saints from the grace of Christ back to "the beggarly elements of the law of carnal commandments"; a circumstance which led St. Paul to exclaim: "I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another gospel; which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ" (Galatians 1:6, 7).

THE CHURCH RENT BY SCHISMS

There were two distinct parties in the church at this time, between whom bitter contentions arose. Some "preached Christ even of envy and strife, and some of good will". "The one preach the Christ of contention, not sincerely", says St. Paul, "supposing to add affliction to my bonds: but the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel" (Philippians 1:15, 16). "Beware of dogs", said he again to the same people; "beware of evil workers; beware of the concision" (Philippians 3:2). "Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things" (Philippians 3:18, 19). To the Colossians St. Paul found it necessary to say: "Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. * * * Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind" (Colossians 2:8, 18). St. Paul sent Timothy to the saints at Ephesus to represent him, that he might charge some to teach no other doctrines than those which he had delivered to them; "neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies, which minister questions rather than godly edifying, which is in faith"; for some had "turned aside" from the commandment of charity, "out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned", unto "vile jangling, desiring to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say nor whereof they affirm" (I Timothy 1:3-7). Others concerning faith had made shipwreck, whom St. Paul had delivered unto Satan that they might learn not to blaspheme (I Timothy 1:19, 20). Others had "erred concerning the faith" and had "given heed to vain babblings, and opposition of science falsely so called" (I Timothy 6:20, 21). In his second letter to Timothy, Paul informs him that "all the saints in Asia had turned away from him" (II Timothy 1:15). He admonishes Timothy again to shun "profane and vain babblings, for", said he, "they will increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will eat as doth a canker; of whom is Hymenae'us and Phile'tus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is passed already, and overthrow the faith of some" (II Timothy 2:16, 18). Demas, once a fellow laborer with St. Paul, had forsaken him, "having loved this present world" (II Timothy 4:10); and at St. Paul's first answer, when arraigned before the court at Rome, no man stood with him, but all men forsook him; he prays that God will not lay this to their charge (II Timothy 4:16). St. Paul admonished Titus to hold fast to the faith, for there were many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision; who subverted whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake; and were giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men and turning from the truth (Titus 1:9-14).

ST. PETER ON HERESIES

St. Peter also had something to say with reference to the danger of heresies and false teachers which menaced the church. He declared that there would be false teachers among the saints, "who privily would bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many", said he "shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you; whose judgments now for a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell and delivered them unto chains of darkness to be reserved unto judgment"—he argues,—then "the Lord would not spare these corrupters of the Gospel of Christ, who were like the dog that had turned again to his vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire" (II Peter 2). He charged also that some were wresting the Epistles of St. Paul, as they were some of the "other scriptures", unto their own destruction (Id. iii:16). "These are wells without water", he declared, "clouds that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is reserved forever. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who live in error. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage" (II Peter 2:17, 18, 19).

ST. JOHN ON ANTI-CHRISTS

St. John, the disciple whom Jesus loved, also bears testimony to the existence of anti-Christs, false prophets, and the depravity of many in the early church. Said he, "As ye have heard that anti-Christ shall come, even now there are many anti-Christs. * * * They went out from us, * * * that they might be manifest that they were not all of us" (I John 2:18, 19). "Try the spirits", said he again, "whether they are of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world" (I John 4:1). "Many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver, an anti-Christ" (II John 7).

This apostle also (of whom we have much to say in a subsequent discourse) gives a vivid description of the rather indifferent status of the seven churches of the east,—and mainly recounts God's reproof of their faults. For instance in the case of the church at Ephesus. While there were some things for which she [the church] could be condemned—she had tried some who had claimed to be apostles and had "found them to be liars"; she had exhibited patience in tribulation, yet the Lord had somewhat against her; she had "left her first love", and she is commanded to repent, else God will remove her out of her place"—reject her (Revelation 2:1-7) And so throughout, God in part commends these churches, and then finds much to condemn. And if for the sin of the church at Ephesus God could threaten her with rejection for "leaving her first love"—for "falling away"—so, too, for the whole church—if guilty of the same thing—could, conceivably, and likely would—receive the same threatened fate. Also the church at Laodice'a, that was "neither cold nor hot", and therefore God declared he would "spue her out of his mouth" (Revelation 3:14-16. For the status of the other five churches, see Revelation 2 and 3).

REFLECTIONS: PURPOSE OF THIS REVIEW

Let me assure you that what is here set down respecting the status of the Christian Church, even while the apostles were still alive—say through the first Christian century—does not exhaust all that could be gleaned from the New Testament as to the existence of evil among the church branches, but this is all I can crowd into this brief address. Also let it be understood that I have not given this review of the conditions of the Church of Christ in the apostolic age with the thought of establishing the idea that the church at that time was in a complete state of apostasy; nor have I dwelt upon the weaknesses and sins of the early saints for the purpose of holding them up for contempt. My purpose has been to dispel, first of all, the extravagant ideas that obtain in many minds that the Apostolic Church was like "a cooing dove-cote" of perfect harmony, made up of absolutely sanctified and holy Christians; and secondly, and mainly, to show that there were elements and tendencies existing in the early church, even in the days of the apostles, that would, when unrestrained by apostolic authority and power, lead to its entire "falling away", as foretold by St. Paul.

Furthermore, let it be said, that we have no good reason to believe that there occurred or would occur any change for the better in the affairs of the church after the demise of the apostles; no reason to believe that there were fewer heresies or fewer false teachers, or false prophets to lead away the people with philosophies, and their foolish babblings, "and opposition of science falsely so called". On the contrary, one is forced to believe the prediction of St. Paul, viz., that evil men and "seducers" [those who would evilly win men from the faith] would "wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived" (II Timothy 3:13): for who, after the apostles were fallen asleep, would stand up and correct the heresies that were brought into the church, rebuke the schismatics, the false teachers and false prophets that arose to draw away disciples after them? If false teachers insinuated themselves into the church, brought in damnable heresies by reason of which the way of truth was evil spoken of, and the pure religion of Jesus Christ corrupted, even while inspired apostles were still in the church, it is not unreasonable to conclude that all these evils would increase and revel unchecked after the death of the apostles. "And now ye know what withholdeth", says St. Paul, "that he [the son of perdition] might be revealed in his time". "The mystery of iniquity doth already work", said he: "only he who now letteth [i. e. hindereth] will let [i. e. hinder] until he be taken out of the way". And here we might ask: What was there that was withholding at that particular time the development of this evil power which ultimately would "sit in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God"? Nothing, only that inspired apostleship or priesthood held and exercised by such men as St. Peter, St. Paul, St. John, St. James, and other apostles who were resisting with all their might the rising flood of apostasy within the very church of their day; and this they would continue to do as long as they lived. But this resisting force will "be taken out of the way". What then? When there are no longer these giants of their day to resist "the mystery of iniquity", then "already at work"—what then? Why, then "shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming" (II Thessalonians 2:3-8). But note—this apostate power will not wholly be swept away from the earth until the Lord shall come to destroy him, "with the brightness of his coming".

This review of the early Christian Church, and these reflections upon it, will, I trust, bring to your thought, here and now, the question of tonight's discussion: Why should it be thought incredible with you that there should be a "falling away" from the Christian religion and church, when all the elements that would contribute to such an event were extant, even in the church of apostolic times?
