B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE III

The Rise Of False Teachers In The Church Of Christ

ST. PETER: "But there were false prophets also among the people [i.e. Ancient Israel] even as there shall be false teachers among you" (II Peter 2:1).

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: This is my third address on " 'The Falling Away', or The World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church". Tonight I am to deal with "The Rise of False Teachers in the Church".

THE MASS OF LITERATURE WITH WHICH WE HAVE TO DEAL

We have now reached a point in the development of our theme where it is necessary to say a word in relation to the mass of ecclesiastical literature with which we shall have to deal. With tonight's subject we shall have to consider the writings of the "apostolic fathers", and other so-called "Christian fathers" who followed them; thence out into the broad field of ecclesiastical history, biography, Christian polemics, and the works of secular writers who have dealt with the ecclesiastical affairs of the world. Not that it is my intention to burden my discourses with lengthy quotations from ancient authors, or from later controversial writings. Comparative little may appear from these as the nature of the discussion I intend to conduct will materially cut down the otherwise necessary appeal to such authorities; and much of the vain wrangling by them on specific topics may be eliminated. It is necessary, however, for me to note the attitude of at least the chief sub-divisions of "Christendom" towards the evidences of the "falling away" from the true Christian religion and the church. I am sorry also that in conducting this inquiry I am under the necessity of referring to some of these divisions by name, but I assure you it is not out of any disrespect I entertain for them; or because of preference for one above another and I would avoid such direct reference to any of them by name if I could.

THE CATHOLIC POSITION

It is well known that the Roman Catholic division of "Christendom" holds that there has been no great or fatal apostasy in the church. Their theory is that there has been a consistent, unbroken perpetuation of a true "Christian" church from the days of the Messiah and his apostles until now; and that the Roman Catholic Church is that very church so perpetuated through the ages. While Roman Catholic writers admit that there have been very corrupt periods in the church, and many wicked prelates and some vile popes, yet they maintain that the church has persisted; that the "Christian" religion has been preserved in the earth. It may be naturally expected, therefore, from the interest which this attitude naturally creates, that they will dwell as lightly and admit as little as possible as to the corruptions of the church and the effect that false teachers and heresies may have had upon it.

THE PROTESTANT POSITION

On the other hand the Protestant writers are also interested in maintaining that the Christian religion, with authority to teach and administer its ordinances has been perpetuated, even throughout the ages of partial, and even serious, "apostasy"; and that this persisting "church", purified of its corruptions, has been given back to mankind by the agency of the so-called "Reformation", chiefly of the 16th century. Hence in their writings, when stating the corruptions of the early church, Protestants are specially guarded lest too strong a statement of those things which lead to a departure from the truth of the Christian religion, and church, would lead to the belief that "Christianity" had been "utterly subverted". It is well known that Rev. Joseph Milner, for example, author of The History of the Church of Christ (4 volumes, revised and somewhat extended by the Rev. Isaac Milner, D.D., F.R.S.), wrote his great work to counteract the influence of Mosheim's Institutes of Ecclesiastical History, which Milner, with others, considered too frank in its statements of the perversions and abuses of the Christian religion. This Milner's History should really be regarded, however, not so much as a history of the church, as a history of piety. Also the Protestant writers must need set forth the theory that the Christian religion survived all the abuses and corruptions of it through the age of "falling away", else they would have no logical ground for the sixteenth century "Reformation" to stand upon. They seem not obvious to the fact, though perhaps not mentioning it in so many words, that if the Christian religion was displaced by a paganized "Christianity", a false religion, as is fully predicted, in the New Testament prophecies, and which the works of Protestant writers go far towards proving—then the only possible way in which the true Christian religion and the Church of Christ could be restored would be by a re-opening of the heavens and the giving forth of a New Dispensation of the gospel, together with a renewal of divine authority to preach it and administer its ordinances. Therefore, neither from Catholic writers nor Protestant, may we expect to find a full statement of the development of the corruptions of Christianity and their consequences; since both, I may say, are equally interested in preserving the notion of the perpetuity of the Christian religion and church in the earth.

ANTI-CHRISTIAN WRITERS

Also in dealing with this accumulated mass of ecclesiastical history, doctrinal and controversial literature, one needs to be equally upon his guard against some over-statements and improper emphasis and groupings used by anti-Christian writers and mocking infidels. To strike a line through this mass of accumulated writings from all who have chosen to discuss this department of history and of controversy, and to draw the simple line of truth through the mass of it—this I recognize as my own task; and I feel the responsibility of it; and the delicacy of it; and the temerity!

While making this brief but necessary explanation, let me also add, on the nature of the argument I am proposing to make in these discourses, both evidence and argument, I trust, will be cumulative; for I am not resting the case on one single line of evidence and reasoning; but shall rather depend upon the converging lines and final union of all the evidence and argument to completely develop the truth I seek to establish; so that a certain suspension of judgment to the close, may be necessary on the reader's part.

* * * * *

And now to the theme of the evening, "The Rise of False Teachers", beginning with the text from St. Peter:

"Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of" (II Peter 1:21, and Id. ii:1, 2).

Two great facts are established by this text; first, that there would arise in the Church of the Christ "false teachers", as false prophets had arisen in Ancient Israel and brought them to a "falling away" from God; and second, that these "false teachers" would privily bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and many would follow their pernicious ways "by reason of whom the way of truth would be evil spoken of".

Standing alone, it may be claimed, that this text does not prophesy a complete victory for these false teachers that would arise; nor does it threaten an entire earthly eclipse of the Church of Christ and of the apostles; but it does introduce to us, and makes clear one of the elements that would contribute to the "falling away", viz, "the rise of false teachers", and in that light let us consider it.

A SUDDEN TRANSITION IN QUALITY OF TEACHERS

A fact of singular importance is observed, and I may say is admitted by all, or nearly all, ecclesiastical writers; that is not the rapid decline, but an abrupt break between the quality of the teachers and writers of the Apostolic Church and those who in the next generations succeed them. On this head Neander, the German historian of the Christian Religion and Church (6 volumes), says:

"A phenomenon, singular in its kind, is the striking difference between the writings of the apostles and the writings of the apostolic fathers, who were so nearly their contemporaries. In other cases, transitions are wont to be gradual; but in this instance we observe a sudden change. There are here no gentle gradations, but all at once an abrupt transition from one style of language to another; a phenomenon which should lead us to acknowledge the fact of a special agency of the Divine Spirit in the souls of the apostles. * * * The writings of the so-called apostolic fathers have unhappily, for the most part, come down to us in a condition very little worthy of confidence, partly because under the name of these men, so highly venerated in the church, writings were early forged for the purpose of giving authority to particular opinions or principles; and partly because their own writings which were extant became interpolated in subservience to a Jewish hierarchical interest which aimed to crush the free spirit of the gospel" (History of the Christian Religion and Church, Neander, vol. 1, pp. 656, 657).

On the question of "forged books and writings" mentioned in the passage from Neander, Dr. Nathaniel Lardner refers to a dissertation written by Dr. Mosheim, which shows the reasons and causes for "the many forged writings" produced in the first and second centuries, and then adds: "All own that Christians of all sorts were guilty of this fraud. Indeed, we may say it was one great fault of the times; for truth needs no such defenses, and would blush at the sight of them" (Lardner's Works, vol. VIII, p. 330).

Eusebius, called "The Father of Ecclesiastical History", (early fourth century), quoting Hegesippus on the subject of "False Teachers", and referring to the condition of the church about the close of the first century, says:

"The church continued until then as a pure and uncorrupt virgin, whilst if there were any at all that attempted to pervert the sound doctrine of the saving gospel, they were yet skulking in dark retreats; but when the sacred choir of apostles became extinct, and the generation of those that had been privileged to hear their inspired wisdom had passed away, then also the combinations of impious errors arose by the fraud and delusions of false teachers. These also, as there were none of the apostles left, henceforth attempted without shame, to preach their false doctrine against the gospel of truth" (Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, Bk. iii, ch. xxxii).

Dr. Mosheim has the following on the same subject:

"Not long after the Savior's ascension, various histories of his life and doctrines, full of impositions and fables, were composed by persons of no bad intentions, perhaps, but who were superstitious, simple, and piously fraudulent; and afterwards various other spurious writings were palmed upon the world, falsely inscribed with the names of the holy apostles" (Mosheim's Institutes, vol. I Bk. i, cent. i, part ii, ch. ii, Murdock's translation).

This condition of things with reference to the writers in the centuries under consideration, naturally leads one to the reflection, that if there were so much of fraud, and so many forged writings, what must have been the state of the church at this time with reference to oral teaching? We are justified in believing, I think, that bad as was the state of things with reference to the writings of these early teachers of the church, the discourses of such as "preached" may be depended upon as being much worse. In this view of the case, one can readily understand that the "authority of antiquity", so generally urged as a reason for accepting the testimonies of the fathers—"antiquity"! that "handmaid to scripture", as the voice of "antiquity" is sometimes called, the whole body of it, written and oral, may indeed "be regarded", Dr. Jortin remarks, "as Briarean for she has a hundred hands, and these hands often clash and beat one another" (Jortin's Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, (2 volumes) vol. I, p. 248).

Moreover, it often happens that those who are condemned by some of these fathers as heretics were not only censured for their heresies, but sometimes for the truths which they held. For example: Papias, a bishop and Christian father in the second century, is condemned by Eusebius for saying that he received from apostolic men—meaning thereby men who were associated with the apostles—the fact that there would be a corporal reign of Christ on earth with the saints, after the resurrection, which would continue through a thousand years (Eusebius, bk. iii, ch. xxxix).

Prodicus is censured by Clement of Alexandria for holding that men are by nature the children of Deity (Lardner's Works, vol. VIII, p. 418). Marcion besides being condemned for his many errors, is also censured by Irenaeus for believing in salvation for the dead, concerning which, it must be acknowledged, Marcion did hold peculiar views; but that is no reason why the general principles should be condemned. Marcion is also condemned for believing in the eternity of matter. So, too, Hermogenes is censured by Tertullian for the same cause, and for arguing that God made the world out of matter, and could not have made it out of nothing (Lardner's Works, vol. VIII, pp. 345, 449-470; also I Peter 3:18-21, Id. iv:6;I I Cor. xv:29).

And so throughout there is censure and counter-censure between the "orthodox" and the "heretics", and it is difficult at times to determine which are the orthodox and which the heretics, so frequently do they change places. Nor was there any improvement in the ages that succeeded these that have been briefly considered. The editor of Dr. Jortin's Ecclesiastical History, on a passage of Jortin's on the early fathers, says of the fourth century:

"After the council of Nice [held in 325 A.D.] a class of writers sprung up, greatly inferior to their predecessors, in whatever light their pretentions are viewed. Sadly deficient in learning, prejudiced in opinion, and inelegant in style, they cannot be admitted for a moment into competition with those who were contemporary with the apostles and their immediate successors" (Ecclesiastical History, Jortin, vol. I, p. 166, note).

The whole tenor of his remarks is to the effect that while the fathers of the second and third centuries are not to be relied upon in their interpretations of scripture, were frequently deceived in opinions, and not always to be depended upon in matters of tradition, yet they were greatly to be preferred in all respects to the fathers of succeeding centuries.

DID BISHOPS SUCCEED TO THE ORDERS AND MISSION OF THE APOSTLES?

Among all the heresies and false doctrines that arose in the early centuries of the Christian era, amidst these weak and sometimes false teachers, and the cloudy traditions that obtained, was the idea that the bishops of local churches, succeeded to the authority and mission of the apostles of Jesus Christ. Especially was this idea mischievous as connected with the Church of Rome. It is claimed, by the Roman Church, that St. Peter transmitted and bestowed upon one Linus his own primacy, which carried with it the universal jurisdiction over the church; the orders (ordination conferring divine authority), and the mission St. Peter had received from the Christ; by which act, after himself, St. Peter made Linus supreme head of the church in all the world; with whom, and his successors ever afterwards, all must be in union in order to be in the fold of Christ. This claim of the Church of Rome has led to the chief troubles, controversies, religious divisions, and wars during the Christian era. The validity of these claims, but only in part now, we are about to test.

In the first place it is essential to note that the jurisdiction, and mission which the Christ bestowed upon the apostles was general, not local or limited:

"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations [were the risen Christ's words to the apostles], baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world" (Matthew 28:19, 20).

This to all the apostles. Also again to all the apostles on his appearing to them after the resurrection: "Peace be unto you; as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. * * * Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained" (St. John 20:21-23).

Again: On parting from the apostles at his ascension into heaven, the Christ said: "Ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost has come upon you; and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and to the utmost parts of the earth" (Acts 1:8).

Surely all these repeated commissions are universal and plenary. With these apostolic powers goes the claim of a certain primacy for St. Peter 1n the quorum or college of the apostles, according to the Church of Rome, by reason of the Christ having made St. Peter head of the church—founded the church upon him, in fact so they say—because St. Peter had declared that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God. Whereupon Christ had said to him, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but my Father, which is in heaven. And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it". On the same occasion the Master had said to him: "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (St. Matthew 16:19). Also because in an emphatic manner near the close of the resurrected Christ's earth association with the apostles, he thrice said to St. Peter: "Feed my sheep * * * feed my lambs" (St. John 21:15-17), having in mind the membership of the church—the flock or church of the Christ. Here allow me to say that it is not my intention to enter in a full analysis and exposition of these texts in this discourse; I merely quote them now to set before you the source of the claims of the Church of Rome, and shall leave their full consideration for later treatment.

THE PRIMACY OF ST. PETER

Just a passing word with reference to this primacy claimed for St. Peter. Whatever of primacy may have been accorded St. Peter, he seems from the New Testament, not to have held that primacy exclusively and absolutely. In the earth-lifetime of the Christ the latter seems to have recognized on various occasions a special relationship to the three apostles, Peter, James, and John; and a relationship among them. When the Master was to meet with and be "transfigured" in the presence of the ancient prophets, Moses and Elias, he took with him, into the mount of transfiguration, Peter, James and John; and in their presence met within the manifest glory of God, Moses and Elias. The same "three" the Christ took with him to be present at the healing of Jairus' daughter: "And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter and James and John, the brother of James" (St. Mark 5:36). In the darkest hour that fell upon him in Gethsemane, the Christ again took with him these special "three", apart from the other apostles to watch with him while he prayed (Matthew 26:36, et seq.).

The primacy of "three" in the kingdom or Church of Christ seems to have obtained among the apostles further in the lifetime of the Christ; for it will be remembered that the mother of Zebedee's sons—these were St. James and St. John, two of the trio named above—asked that these her two sons should sit the one on the right hand and the other on the left hand of the Lord in his kingdom. Jesus did not deny that such a "head" would obtain in his kingdom, but only that the appointment asked for was not his to make, but should be given unto them for whom it was prepared of his Father (Matthew 20:20-28). Also after the resurrection, at the council of the "apostles and elders" held at Jerusalem on church affairs, (about 51 A.D.) there seemed to be "three" men prominent above the others at that council, these were James, Peter, and John, whom St. Paul designates as "pillars", that is, in the council, also, doubtless, in the affairs of the church. These, when the grace was perceived that had been given to Paul and Barnabas among the Gentiles, gave to them the right hand of fellowship and of commendation (Galatians 2:9). Although the "James" of this council meeting was "James" the Lord's brother; and not James of the first trio referred to above; that "James", the brother of St. John, had fallen some time previously under the persecution of Herod (Acts 12:1, 2). It would appear, then, that the very least significance that may attach to the special prominence given to the "three" apostles above mentioned and the general idea of "three" prominent in the church affairs after the departure of the Lord, would be sufficient to check the thought that the primacy of St. Peter was absolute.

WAS THE PRIMACY AND MISSION OF ST. PETER TRANSMITTED TO THE BISHOPS OF ROME?

And now we come to all that which makes for leadership, primacy, orders, jurisdiction, mission and universal presidency over the church, held—we will say—by the apostle St. Peter; and are we to contemplate him as bestowing all these upon the head of the obscure Linus? Making Linus bishop of Rome, bishop of the church universal! Several things, however, here obtrude themselves upon us that forbid any confidence in such an anti-climax taking place in the transmission of such glorious powers as the Christ had bestowed upon this "chief of the apostles".

First among these is the unlocal character of these appointments of the apostles already indicated by the commissions given to them by the Christ. The uncertain tradition that the apostles early after the resurrection of Christ assembled and partitioned out the world to the several apostles, though the tradition is mentioned by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, may not be regarded as true because such a permanent partitioning and permanent appointing would be in violation of the universality of the office of an apostle, since it would be limiting the nature of that office in the church, just as it is unthinkable that St. Peter became bishop of Rome—became a local officer in the church! Reduced from a universal apostleship to be a bishop of a city! This would be derogatory to the great and high commission that St. Peter, with the other apostles, had received from the Master.

CONCESSIONS

We may waive the mooted point about St. Peter being in Rome, although some respectable authorities question the fact of it. Yet it seems to me that the weight of authority favors his presence and martyrdom in Rome. And such is the opinion of what may be called the leading Protestant historians, as well as Catholic authorities (History of the Apostolic Church, Schaff, p. 375). Also we may accept (though with some reserve) the statement of Irenaeus, the bishop of Lyons (who flourished in the latter half of the second century A.D.), that "the blessed apostles, St. Peter, and St. Paul, upon founding and erecting the church at Rome committed the office of administering the church at Rome to Linus"; although it is sometimes doubted in the early traditions as to whether the man-made bishop of Rome was not Clement instead of Linus. "There is no document whatever to be found", writes the author of the History of the Apostolic Church, a work of high standing.—"There is no document whatever to be found respecting any actual transfer of the primacy [of St. Peter] to Linus or Clement; and it is not even certain which of these two was the first bishop of Rome, as the statements of the church fathers differ here" (Schaff's History of the Apostolic Church, p. 375). But this question, too, we may pass, and come face to face with the proposition that St. Peter and St. Paul, as Irenaeus affirms, were both in Rome and St. Peter and St. Paul were both martyred in the Roman persecution under Nero, and that before their death they, not Peter alone, ordained Linus to be bishop of Rome. Hence Linus, not Peter, became the first bishop of Rome. Peter and Paul—for Irenaeus names "these two most glorious apostles" as participating in making Linus bishop—had done at Rome what they and others of the apostles had done in other cities where the gospel was planted, namely: they had ordained a bishop in Rome; but that St. Peter had conferred upon that bishop the general powers which the Christ had conferred upon himself, nowhere appears. Linus, if he was ordained a bishop, was only of equal standing with the bishops that had been ordained by the apostles in other cities. He was a local officer over the church at Rome as were other bishops in their respective cities.

Now a question: Suppose, for the sake of the argument, it is admitted that St. Peter held a primacy in the college of the apostles in all that Rome claims for him; that he held the very "keys of the kingdom of heaven"; suppose he had been martyred before he conferred this primacy, his orders, his mission universal, and right to the general presidency over the church in all the world—suppose he had died holding that power solely, and without having conferred it upon anyone else, what would have become of all those splendid things conferred upon him by the Lord Jesus Christ? Would they not have been lost to the world? The necessary answer is obvious. They would have been lost to the world. Very well. Let us suppose again, for the sake of the argument, that St. Peter 100onferred all these high official powers and prerogatives upon Linus, and that Linus held them. Did Linus, before his alleged martyrdom, confer all these high powers by ordination upon his supposed successor, Cletus? Or did he die before conferring them upon that successor of his? If he did not so confer them, did they not pass from the earth with Linus, as they would have passed away had St. Peter died without conferring them on Linus? Thus leaving Cletus, who is said to have succeeded Linus, without all that which St. Peter 1s alleged to have bestowed upon Linus? Capitulate a little here: In the first place there is no evidence that St. Peter became bishop of Rome; and on the contrary Irenaeus says that "the blessed apostles [Peter and Paul] upon founding and erecting the church [at Rome], committed the office of administering the church on Linus". In the second place, there is no evidence that St. Peter and St. Paul conferred upon Linus any apostolic powers, much less the primacy, orders, and mission of St. Peter. There is no evidence that Linus ordained his successor; or that Clement ordained his successor, and so on down the line. The departing bishops of Rome have not ordained those who succeeded them. And so there has been no unbroken transmission of the primacy and other special powers of St. Peter that have come down the line of the bishops of Rome. Unless there was appointed by the apostles some other agency outside the bishops of Rome with the power to appoint her bishops, and transmit St. Peter's authority to them; which agency in the early Christian centuries nowhere appears; and if it was not established in those times by the apostles, then it nowhere rightfully exists. It follows that the powers once held by St. Peter, right of universal presidency of the church, primacy among the apostles, his orders, jurisdiction, mission, once lost to the world, could only be restored by a re-commission to one of God's choosing by revelation and new ordination.

WHAT OF ST. JOHN?

Observe these details: It is claimed that St. Peter suffered martyrdom at Rome in 67 A.D.; St. Linus is said to have succeeded him the same year; Cletus succeeded St. Linus 78 A.D.; and St. Clement became bishop of Rome in 90 A.D.

Observe now: St. John, the apostle "whom Jesus loved", and who evidently participated in such primacy as St. Peter may have held, as implied by his association in the special ways and privileges with Peter and James, during the lifetime of the Lord; and who because of his fiery zeal in his youth in preaching the message of Christ, was called by the Master, a "Son of Thunder". This man is said to have died at Ephesus in 96 A.D. (Catholic authority), six years after the appointment of the last of these several alleged bishops of Rome. So that he lived 29 years after the martyrdom of St. Peter, and six years after the alleged appointment of Clement. Where does he stand in the church of God during all that time according to the Roman Catholic theory? Oh, he is under the jurisdiction, and in subordination to bishops St. Linus, St. Cletus, and St. Clement of Rome! With whom he must be in union, and in subjection to, in order to be in the fold of Christ! (For the need of all church authorities—all officers and lay members being in subjection to the bishop of Rome see Catholic Belief, Bruno, ch. xvii). All this must be held to have been the situation if these bishops of Rome succeeded to, and held all the primacy and authority of St. Peter. The relationship of St. John to these Roman bishops must have been the same as it would have been to St. Peter, had St. Peter 100ontinued to live: for, according to the Roman Catholic theory, each of these bishops was the supreme head of the church, possessing all the primacy St. Peter held over his fellow apostles, and all that is conceivable to attach to the apostleship of St. Peter. I will not say that such a conclusion is ridiculous, I will say that such a conclusion is unthinkable, and impossible. It was a situation that never obtained.

But I have something more to present; and something even more conclusive. Surely with St. John living, and though perhaps the last of the apostles, it may not be denied that his time—near the close of the first century—was still within the period of revelation from God. This even according to the beliefs of the Roman Catholic, the Greek, and the Protestant churches. And now, in view of the fact that we are within the period of revelation, if revelation is to be given to the church, or to any of its branches, through whom will the revelation come? Unquestionably the revelations will come through the head of the church, who at the time, according to Roman Catholic claims, was Linus, or Cletus, or Clement, bishops of Rome, supreme heads of the church universal! But did it? Ah no; the revelation came through the apostle who was associated evidently in the primacy of the triumvirate of the apostles, St. Peter, St. James, and St. John. It came through the apostle "whom Jesus loved", the "Son of Thunder". It came to him upon the lonely Rock of Patmos when there a prisoner of a Roman emperor, "for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus". And the revelation which came is one of the noblest of the whole scripture. Listen to the beautiful prologue of that revelation:

"The Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John: Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at hand" (Revelation 1:1-3).

Then this is followed by the message to the seven churches of Asia through their "angels", that is, through their presiding officers, in some cases, doubtless, their bishops; who were reproved, instructed and encouraged; not by his grace Linus, or Cletus, or Clement, but by God's apostle, St. John, as should be the case, and not by the bishop of another city, only equal in authority and jurisdiction to themselves.

If it should be claimed that the Revelation of St. John 1s limited to the seven churches of Asia, so far as special messages to churches are concerned, be it conceded; but the major part of John's Revelation is not so limited, but is universal in its character; which God gave "to show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass"; and "blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy", meaning all those that read and hear and keep the words of "this prophecy" then on earth, and all who will subsequently live upon it.

If there can be any doubt, however, in the minds of any that this Revelation from God through Jesus Christ to St. John was not of universal import and authority, then let me remind such that after St. John's release from Patmos and his return to Ephesus, he is to give other evidences as being under the glow of the spirit of revelation from God, for it was then that he wrote the most highly spiritual and glorious Gospel of all the four that have come down to us—The Gospel of St. John. That Gospel was written that "ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name" (St. John 20:31).

A PARALLEL

When God would have his gospel extended to the Gentiles, he directed the devout and righteous Gentile Cornelius, by an angel, to send men to Joppa, where he would find one Simon Peter, who, when he came, would tell him further what to do to please God.

Meanwhile God prepared St. Peter, "chief of the apostles", for the coming of these messengers by a God-given vision, virtually a revelation, which, with the coming of these Gentile messengers, and Peter's visit to Cornelius, and that Gentile household receiving the outpouring of the Holy Ghost as they were being instructed, convinced St. Peter that the gospel was to be extended to the Gentiles.

This great action of opening a dispensation of the gospel to the Gentiles was achieved by God giving a revelation to "the chief of the apostles"—to the earthly head and president of the church, the supremest way in which God could give recognition of the headship of his church—the administrative power of it.

Years passed. So far as known all the apostles have gone to their rest, save St. John. God would, by revelation, send a message to seven important churches of Asia, "and to his servants", of things "that must shortly come to pass"; and also of things to be in the end of the world. And now, in the end of the first century God is true to the great principle he honored when he would have his apostolate extend the gospel to the Gentiles, he sends his revelation through Jesus Christ by an angel to his apostle John, who participated with St. Peter 1n whatever primacy existed among the apostles; and thus by the supremest act possible God recognized St. John as head, and universal pastor of the church; passing by and ignoring those bishops of Rome whom the traditions of the Roman Catholic Church represent as universal bishops, and supreme heads of the whole church of the world! The Roman Church makes that claim. GOD answers it, by ignoring the claim, and by giving his highest possible recognition to St. John the apostle; and by giving that answer GOD sweeps away the figment of all Roman papacy, so far as the bishop of Rome having succeeded to the primacy, or to St. Peter's apostolic authority, is concerned.

And note this: If those first three bishops, who succeeded each other, were not heads of the universal church, no others who followed them were such universal pastors, or supreme heads of the church.

CONCLUSION

These considerations make it impossible to believe that the early bishops of Rome, Linus and the rest, succeeded to the primacy, to the orders, to the mission of St. Peter. It would have been out of order for such local officers as bishops to receive and exercise these splendid and general apostolic powers. It would have been an insult to the authority and power and dignity of St. John, the "Son of Thunder", the "apostle whom Jesus loved", and who shared in the triumvirate primacy of St. Peter, St. James, John's brother, and himself, to have made him subordinate to a Linus, a Cletus, or a Clement; or any other bishop in the world.

In view of these facts of history, and these principles, and because of them, instead of any argument offered by myself, is it too much to say that the claims for the bishop of Rome to the succession of St. Peter's primacy, and full apostleship, are in tatters?

In a subsequent discourse I shall trace the true rise of the papacy from human and political sources; and, of course, in due time, shall submit the claims of all divisions of Christendom to divine authority, to the test of history, scripture, and reason.
