B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE IV

The Development of False Doctrines

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I give you all hail and greetings this Easter Day—Resurrection Anniversary Day! I assure you that Christ is risen from the dead. I wish it were possible for me to hear you give the beautiful Easter response to this from your hearts "He is risen, indeed"!

This is my fourth address on "The 'Falling Away' or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church". I read to you the following text:

ST. PETER: "There were false prophets among the people [meaning Ancient Israel] even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of" (II Peter 2:1-2).

Some of you who listened to the address of last Sunday evening will observe the fact that I am using, in part, the same text of scripture with which I began my subject of last week "The Rise of the False Teachers". This is done not because of any lack of other texts which speak of the development of false doctrines in the church, but because this particular passage couples together in one breath, both the rise of false teachers and the development of false doctrines, of which, of course, one is a concomitant of the other: and also because this passage predicts as climax of the false teaching—the bringing in of "damnable heresies"—including a denial of "the Lord who bought them", and this I wish especially to discuss this evening of the Easter Day Sunday.

As for other texts referring to the incoming of false doctrines into the early church, you may read them in such passages as these: St. Paul strictly and solemnly admonishes Timothy to "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine. For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables" (II Timothy 4:2-4).

Again: "I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them" (Acts 20:29-30). Also again: "The spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron; forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from meats" (I Timothy 4:1-3). I refrain at this point from doing more than merely to mention the great prophecies to be found in the books of Daniel, and the Revelation of St. John, which reveal the rise of apostate world powers; which would not only open their mouths in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and them who dwell in heaven; but it would be given unto them also to make war with the saints and "overcome them" (Revelation 13:6, 7). They would speak great words against the Most High, and would wear out the saints of the Most High (Daniel 7:25). These powers would also make war on the saints and prevail against them (Daniel 7:21). They would destroy the mighty and the holy people (Daniel 8:24). All this, I say I forego here, because I desire to point out the recognition by some authoritative writers on the corruptions that arose in the early centuries of the "Christian Church".

Dr. Lardner, whose great work, the Early Christian Centuries (10 volumes), makes him an authority on conditions in the early "Christian Church", says:

"Eusebius relates that Ignatius [early in the second century], on his way from Antioch to Rome, exhorted the churches to beware of heresies which were then springing up, and which would increase; and that he afterwards wrote his Epistles in order to guard them against these corruptions, and to confirm them in the faith. This opinion that the seeds of these heresies were sown in the time of the apostles, and sprang up immediately after, is an opinion probable in itself, and is embraced by several learned moderns" (Lardner, vol. VIII, p. 344).

Lardner also quotes the following with approval: "To mention the corruptions the innovations in religion of the four first centuries, is wholly superfluous; when it is so very notorious, that even before the reign of Constantine, there sprang up a kind of heathenish Christianity which mingled itself with the true Christian religion" (Id., vol. VIII, p. 345).

Of the impending departure from the Christian religion, immediately succeeding the days of the apostles, Dr. Neander, the German historian, says:

"Already, in the latter part of the age of St. Paul, we shall see many things different from what they had been originally; and so it cannot appear strange if other changes came to be introduced into the constitution of the [Christian] communities, by the altered circumstances of the times immediately succeeding those of St. Paul or St. John. Then ensued those strongly marked oppositions and schisms, those dangers with which the corruptions engendered by manifold foreign elements threatened primitive Christianity" (Neander's History of the Christian Religion and Church, vol. I, p. 191).

Dr. Phillip Smith, the author of the Students' Ecclesiastical History, in speaking of the early corruptions of the Christian religion, says:

"The sad truth is that as soon as Christianity was generally diffused, it began to absorb corruptions from all the lands in which it was planted, and to reflect the complexion of all their systems of religion and philosophy" (Students' Ecclesiastical History, vol. I, p. 49).

Dean Milman, in his Preface to his annotated edition of Edward Gibbon's great work, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, and commenting upon that great author's attitude of arraignment of the Christian religion, says:

"If, after all, the view of the early progress of Christianity be melancholy and humiliating, we must beware lest we charge the whole of this on the infidelity of the historian. It is idle, it is disingenuous, to deny or to dissemble the early depravations of Christianity, its gradual but rapid departure from its primitive simplicity and purity, still more from its spirit of universal love. It may be no unsalutary lesson to the Christian world, that this silent, this unavoidable perhaps, yet fatal change, shall have been drawn by an impartial, or even an hostile hand" (Gibbon's Roman Empire, Preface by Dean Milman, p. 15).

"DENYING THE LORD THAT BOUGHT THEM"

Of all the heresies that arose in the early Christian centuries of the church, the one most fatal to the continuance of the Christian religion was one which led to the denial of him that bought them—the Lord Jesus. And here, in an incidental way, our subject of the evening touches the great thought of this Easter Day (Sunday, March 31, 1929); because I must necessarily point out the conception which the church of God had of the Christ, when he was truly revealed to the apostles, in order that I may effectually make plain the early "Christian" denial of him by their acceptance of false doctrine on this head. And in setting forth briefly the revealed God of the New Testament in the person of the Christ, I shall be able to contribute my own meed of praise and glory to him this Easter Day, already honored in this service by the beautifully rendered music of Haydn, and the noble words of Job and St. Paul—"I know that my Redeemer liveth"; and, "Now is Christ risen from the dead".

CHRIST, "GOD MANIFESTED IN THE FLESH"

The general conception entertained of the Christ as "God manifested in the flesh", may be seen in the following passage from St. Paul:

"Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest [manifested in the margin of the S. S. Oxford Teachers' Bible, and also in other Protestant versions, and in the Catholic-English edition of the Bible] in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory" (I Timothy 3:16).

All this in plain allusion to the Christ conceived of as "God manifested in the flesh". And now the whole, though brief review of the doctrine of God in the New Testament summarized and referenced:

THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF GOD

The existence of God both Jesus and the apostles accepted as a fact. In all the teachings of the former he nowhere seeks to prove God's existence. He assumes that, and proceeds from that basis with his doctrine—he declares God to be his Father, and frequently calls himself the Son of God (St. John 10; Matt. 27; Mark 14:61, 62).

After the Christ's resurrection and departure into heaven, the apostles taught that he, the Son of God, was with God the Father in the beginning; that he, as well as the Father, is God; that under the direction of the Father he was the Creator of worlds; that without him was not anything made that was made (for all of which see St. John i:1-4, 14; Heb. i:1-3). That in him dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Colossians 1:15-19, and 2:9); and that he was the express image of the Father's person (Hebrews 1:2, 3). Jesus himself taught that he and the Father were one (St. John 10:30; 17:11-22); that whosoever had seen him had seen the Father also (St. John 14:9); that it was part of his mission to reveal God, the Father, through his own personality; for as was the Son, so too was the Father (St. John 14:4-9; St. John i:18). Hence Jesus was God manifested in the flesh—a revelation of God to the world (I Timothy 3:16). The foregoing is a revelation not only of the being of God, but of the kind of being God is. Those who will give attention to the scriptures cited herein will see God as Creator of all things; as world sustaining power; the vital force of it; the intelligence inspiring power of the world; the love manifested power toward men through Jesus Christ; and, of course, the scriptures teach that justice, judgment, mercy, truth, holiness—which is righteousness—are the attributes of God; and these attributes are his perfections.

Jesus also taught (and in doing so showed in what the "oneness" of himself and his Father consisted) that the disciples might be one with him, and also one with each other as he and the Father were one (St. John 14:10, 11, 19, 20; also St. John 17). Not one in person—not all merged into one individual, and all distinctions of personality lost; not that; but one in mind, in knowledge, in love, in will—one by reason of the indwelling in all of the one spirit, even as the mind and will of God the Father was also in Jesus Christ (Ephesians 3:14-19).

The Holy Ghost, too, was upheld by the Christian religion to be God (Acts 5:1-14). It was held that to lie to the Holy Ghost is to "lie to God", because the Holy Ghost is God. Jesus ascribed to him a distinct personality; as proceeding from the Father; as sent forth in the name of the Son; as feeling love; experiencing grief; as forbidding, as abiding; as teaching, as bearing witness; as appointing to work; and as interceding for men. All of which clearly establishes for him a personality. (St. John 13, 14, 15; also Acts 13:1-6).

The distinct personality of these three (united however into one Godhead, or Divine Council), was made apparent at the baptism of Jesus; for as he, God the Son, came up out of the water from his baptism at the hands of John, a manifestation of the presence of the Holy Ghost was given in the sign of the dove which rested upon Jesus, while out of the glory of heaven the voice of God the Father was heard saying, "This", referring to Jesus, "is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matthew 3:13-17). The distinctness of the personality of each member of the Godhead is also shown by the commandments to baptize those who believe the gospel in the name of each person of the Holy Trinity. That is, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost (Matthew 28:19, 20). And again, also, in the apostolic benediction, viz., "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God [the Father], and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all" (II Corinthians 13:14).

These three personages constitute the Christian Godhead, the Holy Trinity. In early Christian theology they were regarded as the Supreme governing and creating power in heaven and in earth, of which Trinity the Father was worshipped in the name of the Son, while the Holy Ghost bore record of both the Father and the Son. And though the Holy Trinity was made up of three distinct personages, yet did they constitute but one Godhead.

This outline of the doctrine of God represents him as anthropomorphic; that is, like man in form; or rather, it reaffirms the doctrine found in the book of Genesis, viz., that man is created in the image of God, and after his likeness. The outline of New Testament doctrine of God also ascribes to him what are called human attributes and feelings; but as in the foregoing we first say that God is represented as being in human form, and then to get the exact truth say: "or, rather, man was created in the image and likeness of God"; so in this latter case, when we have said that the doctrine of the New Testament ascribes human attributes and feelings to God, to get the exact truth we should say: "or, rather, man possesses the attributes of God"—the attributes of knowing, willing, judging, loving, etc—though it should be stated, of course, that man does not possess these attributes in their perfection, as God does. The same may also be said of the physical perfection. While man has been created in the image and likeness of God, yet our bodies in their present state of imperfection—sometimes stunted in growth, diseased, subject to sickness, wasting, decay, and death—cannot be said to be like God's glorious, perfect, physical body, yet we have the Divine word that our bodies shall be like his:

"For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself" (Philippians 3:20-21). This, of course, by reason of and in the resurrection; when there will be, as in the case of the Christ, an indissoluble union of spirit and body; not that there is deterioration of spirit to blend with body, but that there is purification of body to blend with spirit—both becoming one, spiritual, inseparable, and perfect!

The foregoing doctrine of God, taught to the Christians in apostolic times, awakened their pious reverence without exciting their curiosity. They dealt with no metaphysical abstractions, but were contented to accept the teachings of the apostles in humble faith, and believed that Jesus Christ was the complete manifestation of Deity; the express image of God his Father; hence a revelation to them of God; while the Holy Ghost they accepted as God's spiritual witness and messenger to them.

It now becomes my duty to trace, briefly, the departure of the "Christian" world from this conception of Christ as God and the actual manifestation of God.

DOCTRINE OF PAGAN TRINITIES

Primitive Christianity, as is well known, came in contact with other doctrines of Deity than those of the Bible. It was almost immediately brought in touch with the mysticism of the Orient, and also with the philosophy of the Greeks, who took so much delight in intellectual subtleties. In the Oriental philosophies, and in the Greek, there was conceived, for instance, the idea of a trinity in Deity; an idea which possibly may have come down from the doctrines revealed to the patriarchs concerning the Godhead, but which had been corrupted and rendered unintelligible by the vain philosophizing of men.

The Greek trinity is sometimes stated in the terms, "First Cause; Reason, or Logos; and Soul of the Universe"; but more commonly in these: "Goodness, Intellect, and Will". The nature of the Greek trinity has long been a matter of contention among the learned, and one indeed that is not settled to this day. Is there indicated in this system "a true and proper tri-personality, or merely a personification of three impersonalities"; a trinity of attributes or functions? The answers to these questions are varied, and would require too much time for consideration here. Christians having been taught to accept the New Testament doctrine of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as constituting one Godhead, no sooner came in contact with the philosophies of the Greeks and Egyptians than there was an effort made to identify the Christian trinity with that of the Greek and other philosophies.

The temptation to do this was very great. Christianity was a prescribed religion and its followers detested. Whenever it could be shown, therefore, that under new symbols the church was really teaching the same doctrines that the old philosophers did, it was regarded as a distinct gain to Christianity. The mere fact of Christianity teaching a trinity of any kind was a sufficient basis of comparison, under the temptation offered, and hence in a short time we have the alleged followers of Christ involved in all the metaphysical disputations of the age. The chief difficulty in those speculations was to define the nature of the "Logos", or "Word" of God—a title that is given to our Savior by the apostle St. John, be it remembered (St. John 1:1-5, 14).

THE NATURE AND RELATIONSHIP OF THE CHRIST TO OTHER MEMBERS OF THE GODHEAD

Adopting absolute "being" as the postulate of their conception of God, absolute oneness, and therefore absolute singleness, the difficulties of the Christian theologians arose in trying to reconcile the existence of three persons in the Godhead to the postulate of unity. The disputations were created on chiefly concerning the Christ, the "Word", in his relationship to the Godhead; and the disputants concerned themselves with such questions as these: "Is Jesus the Word"? "If he be the 'Word', did he emanate from God in time, or before time"? "If he emanated from God is he co-eternal and of the same, that is, identical substance with him, or merely of a similar substance"? "Is he distinct from the Father, that is, separate from him, physically, or is he not"? "Is he made or begotten"? "Can he beget in his turn"? "Has he paternity, or productive virtue without paternity"?

Similar questions were asked as to the other person of the Godhead, the Holy Ghost. These questions were violently agitated at Alexandria by the bishop of that city, Alexander, and one of the presbyters, Arius, 318-321 A.D.; thence the contention spread throughout "Christendom", and culminated finally in the council of Nicea, 325 A.D., and in the adoption of the following creed:

THE NICENE CREED

"We believe in one God, the Father, almighty, the maker of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, begotten of the Father, Only-Begotten, (that is), of the substance of the Father; God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God; begotten not made; of the same substance with the Father, by whom all things were made, that are in heaven and that are in earth; who for us men, and for our salvation, descended, and was incarnate, and became man; suffered, and rose again the third day, ascended into the heavens; and will come to judge the living and the dead; and in the Holy Spirit. But those who say, that there was a time when he was not, and that he was not, before he was begotten, and that he was made out of nothing, or affirm that he is of any other substance or essence, or that the Son of God is created, and mutable or changeable, the Catholic Church doth pronounce accursed" (Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, vol. I, bk. ii, cent. iv, part ii, ch. v, footnote 22. I give above the Nicene Creed as translated from the Greek by Mosheim's translator, Murdock).

"The creed used in the Catholic, Lutheran, and English churches, and called the Nicene Creed", says our author, "is in reality the creed set forth by the council of Constantinople, in the year 381", which is slightly different in phraseology though meaning practically the same as the Nicene Creed. This to account for slight differences between the creed as here given, and that published in Catholic and Protestant books.

This Nicene Creed variously amplified and expounded is quite generally accepted as the symbol of the orthodox "Christian" faith of all modern principal divisions of "Christendom". Presumably based upon it the Catholic Church says: "There is but one God, the creator of heaven and earth, the supreme, incorporeal [meaning immaterial], uncreated being, who exists of himself and is infinite in all his attributes" (Catholic Belief, Bruno, p. 1). The Church of England teaches in her Articles of Religion "that there is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body [meaning not-material], parts or passions, of infinite power, wisdom and goodness" (Book of Common Prayer, Articles of Religion, Article 1). This view of God as incorporeal, immaterial, bodiless, partless, passionless BEING, is now, and has been, from the days of the gradual apostasy from God and Christ in the second and third and fourth centuries, the doctrine of Deity generally accepted by Christendom. The simple doctrine of the Christian Godhead, set forth in the New Testament is corrupted by the jargon of these creeds and their explanations. Those who profess a belief in them are wandering in the darkness of the mysticisms of the old pagan philosophies. When they are considered it is no wonder that Athanasius himself, supposed to be the author of the creed, whom Gibbon calls "the most sagacious of the Christian theologians", candidly confessed that whenever he forced his understanding to meditate on the divinity of the "Logos", [which of course, involved the whole doctrine of the Godhead], his "toilsome and unavailing efforts recoiled on themselves; that the more he thought, the less he comprehended: and the more he wrote, the less capable was he of expressing his thoughts"! It is a fine passage with which Gibbon closes his reflections upon this subject, and hence I give it place:

"In every step of the inquiry, we are compelled to feel and acknowledge the immeasurable disproportion between the size of the object and the capacity of the human mind. We may try to abstract the notions of time, of space, and of matter, which so closely adhere to all the perceptions of our experimental knowledge; but as soon as we presume to reason of infinite substance, or spiritual generation; as often as we deduce any positive conclusions from a negative idea, we are involved in darkness, perplexity, and inevitable contradiction" (Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. III, ch. xxi, p. 50).

Recurrence to the New Testament doctrine of God, and a comparison of it with the doctrine of Deity set forth in the Nicene Creed of Christendom, and what is deduced from it will exhibit the wide departure—the apostasy—that took place in respect of this most fundamental of all doctrines of religion—the doctrine of God. Truly "Christians" through the ages have denied "the Lord that bought them" (II Peter 2:1); and have turned literally to the vain philosophies of men—teaching for doctrine the deductions if not the commandments of men. They have enthroned a conception of a negative idea of "being", which can stand in no possible relationship to man, nor man to it; and to this they ascribe divine attributes and give it title, knee and adoration and worship which belong to God alone.

THE PAGAN ORIGIN OF CHRISTENDOM'S CONCEPTION OF GOD

One does not have far to seek to find the origin of those ideas which led the early Christians away from the plain teachings of the New Testament revelation of God through Jesus Christ. It is conceded by Christian writers that the creedal Christian doctrine of God is not expressed in New Testament terms, but in the terms of Greek and Roman metaphysics, as witness the following from the very able article in the Encyclopedia Britannica on "Theism", by the Rev. Dr. Flint, Professor of Divinity, University of Edinburgh:

"The proposition constitutive of the dogma of the trinity—the propositions in the symbols of Nice, Constantinople and Toledo, relative to the immanent distinctions and relations in the Godhead—were not drawn directly from the New Testament, and could not be expressed in New Testament terms. They were the product of reason speculating on a revelation to faith—the New Testament representation of God as a Father, a Redeemer and a Sanctifier—were only formed through centuries of effort, only elaborated by the aid of the conceptions, and formulated in the terms of Greek and Roman metaphysics". The same authority says: "The massive defense of theism, erected by the Cambridge school of philosophy, against atheism, fatalism, and the denial of moral distinctions, was avowedly built on a Platonic foundation".

And to this all authorities are agreed, and I need quote no further. But the above quoted passage, remember, is from the Encyclopedia Britannica; and I can produce an hundred authorities to the same effect.

It is hoped, however, that enough is said here to establish the fact that the conception of God as "pure being", "immaterial", "without form", "or parts, or passions", as held by so-called orthodox "Christianity", had its origin in Pagan philosophy, not in Jewish or Christian revelation.

In view of all this that is here set forth, we can understand how it is that to St. John when given the vision of an angel in the hour of God's judgment, in the last days, restoring the "everlasting gospel", to be preached to every nation and kindred and tongue and people, would make as part of that message this ringing call to the world—

"FEAR GOD, AND GIVE GLORY TO HIM, FOR THE HOUR OF HIS JUDGMENT IS COME; AND WORSHIP HIM THAT MADE HEAVEN, AND EARTH, AND THE SEA, AND THE FOUNTAINS OF WATER"—

For evidently in the hour or time of God's judgment—near the end of the world—near the end of the "falling away" period—men would not be worshipping God "that made heaven and earth and the sea"—hence an angel is to be sent warning them, and calling them to the worship of the true, and living, and personal God; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; three personal beings united in one Godhead, or Divine Council, in which all fulness and perfection dwells; and who in nature and being, in character and attributes and quality are manifested in Jesus Christ; who, to reveal God's love for men, and make known that bond of sympathy which holds in a magnificent reign of law and love and brotherhood, the moral and spiritual universe—came on earth to live man's life, to endure more than a man's suffering, to exhibit God's power over death, by his own resurrection, and the assurance of man's resurrection; bringing to pass the immortality and the eternal life of man. Such the life and the purpose of the Christ.

I pray you think how serious is this matter of the religious world—the alleged "Christian world"—"denying the Lord that bought them"! Turning from God and Christ as revealed in the Bible, and especially as revealed in the New Testament through Jesus Christ, as God manifested in the flesh! Has "Christendom" done this? The evidence of the fact is placed before you this night. The evidence found not alone in the scriptures we have examined and compared with the creeds, but proven by the admission that they themselves make, viz., that the expression of their creeds are not drawn from New Testament language, nor, I may say, from New Testament conceptions; but from alleged "reason applied to faith", drawn from the ancient philosophies. In other words, "Christians" departed from the revealed God in Christ, and accepted the God of the old pagan philosophers. What is this but the world's loss of the Christ? And with the loss of the Christ, the loss of all things else that makes for the whole system for which he stood, and stands! For men may not repudiate the Christ—deny him that brought them—and retain a true "Christian" religion.

My dear friends, I remind you again that this is the accepted annual anniversary of the resurrection of the Christ—Easter Sunday! Will you permit me without resentment, to suggest that you make it, each for himself, a real resurrection of the literal Christ of the New Testament, in conception and life? That putting aside all the jargon of the vain philosophies of the school-men, ancient and modern—all this effort to "deduce a positive conclusion from a negative idea"—come to the simple faith of the New Testament scriptures—the reality of God revealed in, and through Jesus Christ, our Lord; God's glorious Son!
