B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE V

The Paganization of Christian Ordinances And Worship

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: Tonight we are to deal with a subject vitally related to the main theme of our discourses, viz.: "The Paganization of the Christian Ordinances and Worship". I read to you the following texts:

ST. PAUL TO TIMOTHY: "Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; * * * for the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables" (II Timothy 4:2-4).

ISAIAH'S PROPHECY: "Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. And it shall be as with the people, so with the priest; * * * The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left" (Isaiah 24:1-6).

It will be conceded without controversy that the Christian religion was simple in its doctrines, in its sacraments and in its forms of worship. Indeed the simplicity of the Christian religion was made a reproach to the Church of Christ by the Jewish and the Pagan priests in the first two or three centuries of its existence. "The Christians have no temples, therefore they have no gods", was an argument sufficiently convincing to the heathens. The apostles and other Christian men and women of the first century had been given their vision of God the Father in the person of Jesus Christ, now raised from the dead and ascended into heaven, where he is at the right hand of God; in service, doubtless, but awaiting the hour of his advent into the earth again, and this time his coming will be in his power and glory. All this, however, was matter of faith and hope among the saints of those early centuries, but of which there was no visible representation or other formula of worship comparable with the magnificent Pagan and Jewish ceremonials and worship; hence the disparagement of the Christian religion in comparison with the old religions, and the charge of atheism. Him whom they worshiped was invisible, and theirs the task "to endure as seeing him who is invisible" (Hebrews 11:27).

It was but natural, perhaps, that the Christians should seek to cast off this disparagement and reproach; but the desire to do so led to the introduction of many things quite at variance with the religion of Jesus Christ, and went far towards subverting it altogether. On the authority of Mosheim, and, in fact, upon an almost universal agreement of authorities upon the abuses which arose in the Christian Church during the second and third centuries, I may say there is every reason to believe that the Christian bishops purposely multiplied alleged sacred rites for the sake of rendering the Jews and the Pagans more friendly to them. In pursuance of this policy the "Christian" leaders introduced many rites that they might be able to maintain that they really had those same things which the Pagans had, only they subsisted under different forms. Some of these rites—justified, as was supposed, by a comparison of the Christian oblations with Jewish victims and sacrifices—in time corrupted essentially the doctrine of the Lord's Supper, and converted it from a memorial observance into a "mystical" sacrifice. To add further to the dignity of the "Christian" religion, the churches of the east feigned mysteries similar to those of the Pagan religions; and, as with the Pagans, the holy rites of the mysteries were concealed from the vulgar: "and they not only applied the terms used in the Pagan mysteries to the Christian institutions, particularly baptism and the Lord's Supper, but they gradually introduced also the rites which were designated by those terms". This practice originated in the eastern provinces of the Roman empire, and thence, after the times of Adrian [who first introduced the Grecian mysteries among the Latins—117-138 A.D.] it spread among the Christians of the west. "A large part, therefore, of Christian observances and institutions, even in this century, had the aspect of the Pagan mysteries". In like manner many ceremonies and customs of the Egyptians were adopted (Mosheim's Institutes, vol. I, cent. ii, part ii, ch. iv).

All the monuments of the third century show that there was a great increase of ceremonies in the church owing to the prevailing passion for the Platonic philosophy. Hence arose the public exorcisms, the multiplication of fasts, the aversion to matrimony, and the painful austerities and penances which were enjoined upon offenders (Id. cent. iii, part ii, ch. iv). But let us come to closer grips with some of these matters.

EPITOME OF CHRISTIAN PRINCIPLES AND ORDINANCES

An epitome of the principles and ordinances of the Christian religion as gathered from the New Testament would be: Faith in God, the Father; and in his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, as the Redeemer and Savior of men; and in the Holy Ghost. These Three, conceived as united in purpose and will, constituted a perfect Godhead, and man's sole object of worship, expressed in obedience. The recognized outward ordinances or sacraments of the faith were baptism in water for the remission of sins, the laying on of hands for imparting the Holy Ghost, effecting the union of man's spirit with God's Spirit; and the Lord's Supper, or Memorial Sacrament for perpetuating the remembrance of the Lord Jesus and union with him, that the partakers of that Sacrament might always have his spirit to be with them. Baptism was administered through the major part of the first three centuries by immersion of the body of the candidate in water, symbolizing the death and burial of the Lord Jesus Christ; also his resurrection and new life; indicating thereby the burial of the sinful man, and the birth of the new man unto newness of life—unto righteousness. Hence St. Paul said to the saints at Corinth: "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection" (Romans 6:3-4). In writing to the saints of Colosse, the same apostle reminds them that they had been "buried with him [Christ] in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God who hath raised him from the dead" (Colossians 2:12).

The only pre-requisites to receiving this ordinance were sincere faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and sincere repentance of all sin. As soon as the candidate professed these qualifications he was admitted into the church by baptism (Acts 2:41; Acts 8:12, 35-40). In a short time, however, the simplicity of this ordinance was corrupted and burdened with useless ceremonies. In the second century the newly baptized converts, since by baptism they had been "born" again, were taught to exhibit in their conduct the innocence of little infants. Milk and honey, the common food of infants, were administered to them after their baptism to remind them of their infancy in the church. Moreover, since by baptism they were released from being servants of the devil, and became God's free men, certain forms borrowed from the Roman ceremony in the manumission of slaves were employed in baptism. As by baptism also they were supposed to be made God's soldiers, like newly enlisted soldiers in the Roman army, they were sworn to obey their commander. A century later (the third) further ceremonies were added. It was supposed that some evil spirit was resident in all vicious persons and impelled them to sin. Therefore, before entering the sacred fount for baptism, an exorcist by a solemn, menacing formula declared them free from the bondage of Satan, and hailed them servants of Christ. After baptism the new converts returned home, "decorated with a crown and a white robe; the first being indicative of their victory over the world and their lusts, the latter of their acquired innocence" (Mosheim's Institutes, vol. I, cent. iii, part ii, ch. iv).

Baptism was administered in the days of the apostles as soon as profession of faith and repentance were declared, but in the second and third century baptism was only administered twice a year, and then only to such candidates as had gone through a long preparation and trial. According to Schlegel, the so-called apostolic constitution enjoined a three years' course of preparation; yet with allowance of some exceptions (See Id., cent. iii, part ii, ch. iv). In the fourth century it had become the custom to accompany the ceremony with lighted wax candles, to put salt—an emblem of purity and wisdom—in the mouth of the baptized, and everywhere a double anointing was administered to the candidate, the one before, the other after baptism (Mosheim, vol. I, bk. ii, cent. iv, part ii, ch. iv).

THE FORM OF BAPTISM CHANGED

It was early in the third century that the form of baptism began to be changed. Up to this time it had been performed only by immersion of the whole body. But in the first half of the third century, Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, during a controversy respecting the re-baptism of those who in times of persecution had denied the faith, decided that those whose weak state of health did not permit them to be immersed were sufficiently baptized by being sprinkled (Cyprian's Epistles, letter 76. See also Eusebius, bk. vi, ch. xliii).

There is a practical agreement among the authorities as to sprinkling not becoming a customary form of baptism until in the third century. And one may wonder how it is, when the mere convenience of the thing is considered, if warrant may be found from the Christ and the apostles, or other warrant of authority for sprinkling, as an acceptable form of Christian baptism, why it did not become the custom of the church earlier than the third century. The fact that it did not, but was then commenced, is strong reason for concluding that it had no warrant of authority at earlier times. This innovation continued to spread until now the general rule among so-called Christian sects is to baptize by sprinkling or pouring. For this change there is no warrant of revelation. It destroys the beautiful symbol there is in baptism as taught by the Christ and his apostles—that of a burial and a resurrection—of a death and a birth—a death unto sin, a birth unto righteousness. It is one of those innovations which changed an ordinance of the everlasting covenant.

BAPTISM MISAPPLIED

About the time that the form of administering baptism was changed it began to be misapplied, that is, it was administered to infants. Just when this custom came into vogue may not be determined, but clearly it has no warrant for its existence either in the doctrines or practice of the apostles or any New Testament writer. No truth is more plainly taught by the apostles than that baptism is for the remission of sins, and must be preceded by faith and repentance; and as infants are incapable of sin, or of exercising faith, or of repenting, evidently they are not fit subjects for baptism.

As faith and baptism are so closely connected together in the New Testament, says Dr. Neander, an opinion was likely to arise that where there could be no faith there could be no baptism (History of the Christian Religion and Church, Neander, vol. I, pp. 311, 312). It is certain that Christ did not ordain infant baptism. It cannot be proven that the apostles ordained infant baptism; from those places where the baptism of a whole family is mentioned (Acts 16:33; I Cor. i:16), no such conclusions can be drawn, because the inquiry is still to be made whether there were any children in those families of such an age that they were not capable of any intelligent reception of Christianity; for this is the only point on which the case turns. Then, to see the horrible effect of this innovation, one must keep in mind the terrible implication as to the status of unbaptized infants! What of them? Lost? Damned? And under orthodox "Christianity" "Eternally damned"!

Still it became the custom in the latter part of the second century or early in the third to baptize infants. In the year 253 A.D., a council of sixty bishops, in Africa—at which Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, presided, took under consideration the question whether infants should be baptized within two or three days after birth, or whether it should be deferred until the eighth day, as was the custom of the Jews in respect to circumcision. The council decided that they should be baptized at once, that is, within a day or two after birth (Milner's Church History, vol. I, pp. 429, 430). The decision of this early council, however, proves, not that infant baptism is a correct doctrine, or that it was derived from the teachings and examples of the apostles—as some aver—but that in a century or so after the introduction of the gospel, men began to pervert it by changing and misapplying its ordinances. The false doctrine of infant baptism is now practiced by nearly all so-called "Christian" churches.

THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER—MEMORIAL OR MASS?

Instituting the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as essentially related by the New Testament writers, is as follows:

St. Matthew [Night of the Passover]: "And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins" (Matthew 26:26-28).

St. Mark: "And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it. And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many" (St. Mark 14:22-24).

St. Luke: "And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shed for you" (St. Luke 22:19-20).

It will be observed that these several passages say directly "This is my body", "This is my blood"; and the Roman Catholic Church—I make the reference respectfully throughout, and only name the church from necessity—admitting of no figurative quality in the words, insist that it was the intent of the speaker that the bread he broke and the wine he offered should be turned literally into his very body and blood. Their marginal interpretation of the passage from St. Matthew is: "He does not say, this is the figure of my body—but this is my body" (2. Council of Nice, Act vi). Neither does he say, "in this, or with this is my body," but absolutely, this is my body: which plainly implies transubstantiation.

"Transubstantiation" Roman Catholic authority defines as "the change or passing of one substance into another"; hence the changing of the bread and the wine into the very blood and body of the Christ (See Bruno, Catholic Belief, pp.69-70).

THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME

Fortunately, however, we have not only these figurative expressions of the Christ, but also a scriptural commentary upon them that makes clear the whole purpose of the "Lord's Supper". Indeed it may be said that one of the quoted passages above from the Christ himself makes clear the purposes of the institution of the Lord's Supper, and necessarily affects the nature of the whole ordinance, viz.: "He took bread and gave thanks, brake it, and gave it unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: This do in remembrance of me. * * * Also the cup [wine in the cup] saying: This cup [wine in the cup] is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you" (St. Luke 22:19-20). Let it be remarked, in passing, that the Savior did not refrain from using figurative language (twice) in the above passage: when he said, "This cup is the new testament in my blood"; when he really means—when the figurative quality is separated from the passage—the wine in this cup is the new testament represented "in" or "by" my blood. The argument is that if the Christ could be figurative in this passage—and he is—he could also be—and he was—in the passage, "This is my flesh. * * * This is my blood". Meaning "this bread represents my body; this wine represents my blood that will be shed for you".

But it is the words of the Christ, "This do in remembrance of me", that determines the whole nature of the Lord's Supper, as he instituted it; and its whole purpose: It is a memorial of a sacrifice, not itself a sacrifice. And this is strengthened by the comment of St. Paul when delivering to the Corinthian saints what he had "received of the Lord", and that which also he delivered unto them on this subject, viz.:

"For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you; that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread: And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood; this do ye, as oft as ye drink it in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come" (I Corinthians 11:23-27.) Through using here the same figurative expression that the Savior did, "this is my body", he also reiterates the whole purpose of the ordinance—even as the Christ himself did—"this do in remembrance of me"; and "as often as ye eat this bread [and it was bread when they ate it, not flesh] and drink this cup [wine of the cup, and it was wine when they drank it, not blood!] ye do shew [represent] the Lord's death till he come".

Clearly all this represents the memorial of a sacrifice to be perpetuated until the Christ shall come again, and not itself an atonement, and not itself a sacrifice but the memorial of a sacrifice through which came an atonement.

SUPPRESSION OF ONE-HALF OF THE SACRAMENT

In the course of time [during the fifth century] an error grew out of this misconception of the "real presence" of the body and the blood of the Christ in the bread and wine of the Lord's Supper, viz.; the suppression of one-half of the Sacrament by instituting "communion in one kind". That is to say, the church regarding the Lord Jesus wholly present in either the bread or the wine, as in both, and regarding that there is "no command from our Lord Jesus Christ for the laity to receive the holy communion under two kinds; * * * she [the church] holds that this two-fold reception was not demanded by the nature or by the institution of this holy Sacrament. The church therefore either left the faithful free [for a time] to receive under both kinds or under one kind, or she regulated this point of discipline as she thought proper under existing circumstances" (Bruno, Catholic Belief, p. 334). After the fifth century, however, under the direction of the Church of Rome, the Sacrament has been administered to the laity of that communion chiefly "in one kind."

To remark that this was changing the ordinances of the Sacrament as instituted by the Christ—suppressing half of it in fact—can scarcely be necessary since it is so well known that Jesus administered both bread and wine when instituting the sacred ordinance (Matthew 26 and Luke xxii); and, according to Roman Catholic concession (Bruno, Catholic Belief, pp. 334-5), the church administered to laity and clergy both kinds up to the fifth century.

And now the question: If the Christ meant when he said "This is my body: * * * This is my blood", and so the changing of the "species" was the main thing to be wrought, did he not know that he could and would be equally present under either "species", bread or wine? And knowing that why did not he institute communion in "one kind" instead of leaving it for an "infallible church" to establish "communion in one kind" about five centuries later? But that is not so much my point as this: Does not the fact that the Christ used both bread and wine when instituting the Sacrament, prove that the purpose of the Master was to institute a memorial of his sacrifice rather than to establish the notion of "transubstantiation"—the changing of bread and wine into his flesh and blood? And that the employment of bread and wine was necessary to the memorial, and neither could be dispensed with to make that memorial complete? And that when one-half is dispensed with or suppressed the purpose of the Christ is marred—in fact undone!

The manner of administering the Sacrament in the early centuries was very simple. Describing "Christian" worship and the administering of the Lord's Supper in the first century it is said: "In these public assemblies of Christians the holy scriptures were read. * * * Then followed an exhortation to the people, neither eloquent nor long, but full of warmth and love. * * * The prayers of the Christians were followed by oblations of bread and wine. * * * From these gifts, so much bread and wine as were requisite for the Lord's Supper were set apart, and consecrated by prayers offered solely by the bishop, to which the people responded Amen. The distributors of the sacred supper were the deacons" (Mosheim's Institute, vol. I, p. 86).

Of the Sacrament in the second century it is written: "When the Christians celebrated the Lord's Supper, which they were accustomed to do chiefly on Sundays, they consecrated a part of the bread and wine of the oblations, by certain prayers pronounced by the president, the bishop of the congregation. The wine was mixed with water, and the bread was divided into small pieces. Portions of the consecrated bread and wine were commonly sent to the absent and the sick, in testimony of fraternal affection towards them. There is much evidence that this most holy rite was regarded as very necessary to the attainment of salvation and I therefore dare not accuse of error, those who believe that the sacred supper was, in this century, given to infants" (Mosheim's Institutes, vol. I, p. 137).

In the third century: All believed it absolutely necessary to the attainment of salvation; and therefore they universally wished infants to partake of it. In some places the sacred feasts preceded, and in others followed, the Lord's Supper" (Id. vol. I, pp. 188-9).

The fourth century: It was administered at the sepulchres of the martyrs, and at funerals; whence arose, afterwards, the "masses" in honor of the saints, and for the dead. The bread and wine were now everywhere elevated, before distribution, so that they might be seen by the people, and be viewed with reverence; hence arose, not long afterwards, "the adoration of the symbols". Neither catechumens, nor penitents, nor those who were supposed to be under the power of evil spirits, were allowed to be present at this sacred ordinance; nor did the sacred orators, in their public discourses, venture to speak openly and plainly concerning the true nature of it (Id., vol. I, p. 281).

The fifth century: Communion in "one kind" was established (Catholic Belief, Bruno, pp. 334-5); and the "Agapae" or "love feast" in connection with the Lord's Supper was abolished "because as piety diminished gradually and continually these feasts gave to many persons occasions for sin" (Mosheim's Institutes, vol. I, p. 351, and note 4).

The sixth century: "The new mode of administering the Lord's Supper, magnificently, and with a splendid apparatus, or "The Canon of the Mass", as it is called, was a prescription of Gregory the Great; or, as some would say, he enlarged and altered the old Canon. But many ages elapsed before the other Latin churches could be prevailed on to adopt "this Romish form" (Id., vol. I, p. 413).

And thus is noted the gradual multiplication of forms and ceremonies with the passing of the centuries, a drifting away from the original simplicity of the apostolic age and church.

THE MASS

Just when and how the idea of the "Mass", meaning "sacrifice", got worked into the acceptance and the practice of the church in the early Christian centuries is difficult to determine. I beg leave to say, however, that it has no warrant in the teachings of the Christ or of his apostles. It represents one error piled upon another; the heresy of the mass piled upon the heresy of the "real presence" of the body and blood of the Christ in the Sacrament. On the idea that the bread and the wine, symbols of the Sacrament, were really changed to the body and blood of the Christ, it follows that the Christ was really, though perhaps "mystically" present; but if present then he could be offered up as a sacrifice. And, of course, if the Christ were really present, and he could be offered up as a sacrifice, then the reproach that the Christians had no altars, no victims, and no sacrifice in their religion would be removed, and their reproach among the Pagans taken away. But St. Paul argues in the Epistle to the Hebrews that Christ, "the great High Priest", with a superior sacrifice than those which under Moses foreshadowed the coming of the Great Sacrifice, had now come; and had entered even into heaven itself, there to appear in the presence of God for men." "Not that he should offer himself often," as the earthly high priest "entereth into the holy place every year with the blood of others [lambs, etc.]—for then must he [the Christ] often have suffered since the foundation of the world. But now once in the end of the world, hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; and as it is appointed once for men to die, but after this the judgment, so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many" (Hebrews 9:16-28). And again, in the same connection, the Christ is represented by saying: "I come to do thy will O God! * * * By the which 'will' we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all. And every priest [under the law of Moses] standeth daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins [being but types and shadows of the sacrifice that would take away sins]; but this man, [the Christ], after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, forever sat down on the right hand of God. * * * For by one offering he hath perfected them that are sanctified * * * and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more [saith God]. Now where remission of these are, there is no more offering for sin" (Hebrews 10:7-18). But notwithstanding this argument of St. Paul's for the "once for all" and complete sacrifice for sin, and "after which there is no more offering for sin"; yet by this time—centuries later—a far fallen church must out of a memorial of that sacrifice—"The Lord's Supper"—create a "daily sacrifice"; with altar, victim, and "mystical", though none the less real, sacrifice; "this man", Jesus, though having completed his sacrifice, and once for all sat down on the right hand of God, must daily offer himself in sacrifice through the priests of the Roman Church on ten thousand altars! And it matters not that all this is explained as "mystical", etc.; it is pretended to be real, nevertheless, as witnessed in the following paragraph in explanation from an approved Roman Catholic work:

"The holy sacrifice of the mass does not differ in its essence from the sacrifice offered up upon mount Calvary. As we find on Calvary and in the mass the same identical victim, and the same principal offerer, Jesus Christ, the two sacrifices are essentially the same. The two sacrifices only differ in non-essentials, because only the manner of offering is different. One was offered by Christ personally, the other is offered by him through his ministers. That was offered with real suffering, real shedding of blood, and real death of the same victim; This with only a mystical suffering, a mystical shedding of blood, and a mystical death of the same victim. Therefore the priest, at the time of the consecration, does not say: 'This is the body of Christ', but acting in the person of Christ says: 'This is my body' " (Bruno, Catholic Belief, p. 76).

All this, doubtless, would establish for Christians a sacrificial offering—a victim, an altar, richly robed priests, incense, lighted tapers, all the paraphernalia of either Jew or Pagan worship; while the flesh of the victim feigned by the priests and the communicants as being really but mystically present in the bread and the wine of their offering, would show the share they had in the sacrifice, even as the ancient Jews not only united in spirit at the sacrifice of the victims offered up for them, "but were also partakers of the flesh as their share in the oblations". So the "Christian Mass" came into existence. And in the form of "Christian High Mass" was enacted into symbolic drama which in splendor eclipsed all other performances of religion that has appeared in the world. Under thirty-five distinct heads the drama in significant actions of the appointed administrator and his assistants, with the use of genuflections, advancements and retirements, burning incense, the reading of appointed portions of the scriptures, the chanting of choirs, the singing of appointed psalms, the elevations of the "host" for the adoration of the people—some say for their worship! And why not if the Christ is really present in the "host"—the bread and the wine? This with all the other appointed parts to the drama—too numerous to further mention here—are acted out until the whole story of the Christ's sacrifice is completed.

There can be no doubt but what the post-Apostolic Church, in the course of the centuries employed in the creation and elaboration of this drama of the sacrifice, in splendor surpassed both the Jewish and Pagan rituals. But at what a cost!

CONSIDERATION OF OUR TEXTS

And now a word as to the texts of scripture quoted at the head of this address. First, St. Paul: "The time will come when they [the people of the church] will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables"! Is comment necessary? In view of the portrayal of transformations of essential Christian doctrines this night, are you not witnesses of men's ears being turned from truth to the acceptance of fables?

More serious yet the prophecy of Isaiah which appears at the head of this discourse. "The Lord maketh the earth empty and maketh it waste. * * * The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, and [thereby] broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned and few men left". Again, I ask, is comment necessary? Is not the world thrown into religious disorder? Is not religious confusion confounded? In view of what has been set forth in this discourse have not men and their churches "transgressed the laws", "changed the ordinance, and [thereby] broken the everlasting covenant"? And therefore hath not the curse of religious distraction and confusion devoured the earth until they that dwell therein are made desolate, and future disasters threaten men?

Only one more word need be spoken and that in explanation as to the "covenant" whose laws are to be transgressed; whose "ordinance" is to be changed; whose "covenant" is to be broken. Being in the Old Testament there may be those who will be inclined to think that reference is here made to the Mosaic covenant and law, not to the new covenant of the Gospel of Christ. Not so, however, for this "covenant" of Isaiah's prophecy is according to him an "Everlasting Covenant"; and the Mosaic covenant was never that. The Mosaic law was explained by Paul as merely a schoolmaster to bring Israel to Christ, but after Christ had come, Israel was no longer under a schoolmaster: so that the "Law of Moses" passed, and the "Everlasting Covenant", or the "Everlasting Gospel", displaced the law. It was the "Everlasting Covenant" then, the "Everlasting Gospel"—the Gospel of Jesus Christ—whose "laws" were to be transgressed; whose "ordinance" was to be changed; whose "covenant" would be broken, with the disastrous results to the world foreshadowed in the rest of the prophecy and which are still future! In further evidence of the truth here presented, the blood of the Christ is proclaimed in the scripture to be "the blood of the everlasting covenant" (Hebrews 13:20).

I proclaim, then, that the "transgression of the laws" referred to in Isaiah's prophecy; the "changing of the ordinance," thereby breaking the "everlasting covenant" of the Gospel of Jesus Christ on the part of man—this I proclaim to be the religious crime of the ages, and the cause of the world's religious confusion.
