B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE VI

The Effect of Pagan Persecution on The Christian Religion and Church

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: The subject of the evening is to be "The Effect of Pagan Persecution on the Christian Religion and Church". Of course I refer now to the persecutions of the first three centuries.

I call your attention to the following text, the words of the Lord Jesus:

"The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force" (St.Matthew 11:12).

This the Master said when they brought to him John the Baptist's inquiry from his prison, "Art thou he who should come, or do we look for another?" Then Jesus, having answered John's inquiry, by way of reflection to his own disciples about John, gave voice to the text above—"And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and the violent take it by force".

Shortly afterwards John the Baptist was beheaded for his rebuke of a king. The kingdom of heaven as represented in the faithfulness of the Baptist, suffered violence and the violent took it by force. And from this example we may conclude that wicked violence is to be a force to be reckoned with in the contest for the establishment of the kingdom of heaven on earth. The Christ clearly understood the force of violence that the kingdom of heaven struggling for a place in the earth would have to meet. This especially is made apparent when he said to the Pharisees near the close of his mortal life: "Behold I send unto you prophets and wise men and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city. That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation" (St. Matthew 23:34-36). Another instance in which the kingdom of heaven would "suffer violence" and the violent would "take it by force".

Let it be understood that I am not setting forth the thought that "violence alone", persecution alone, would or did destroy the Christian religion and church; but as we proceed we shall see that violence will be one factor in effecting that destruction—a contributing cause of it.

The extent and greatness of the early Christian persecutions are little thought upon in these days, and for that reason I venture to glimpse them, and only to glimpse them, on this occasion. Nor let it be a matter of surprise that I class wicked "violence" which assailed the Christian religion and church as among the factors leading to its destruction. The force of heathen rage through three centuries was aimed at the leaders and strong men of the body religious; and being long-continued and relentlessly cruel, those most steadfast in their adherence to the church invariably became the victims of the persecutions. These being stricken down, as we shall see, left only weaklings to contend for the faith, and made possible those subsequent innovations in the religion of Jesus which a Pagan public sentiment demanded; and which so completely changed both the spirit and form of the Christian religion and church, as—connected with other destructive factors—to subvert it altogether.

Let it further be remarked that the idea that the right is always victorious in this world; that truth is always triumphant, and innocence always divinely shielded, are old, fond fables with which well meaning men have misled credulous multitudes; but the stern facts of history and actual experience in life correct the delusion. Do not misunderstand me. I believe in the ultimate victory of the right, the ultimate triumph of truth, the final immunity of innocence from violence, the ultimate triumph and establishment of both the Church of Christ and the Kingdom of God in the earth—the accomplishment of all the purposes of God in respect of all these things. Also innocence, truth and right, will be, at the last, more than conquerors. They will be successful in the war, but that may not prevent them from losing some battles through the violence of the wicked.

In the light of these reflections, then, I say that after Christ, as before his day, the kingdom of heaven suffered "violence, and the violent take it by force". How far that violence, as manifested in the persecutions of the first three Christian centuries was effectual as a factor in causing the destruction of the "Christian" church, is now briefly to engage our attention.

CONFLICT OF AUTHORITIES

At the outset, however, there is a difficulty I cannot pass without comment—the disagreement of eminent writers on the extent and severity of the persecutions endured by the Christians up to the accession of Constantine to the imperial throne of Rome early in the fourth century (306 A.D.). On the one hand infidel writers, such as Gibbon and Dodwell, have sought to minimize the suffering of the Christians under the persecutions; and on the other hand, Christian writers, such as Eusebius, Milner, Paley and Fox, have sought to magnify them. The motive on the part of both infidels and Christians is obvious. The more violent and extensive the persecutions, the more numerous the martyrs, the more glorious the alleged triumph for the church. While on the other hand, if the persecutions can be proven to be limited, the suffering made to appear trifling, and the martyrs few, the church is robbed of so much of her glory. Doubtless both parties have gone to extremes in the contention. Unfortunately for the Christian side of the controversy, there is much reason for believing that the account of Christian suffering within the period named has been much exaggerated. Their chief authority—Eusebius—has thrown more or less suspicion upon the trustworthiness of all that he has written, by declaring in the opening chapter of his Ecclesiastical History and elsewhere, that "Whatsoever, therefore, we deem likely to be advantageous to the proposed subject, we shall endeavor to reduce to a compact body by historical narration. For this purpose we have collected the materials that have been scattered by our predecessors, and culled, as from some intellectual meadows, the appropriate extracts from ancient authors" (Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, bk. i, ch. i; bk. xiii, ch. ii and xii).

On these passages Gibbon remarks: "The gravest of the ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius himself, indirectly confesses that he has related whatever might redound to the glory, and that he has suppressed all that could tend to the disgrace of religion. Such an acknowledgment will naturally excite a suspicion that a writer who has so openly violated one of the fundamental laws of history, has not paid a very strict regard to the observance of the other" (Decline and Fall, vol. II, p. 281, Murray edition of 1887).

John W. Draper, author of the Intellectual Development of Europe, also refers to the same, when commenting upon the inaccuracies of early Christian writers, he says: "In historical composition there was a want of fair dealing and truthfulness almost incredible to us; thus, Eusebius naively avows that in his history he shall omit whatever might tend to the discredit of the church, and magnify whatever might conduce to her glory (Intellectual Development of Europe, vol. 1, p. 360).

But while it must be conceded that there is much reason for believing that the Christian fathers exaggerated both the extent and severity of those early persecutions, it remains clear that both the extent and severity of them were greater than infidel writers admit; and more baneful to the church than Christian writers allow. The truth of this may be proven independently of the testimonies of the Christian fathers or the attempted palliation of infidels on behalf of the persecutors. The proofs I refer to are the edicts of the emperors themselves, considered in the light of the well-known cruelty of the Romans, intensified by the malice of religious zeal aroused to suppress an obnoxious society whose doctrines were held to be destructive of the ancient religions of Rome, and a menace to the existence of the state itself.

PERSECUTION BY THE JEWS

The first persecution of the followers of Christ is mentioned in the New Testament, and was conducted in large part under the young zealous pharisee Saul of Tarsus; afterwards Paul, the missionary of the Acts and Epistles. This resulted in the stoning to death of Stephen and casting many into prison (Acts 7). Following which came "a great persecution against the church at Jerusalem" and the Christians were scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria. This particular persecution, however, seemed not to have been aimed at the apostles (Acts 8). But afterwards Herod Antipas, the tetrarch, early in the experience of the church stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the church, and he killed James, the brother of John, with the sword; and because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to take Peter also and cast him into prison; but the apostle was delivered out of prison by an angel and escaped from Jerusalem.

THE NERONIAN PERSECUTION

By the middle of the first century multitudes of followers of the Christ had gathered into Rome; and when the Emperor Nero, to gratify his depraved madness, fired the city (67 A.D.), he threw the blame of it upon the Christians—everywhere held in contempt for their supposed "hatred of mankind". According to the judicious Tacitus, the Emperor Nero tried to make the Christians confess to the burning of Rome; in which, however, he failed. Then Tacitus: "With this view he [Nero] inflicted the most exquisite tortures on those men who, under the vulgar appellation of 'Christians', were already branded with deserved infamy. They derived their name and origin from Christus, who, in the reign of Tiberius had suffered death by the sentence of the procurator, Pontius Pilate. * * * The confessions of those that were seized discovered a great multitude of their accomplices and they were all convicted; not so much for the crime of setting fire to the city, as for their hatred of human kind. They died in torments, and their torments were embittered by insults and derision. Some were nailed on crosses; others sewn up in the skins of wild beasts, and exposed to the fury of dogs; others again, smeared over with combustible materials, were used as torches to illuminate the darkness of the night" (Tacitus Annals, Oxford translation, Harper's Classical Library, bk. xv. ch. xliv).

This brief excerpt from a long passage makes the testimony of Tacitus sufficient to prove, first, that the Neronian persecution was general within the city; second, its terrible cruelty; and third, the great abhorrence in which the Christians were held by the Romans.

THE DECIAN PERSECUTION

The necessary limits of this treaties forbid anything like an exhaustive consideration of the several persecutions [ten in all] during the first three centuries, endured by the Christians. I shall therefore content myself with a brief reference to those most disastrous to the church. This will bring us next—after passing by many severe persecutions—to that general and terrible persecution of the Christians under Decius in the middle of the third century. This persecution was more terrible than any which preceded it. It extended over the whole empire, and had for its avowed object the enforced apostasy of the Christians.

How unrelenting the efforts must have been to encompass either the destruction or the apostasy of the Christians will appear when it is known that the governors of the provinces were "commanded", on pain of forfeiting their own lives, either to exterminate all Christians utterly, or bring them back by pain and tortures to the religion of their fathers. "During two years, a great multitude of Christians in all the Roman provinces were cut off by various species of punishment and suffering; * * * and immense numbers dismayed, not so much by the fear of death, as by the dread of the long-continued tortures by which the magistrates endeavored to overcome the constancy of the Christians, professed to renounce Christ, and procured for themselves safety, either by sacrificing, [i.e. offering incense before the idols], or by certificates purchased with money" (Mosheim's Institutes, Murdock's translation, bk. i, cent. iii, part i, ch. ii).

Gibbon, who never admits the severity of the persecutions under the Roman emperors, except when compelled by undeniable facts, says, of this persecution under Decius: "The fall of Philip [the predecessor of Decius] introduced with a change of masters, a new system of government so oppressive to the Christians that their former condition, ever since the time of Domitian, was represented as a state of perfect freedom and security, if compared with the rigorous treatment which they experienced under the short reign of Decius" (Decline and Fall, vol. I, ch. xvi, p. 260).

Milner, quoting Cyprian, says concerning the effect of this persecution: "Vast numbers lapsed into idolatry immediately. Even before men were accused as Christians, many ran to the forum and sacrificed to the gods as they were ordered; and the crowds of apostates were so great that the magistrates wished to delay numbers of them till the next day, but they were importuned by the wretched suppliants to be allowed to prove themselves heathens that very night" (Milner's Church History, vol. I, cent. iii, ch. viii). A refutation this of the idea that persecution did not at times overwhelm the constancy of the Christians.

THE DIOCLETIAN PERSECUTION

There remains but one more persecution to notice; that which is commonly known as the Diocletian persecution. According to Eusebius this persecution (usually called the tenth) began in the nineteenth year of the reign of Diocletian—303 A.D.

The emperor sought at first to destroy the Christian "superstition" by overcoming the constancy of the leaders; but meeting with more resistance than he anticipated, he at last issued an edict, directing the magistrates to compel all Christians, irrespective of age, sex, or official position, to offer sacrifice to the gods; and to employ tortures to compel that apostasy. The magistrates yielded strict obedience to the edict of the emperor, and the Christian Church was reduced to the last extremity (Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, bk. ii, cent. iv, part i, ch. i, p. 209). The scenes of suffering from tortures and bloodshed throughout the empire, except in Gaul, where Constantine reigned, defy description. "Thousands, men and women and children", says Eusebius, speaking of those who suffered in Egypt, "despising the present life for the sake of our Savior's doctrine, submitted to death in various shapes. Some, after being tortured with scrappings and the rack, and the most dreadful scourgings, and other innumerable agonies which one might shudder to hear, were finally committed to the flames: and some plunged and drowned in the sea; others voluntarily offering their own heads to their executioners, others dying in the midst of their torments, some wasted away by famine, and others again fixed to the cross. Some, indeed, were executed as malefactors usually were; others, more cruelly, were nailed [to the crosses] with head downwards, and kept alive until they were destroyed by starving on the cross itself" (Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, bk. viii, ch. viii). Such descriptions of cruelty and suffering could be multiplied almost indefinitely.

Gibbon, whose very reluctance to concede the severity of these successive persecutions of the early Christian centuries induces me to quote him as often as space will allow, says of this persecution: "The magistrates were commanded to employ every method of severity which might reclaim them [the Christians] from their odious superstition, and obliged them to return to the established worship of the gods. The rigorous order was extended by a subsequent edict to the whole body of Christians, who were exposed to a violent and general persecution. Instead of those salutary restraints which had required the direct and solemn testimony of an accuser, it became the duty as well as the interest of the imperial officer to discover, to pursue, and to torment the most obnoxious among the faithful. Heavy penalties were denounced against all who should presume to save a prescribed sectary from the just indignation of the gods and the emperors" (Decline and Fall, vol. II, p. 274).

This persecution lasted for ten years; and at the end of that time the church presented a melancholy spectacle. Everywhere, even in Gaul, the Christian houses of worship were laid in ruins. Streams of Christian blood flowed in every province of the empire, excepting in Gaul where Constantine governed; and there a previous persecution under Aurelius and Verus had well-nigh destroyed the churches. Public worship was suspended. The saints were either driven to apostasy by tortures, had fled from the provinces to the barbarians, or kept themselves concealed. Meantime the magistrates incited as much by avarice as by hatred of Christianity, confiscated not only the church property, but also the private possessions of the ministers. In other cases the church leaders were either slain, or mutilated and sent to the mines or banished from the country. "Many through dread of undergoing torture had made way with their own lives, and many apostatized from the faith; and what remained of the Christian community, [and mark you this!] consisted of weak, poor and timorous persons" (Schlegel, quoted by Murdock, see note Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, bk. ii, cent. iv, part i, ch. i, p. 210, footnote 12).

A MORE INSIDIOUS PERSECUTION THAN VIOLENCE

After adopting these measures for the destruction of the church, severities of another character were put into operation. "It was thought necessary to subject to the most intolerable hardships the condition of those perverse individuals who should still reject the religion of nature, of Rome, and of their ancestors. Persons of liberal birth were declared incapable of holding any honors or employments; slaves were forever deprived of the hope of freedom, and the whole body of the people were put out of the protection of the law. The judges were authorized to hear and determine every action that was brought against a Christian. But the Christians were not permitted to complain of any injury which they themselves had suffered; and thus those unfortunate sectaries were exposed to the severity, while they were excluded from the benefits of public justice. This new species of martyrdom, so painful and lingering, so obscure and ignominious, was perhaps, the most proper to weary the constancy of the faithful; nor can it be doubted that the passions and interest of mankind were disposed on this occasion to second the designs of the emperors" (Decline and Fall, vol. II, ch. XVI, p. 270).

THE TESTIMONY OF MONUMENTS

That the Romans 100onsidered the destruction of the Christian Church completed by the Diocletian persecution is witnessed by the inscriptions upon monuments and medals. Two pillars in Spain, erected to commemorate the reign of Diocletian bore the following; on the first—

"DIOCLETIAN, JOVIAN, MAXIMIAN HERCULIUS, CAESARES AUGUSTI, FOR HAVING EXTENDED THE ROMAN EMPIRE IN THE EAST AND WEST, AND FOR HAVING EXTINGUISHED THE NAME OF CHRISTIANS, WHO BROUGHT THE REPUBLIC TO RUIN":

On the second—

"DIOCLETIAN, ETC., FOR HAVING ADOPTED GALERIUS IN THE EAST, FOR HAVING EVERYWHERE ABOLISHED THE SUPERSTITION OF CHRIST, FOR HAVING EXTENDED THE WORSHIP OF THE GODS".

And on the medal of Diocletian this:

"THE NAME OF CHRISTIANS BEING EXTINGUISHED" (Milner's Church History, vol. II, cent. iv, ch. i, pp. 6, 7).

When it is remembered that these persecutions, to which I have briefly referred, ran through nearly three centuries; that the emperors whose edicts inaugurated them possessed unlimited power to execute their decrees; that the age in which they occurred was cruel beyond modern comprehension; that Roman, that is to say, Pagan, hatred of Christians was venomously bitter, because the Pagans were made to believe that the existence of the ancient religion of Rome and latterly the existence of the empire itself depended upon the destruction of Christianity—when all this is remembered, it is not to be wondered at that the saints were "worn out" or so nearly so that only "weak and timorous men" were left to ineffectually resist the paganization of Christianity—the destruction of the Church of Christ.

It will be held, of course, by some, that the triumph over "Christianity" announced on these monuments was soon followed by the "triumph of Christianity" under the Roman emperor Constantine, called "the great"; that the "Christian religion" became, practically, the state religion of the empire. But was it the "Christian religion" and the "Christian Church" which thus triumphed, or merely a paganized form of religion and a paganized church bearing the name of the Christian Church which then triumphed? I am persuaded that the truth of history will sustain the view that the Christian religion and the Christian Church of the early decades of the fourth century, and through all the centuries following the fourth, was no longer the religion of Jesus Christ; nor were the churches that successively followed the wreckage of the early Christian centuries—Roman Catholic, the Greek, and the Protestant divisions of "Christendom," or all of them combined, the church or the churches of Jesus Christ. A sweeping declaration I know; but an extensive inquiry into the subject, running through many years of study and writing upon that branch of history, has led to the conclusion so positively stated.

THE EFFECT OF INTERMITTENT PEACE AND TOLERATION OF THE CHURCH

These recurring periods of persecution through the first three centuries (ten in number) were separated by periods of toleration and peace and prosperity for the church. But all the standard ecclesiastical writers agree that these periods of prosperity were more disastrous to the religion and church of Jesus than the periods of malignant persecution! It is something of an historical aphorism that war may destroy nations; but ease and luxury mankind corrupt, the body and the mind. Especially is peace dangerous to the church. Prosperity relaxes discipline; people feel less and less the need of a sustaining Providence; but in adversity, man feels after God and he is correspondingly more devoted to him. I can take time only for a brief glimpse of one of these periods of peace and prosperity and its effects; the one which preceded the Diocletian persecution, a sample of the effects of other such periods.

"When by reason of excessive liberty", says Eusebius, "we sunk into negligence and sloth, one envying and reviling another in different ways, and we were almost, as it were, upon the point of taking up arms against each other with words as with darts and spears; prelates inveighing against prelates, and people rising up against people, and hypocrisy and dissimulation had arisen to the greatest height of malignity; then the divine judgment, which usually proceeds with a lenient hand, whilst the multitudes were yet crowding into the church, with gentle and mild visitation began to afflict the episcopacy, the persecution having begun with those brethren in the army. But as if destitute of all sensibility, we were not prompt in measures to appease and propitiate the Deity; some indeed like atheists, regarding our situation as unheeded and unobserved by a Providence, we add one wickedness and misery to another. But some that appeared to be our pastors, deserting the law of piety, were inflamed against each other with mutual strifes, only accumulating quarrels and threats, rivalship, hostility and hatred to each other, only anxious to assist the government as a kind of sovereignty"—and so on at great length. (Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History, bk. viii, ch. 1).

Of conditions preceding and following this Diocletian persecution, and especially the period in which the Christian Church was crushed by reason of it, the chiefest author who stands for the persistence of a Christian Church throughout these and all other ages—Rev. Joseph Milner (author of The History of the Church of Christ—often referred to) says:

"The persecution we are reviewing [the Diocletian] found the church in the lowest state of Christian wisdom and piety. * * * It is in vain, that I look out for judicious and discreet pastors, and for clear evangelical views in all this period. * * * The persecution found vast numbers perfidious and cowardly; some chosen spirits, humble and faithful to death; but of these, many, it is to be feared, poorly informed of their duty both to God and man, and mixing with the love of Christ the intemperance and precipitation of blind self will. * * * That knowledge was thus low among Christians is evident from Eusebius, one of the most learned of those times, who extols a conduct in these brethren which every Christian of common light and capacity now would condemn. * * * I know it is common for authors to represent the great declination of Christianity to have taken place only after its external establishment under Constantine, but the evidence of history has compelled me to descend from this view of things. In fact we have seen that for a whole generation previous to it [the Diocletian persecution] few marks of superior piety appeared. Scarce a luminary of godliness existed, and it is not common in any age for a great work of the Spirit of God to be exhibited, but under the conduct of some remarkable saints, pastors, and reformers. This whole period, as well as the whole scene of the persecution, is very barren of such characters".

He deplores the absence of competent teachers of evangelical truth and their lack of impression on Christian minds. Then: "It is vain to expect Christian faith to abound without Christian doctrine". He also teaches the same things referred to above by Eusebius, saying: "The ambitious spirit of many in aspiring to the offices of the church; of alleged and unlawful ordinations, the quarrels among confessors themselves, and the condition excited by young demagogues in the very wrecks of the persecuted church, and the multiplied evils which their vices excited among Christians. How sadly must the Christian world have declined which could thus conduct itself under the very rod of Divine vengeance" (Milner's Church History, vol. II, cent. iv, ch. i)?

There is much more to the same effect, and from many other authors. Time will not permit me to indulge further quotations. But these reflections are forced upon one:

If such spiritual and moral lapses as these, arising from intermittent peace periods, be added to the effect of cruel persecution periods, what a deteriorating effect the two combined must have had upon the "Christian" religion and church of the first three centuries! Moreover, when such confessions have to be made in respect of periods of peace and prosperity recurring between periods of cruel persecution, as above, then what are we to anticipate when a religion and church so deteriorated shall come to the period when conscienceless, worldly emperors will become its patrons for political advantage, and that which was once the Church of the Christ, is, after worldly fashion, elevated to the state religion of still Pagan Rome?

Allow me, however, to so far anticipate the answer that will occur to some minds in relation to these disintegrating forces operating upon the Christian religion and church, viz: Despite all that may be said respecting "The 'Falling Away' or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church", we have the promise, some will say, that the Christ will be with his apostles "always, even unto the end of the world"; which, it is alleged, must include the successors to the apostles as well as the apostles themselves—else the promise could not be fulfilled; so that the world is assured of having always a divine ministry to teach the gospel, and therefore secure in the matter of having divine ministry and an effective church. Also, it will be answered; that some one will hold "the keys of the kingdom of heaven"; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against the church. All this, in its time and place I promise you shall have consideration and exposition that reason and scripture will approve; nor will right understanding of these passages mitigate against the truth here contended for "The 'Falling Away"'.

This brings us to the consideration of the "Christian" revolution of the early part of the fourth century, and how it affected the character of the Christian Church—if one existed by that time. This will be the subject of our next discourse.
