B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE VII

The Revolution of the Fourth Century and its Effects on the Christian Religion and Church

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I am to consider tonight "The Revolution of the Fourth Century and its Effects on the 'Christian' Religion and Church". The text is as follows:

"And it was given unto him to make war with the saints and to overcome them: and power was given him over all kindreds and tongues and nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him whose names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Revelation 13:7, 8).

CONSTANTINE

In the foreground of that revolution stands Constantine, emperor of Rome. He was elected emperor at York, Britain, 306 A.D. (Gibbon, vol. II, p. 111); the eastern associates of his father in the government, however, refused to ratify the election and for eighteen years civil war ensued in which there were six competitors for the throne, and Constantine did not become sole monarch of Rome until 323 A.D.

Constantine followed the example of his father Constantius in tolerating the "Christians" in his division of the empire, the West (and finally throughout the empire when he became sole monarch). The toleration of the father ripened into friendship by the son. His friendship for the "Christians" on the one hand, and the hostility of his rivals to the church on the other, brought to him the united support of the "Christians" throughout the empire during his long struggle for supremacy; and although the "Christians" were not so numerous as they are frequently represented to be, yet it cannot be denied that they were important factors in determining the course of events in the empire at this time. They were truly faithful allies to Constantine, and on his part he neglected not to meet their anticipation of reward at the end of the conflict which made him sole monarch.

It is difficult, however, to determine the precise status of Constantine with reference to the church; the time or means of his conversion; or the degree of his convictions. Of his conversion and the means of it there is a variety of opinions. According to Theodoret the emperor was converted through the arguments of his Christian mother, Helena, the daughter of an innkeeper, whom his father repudiated when raised to the dignity of "Caesar" in the reign of Diocletian. According to Zosimus it was brought about through the arguments of an Egyptian bishop, supposed to be Hosius, bishop of Cordoba, who promised the emperor absolution for his crimes, of which there were many. But the most generally accepted cause of his conversion is the alleged mid-day vision of "a luminous cross" on the battlefield, in one of his many wars, and above the cross this inscription:

"BY THIS CONQUER"

The vision of the day was supplemented by a dream of the night in which the Christ himself is alleged to have appeared to the emperor, with the same sign of the cross and the inscription, and there was added in the dream the instruction of the Christ to make the cross and this inscription the ensign of his banners, and his protection against his enemies. The story is told by Eusebius, and is alleged to have been related to him by Constantine himself, many years after the event. The belated revelation of it, and the relation of it alone by the rather untrustworthy Eusebius, casts suspicion of untruth upon the whole story.

The time of Constantine's conversion is also doubtful, though Neander favors an early date, through the influence of his parents. Eusebius fixes the date of the "cross" incident at 312 A.D. when it seems conversion would immediately follow, though the emperor was not baptized until in the very last year of his life, 337 A.D. This, however, is very generally explained to mean that he followed this course, quite common by this time in the church, in order that purified at once from all the stains of sin he might be assured of entering into bliss. The example and reputation of Constantine seemed to countenance the delay of baptism in others. And "future tyrants", remarks the author of the Decline and Fall of Rome, "were encouraged to believe, that the innocent blood which they might shed in a long reign would instantly be washed away in the waters of regeneration; and the abuse of religion dangerously undermined the foundation of moral virtue" (Id., vol. III, ch. xx, p. 22).

That there was a good deal of wavering on the part of Constantine between the "Christian" and the Pagan religions, and that through many years, admits of no doubt; but consideration of his many equivocal actions may not be enumerated here. There can be little doubt, however, as to his evil life. Those who benefited by his policies have not neglected to ascribe to him virtues to which he is not entitled. "An emperor born of an emperor, the pious son of a most pious and virtuous father", is the flattering announcement of his parentage on the paternal side by Eusebius the historian, and contemporary of the emperor. Even in modern times the priests of the Greek Church seldom mention the "Imperial Saint" without adding the title, "Equal to the Apostles". When such flattering titles are ascribed even in modern times to the first "Christian" emperor, it is not to be wondered at if a "Christian" bishop at his court could be found who "congratulated him as constituted by God to rule over all in this present world, and destined to reign with the son of God in the world to come" (Neander's Church History, vol. II, p. 24). Many apologists for Constantine appear among historical writers, but when everything has been said that can be said in panegyric of his character, or in extenuation of his crimes, there remains to be accounted for a number of murdered victims—friends and relatives of his own household—that would more become a Pagan Nero than a "Christian" emperor. I have not time to enumerate them here. It will be sufficient for me to simply say that Constantine was a worthy patron of what, by now, was fast becoming a paganized religion and a worldly church. What was done as to the Christian religion and church by Constantine, and that which followed as effect of what he did, is of far more importance than the personal life and character of the emperor can possibly be. Let us consider somewhat of that.

ATHANASIAN-ARIAN CONTROVERSY

When Constantine became sole ruler of the empire in 323 A.D., he came immediately into contact with the Athanasian-Arian controversy involving an understanding of the divine nature of the Christ, and his place and relationship in the Godhead. In other words, the nature of God. This controversy began in Alexandria, between Alexander, bishop of the city, and one of his presbyters, Arius (318-321 A.D.); thence it spread throughout "Christendom" and finally came to be known as the Athanasian-Arian controversy, after the leaders of the respective sides to the questions involved. The contention raged through six years of hot disputation, during which frequent appeals by the contestants were made to the emperor and as a result the council of Nicea, in Bithynia, was called, and the dispute submitted to public debate a portion of the time, at least, in the presence of the emperor, who to some extent seemed to exercise the function of president over the assembly. The outcome of this council of Nicea, and the doctrine of God it adopted has already been sufficiently treated in No. IV of this series. But what was not sufficiently done, at that time, was to point out the aftermath of that council and the long disturbed state of "Christendom" on this subject before the erroneous "orthodox" creed became the accepted "mystery" of the doctrine of God for the church.

Arius was defeated in the council and the views of Athanasius as expressed in the Nicene creed were triumphant. Let it be understood, of course, that I am not contending that the council of Nicea in rejecting the doctrine of Arius was rejecting the true Christian doctrine of Deity; my point is that both sides to the controversy were in error, and that the whole of Christendom had been led away from the New Testament revelation of God, fulfilling the prophecy that men would "deny the Lord that bought them" (II Peter 2:1); so that what I have to point out in respect to Arius arises from no sympathy I have with his doctrine of Deity.

But Arius was defeated, and the emperor seemed to announce, even if he did not, the decision upon the doctrine formulated, for about a year after the close of the council he issued a solemn warning as to what the consequences would be if there was any failure to accept the decision rendered, and a conformation to it. This in a general edict against heretics. After deploring his own past forbearance, as occasioning men's being seduced, he says to the supposed various heretical parties:

THE THREAT OF CONSTANTINE

"Since this your pernicious wickedness is no longer to be endured, we by this present law command you, that you no more presume to meet together. And we have given orders that all those places where you are wont to hold assemblies should be taken away. Yea, our concern for this matter is such, that we not only forbid you to assemble in any public place; but we likewise forbid all assemblies of your foolish superstition in private houses, and in all private places whatever. All of you, therefore, who have any sincere love of truth come to the Catholic Church. And that this remedy may have its full effect we ordain that all your superstitious conventicles, I mean oratories of all heretics, if it be fit to call such houses oratories, be forthwith taken away, and without any opposition delivered to the Catholic Church; and that the rest of your places be adjudged to the public" (Lardner's Works, vol. IV, p. 36).

"Thus the dens of heretics were laid open by the imperial edict", exultantly exclaims Eusebius, the Christian bishop, "and the wild beasts, the ring leaders of their impiety, were scattered" (Life of Constantine, Eusebius, p. 66).

One can readily understand, of course, that a "Christian" bishop of this period, can give exclamation to such joy as he here expressed at the prospect of persecuting the heretics; but the thought that comes to one of milder temperament, viewing this first step towards the persecution of those who shall be styled heretics by the orthodox, is: what has "Christendom" here in this emperor? A patron, or a master?

Arius himself was condemned as a heretic and banished into one of the remote provinces, Illyricum; his friends and disciples branded by law, with the odious name of "Porphyrians", because it is supposed that Arius, like Porphyry, had sought to injure "Christianity". His writings were condemned to the flames and a capital punishment was pronounced against those in whose possession they should be found. But three years later, through the influence of the women at the imperial court Constantine softened in his demeanor towards Arius and his followers. The exiles were recalled and Arius himself was received at court and his faith approved by a synod of prelates and presbyters at Jerusalem; but on the day that he was to be publicly received in the cathedral church at Constantinople, by order of the emperor, who, by the way, received the sacraments at the hands of Arians, he expired under circumstances which have led many to believe that other means than the prayers of the orthodox against him were the cause of his death! The leaders of the orthodox party, Athanasius of Alexandria, Eustathius of Antioch, and Paul of Constantinople, were now to feel the wrath of the first Christian emperor. They were deposed on various occasions and by the sentence of numerous councils, and banished into distant provinces. In fact, so far from the adoption of the Nicene creed ending the conflict which had arisen, it was more like the opening of that controversy, which agitated Christendom for so long, and resulted in so many shameful conflicts. Councils were arrayed against councils, and though they never could convince one another of error, they never failed, in the spirit of such "Christian" charity as was then extant, to close their decrees with anathemas. Votes were bartered for and purchased in those councils, and the facts justify the latent sarcasm in Gibbon's remark, that "the cause of truth and justice was promoted by the influence of gold". There were persecutions and counter-persecutions, as now one party and then the other prevailed; there were assassinations and bloody battles over this doctrine of Deity, the accounts of which fill, as they also disgrace, the so-called Christian annals. The creed which was adopted at Nicea, however, became the settled doctrine of orthodox "Christendom", and remains so to this day, under the explanations and limitations given in discourse No. IV of this series.

CONSTANTINE'S PROPOSITIONS FOR "CHRISTIAN" PROPAGANDA

In connection with this Council of Nicea the celebrated propositions of Constantine for the easier propaganda of such "Christianity" as then existed ought not to be overlooked. Neander thus states them:

"The heathen would be most easily led to salvation, if the condition of the Christians were made to appear to them in all respects enviable.

"They [the bishops] should consider, that the advantage to be derived from preaching could not belong to all.

"Some, he said, might be drawn to the faith by being seasonably supplied with the means of subsistence.

"Others were accustomed to repair to that quarter where they found protection and intercession (alluding to the intercessions of the bishops).

"Others would be won by an affable reception.

"Others by being honored with presents.

"There were but few who honestly loved the exhibitions of religious doctrine; but few were the friends of truth (therefore, few sincere conversions).

"For this reason they should accommodate themselves to the characters of all, and like skillful physicians, give to each man that which might contribute to his cure, so that in every way the saving doctrine might be glorified in all" (Neander's Church History, vol. II, pp. 29-30).

Volumes could be written on the evils that attended upon this heathen policy.

MORAL AND SPIRITUAL DECLINE IN THE CHURCH IN AN AGE OF FEACE AND EASE

And what of the moral and spiritual status of a church situated as was the newly elevated church to be the "state" church and religion of Rome? If in recurring periods of peace and prosperity moral and spiritual deterioration befell the church, what must have been the condition when every worldly advantage accompanied church membership? Commenting upon the propositions of Constantine to make acceptance of "Christianity" easy, Dr. Neander says:

"A course of proceeding upon such principles must entirely have thrown open a wide door for all manner of hypocrisy".

"The piercing eye of ambition and avarice", says Gibbon, "soon discovered that the profession of Christianity might contribute to the interest of the present as well as of a future life. The hopes of wealth and honors, the example of an emperor, his exhortations, his irresistible smiles, diffused conviction among the venal and obsequious crowds which usually fill the apartments of a palace. The cities, which signalized a forward zeal by voluntary destruction of their [Pagan] temples, were distinguished by municipal privileges and rewarded with popular donatives" (Decline and Fall, vol. III, ch. xx, p. 23).

"Unhappily," Neander remarks, "there were bishops whose only wish was to make the conversion to Christianity a right easy thing for the Pagans. * * * Hence they baptized even those who lived in open sin, and who plainly enough manifested that it was not their purpose to forsake it. They imagined that when these were only baptized and introduced into the fellowship of the church, it was then time enough to admonish them against sin" (Neander's Church History, vol II, p. 120). Surely it was not difficult among such a mass of unconverted members thus brought into the church to find elements that would foster the errors, both in ethics and in doctrine, which about this time arose in the church. "It is small wonder that it was well-nigh publicly adopted in this age"—we are informed by Mosheim—"That to deceive and lie is a virtue, when religion can be promoted by it, and that error in religion ought to be visited with penalties and punishments". The first of these evils resulted in the accumulation of that mass of myth and fable that burdens the annals of the dark ages; the second established the "holy inquisition", alike the shame of the Roman Church and the so-called Christian civilization she has influenced.

THE LOSS OF SPIRITUAL GIFTS

It was during these times also that the spiritual gifts of the gospel were finally lost to the church; and to this there is practical unanimity of consent by ecclesiastical writers. Indeed it is usually asserted that these spiritual gifts were lost generally by the close of the second century. I mean those spiritual gifts enumerated in the New Testament, such as healing the sick, casting out devils, the working of miracles, prophesying, discerning of spirits, diverse kinds of tongues, interpretation of tongues, "the spirit dividing to every man severally as he will" (I Corinthians 12:4-11). Some even mark the loss of these "gifts" at the end of the apostolic age. "With the close of the New Testament records", says Dr. Phillip Smith, author of the Students' Ecclesiastical History, "and the death of the last surviving apostle, the history of the church passes from its sacred to its purely human phase. The miraculous gifts which attested the Divine mission of the apostles ceased; not indeed by any formal record of their withdrawal, but by the clear evidence that they were possessed no longer" (Students' Ecclesiastical History, Smith, vol. I, p. 62).

Dr. Jortin bears witness to the same fact. He says: "The words of Eusebius intimate that he thought those extraordinary powers to be, at least, not very common afterwards—[i. e., the beginning of the second century]. 'They went about', says he, 'with God's cooperating grace, for even then the Divine Spirit performed many miracles by them'. * * * This brings the probability of miracles down to the beginning of the second century" (Remarks on Ecclesiastical History, vol. I, p. 134).

Certainly what remained in alleged "Christendom" in the fourth and subsequent centuries, in relation to spiritual and miraculous happenings, of visions and healings and the like, are so comingled with the relics of alleged saints and martyrs, and shrines and trumperies that they become like babbling childishness in comparison with the spiritual powers of the New Testament and apostolic times. The church was, even in the early centuries, beginning to cherish only the forms of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And as for the fourth century, and afterwards—what could be spiritually expected of a church such as by then had come into existence?

THE "CHRISTIAN" RELIGION AND CHURCH BECOMES A PERSECUTING RELIGION AND CHURCH

The thing most important of all, however, that challenges our thought in connection with this fourth century revolution under Constantine, is the fact that the religion and church that is made to bear the name of Christ becomes a persecuting religion and church! It seems unbelievable, but it is true; and I present the evidence:

THE EDICT OF MILAN

Eusebius says: "The emperor proceeded to act with great vigor, gave the government of the provinces chiefly to Christians, and when any 'Gentiles' were made governors they were prohibited to sacrifice [that is to the Pagan deities], which law comprehended not only presidents of provinces but also higher officers, and even the praetorian praefects. * * * Soon after that two laws were published at one and the same time; (1) one prohibiting the detestable rites of idolatry hitherto practiced in cities and country places; and that for the future none should erect statues to the gods, nor perform the vain arts of divination, nor offer up any sacrifices. (2) The other law was for enlarging Christian oratories and churches, or for rebuilding them more grand and splendid" (Life of Constantine, Eusebius, bk. ii, ch. xliv). When contrasting the course of the first "Christian" emperor with the Pagan emperors, Eusebius says: "They commanded the temples to be magnificently adorned; he demolished them to the foundation, especially such as were most respected by superstitious people" (Id., ch. xlv). Later he expressly says that "throughout the whole Roman empire, the doors of idolatry were shut to the commonalty and to the soldiery"; and that "every kind of sacrifice was prohibited". Again he says, that there were several laws published for these purposes, forbidding sacrifices, divinations, raising statues, and the secret mysteries or rites of initiation. And he says further, that "in Egypt a sort of priesthood, consecrated to the honor of the Nile, was entirely suppressed" (Life of Constantine, Eusebius, bk. iv, ch. xxiii, xxv).

The zeal of "Christian" writers has done all in its power to excuse or palliate the conduct of Constantine in his acts for the suppression of the Pagan religion and worship; but after all is said by his apologists that can be said; after every allowance is conceded for the times in which he lived, and the previous conduct of the Pagans through two centuries of violence towards the "Christians", the fact remains that the first "Christian" emperor did by his edicts put the ancient religion of the empire under the ban of the law, and by acts of violence destroyed some of its temples, and close the rest by imperial decree, that the Pagan gods might not be worshipped.

On the foundation of intolerance thus laid by him (Constantine), others hastened to build. In the succeeding reign, among the first laws enacted was this one against Pagan sacrifices:

"Let superstition cease; let the madness of sacrificing [i. e. to the Pagan gods] be abolished. For whoever shall presume contrary to the constitution of our father, a prince of blessed memory, and contrary to this command of our clemency, to offer sacrifices, let a proper and convenient punishment be inflicted, and execution presently done upon him" (Lardner's Works, vol. VIII, p. 169).

This edict was supplemented a few years later by another and similar (in 353 A.D.—according to Gothford), by the following:

"It is our pleasure that in all places and in all cities, the temples be immediately shut and carefully guarded that none may have the power of offending. It is likewise our pleasure, that all our subjects should abstain from sacrifices. If anyone should be guilty of such an act, let him feel the sword of vengeance; and after his execution, let his property be confiscated to the public use. We denounce the same penalties against the governors of the provinces, if they neglect to punish the criminals" (The law is extant in the Theodocian Code).

It is not necessary to pursue the subject much further. It will be sufficient to say that during the fourth century, by following the policy of suppression inaugurated by this first "Christian" emperor, "Christianity" was changed from a persecuted to a persecuting religion. Without restraint from the ecclesiastical authorities, the "Christian" emperors issued edicts against the Pagan religion, proscribed its followers, destroyed its temples, and confiscated its property to the uses of the rival religion. Even Neander, speaking of this revolution, and constrained as he is, to say all that he can for the honor of the "Christian Church", is compelled to admit that "the relation of things had become reversed. As in former times the observance of the Pagan ceremonies, the religion of the state, had appeared in the light of a civil duty, and the profession of Christianity in that of a crime against the state; so now it was the case, not indeed that the outward profession of Christianity was commanded as a universal civil duty, for against this the spirit of Christianity too earnestly remonstrated; but that the exercise of the Pagan religion was made politically dangerous" (Neander, vol. II, p. 34). In the pages of this eminent "Christian" historian one may read that before the close of the century which witnessed the elevation of "Christianity" to the dignity of the state religion of the empire, wild troops of "Christian" monks were undertaking campaigns, especially in the country, for the destruction of the heathen temples in which sacrifices were alleged to have been performed; of bishops who not only superintended the destruction of heathen temples at the head of bands of soldiers and gladiators, but paraded through the streets of the cities the symbols of the heathen faith, provoking civil conflicts which "Christian" emperors did not hesitate to take advantage of for the more complete suppression of Paganism! Meantime a Pagan apologist, Libanius, arises to plead the cause of religious toleration, and in the course of his address to the "Christian" emperor, Theodosius, he puts to shame the "Christianity" then in vogue, by showing the emperor how far the church had departed from the spirit of the "Christian" religion, by saying: "Force is said not to be permitted, even according to the laws of your own religion; persuasion is said to be praised, but force condemned by them. Why, then, do you wreak your fury against the temples, when this surely is not to persuade, but to use force? Thus, then, it is plain you would transgress even the laws of your own religion" (Neander, Church History, vol. II, pp. 88-110; p. 67). Lardner calls attention to the fact that as under Pagan emperors previous to Constantine "Christianity" had been in a state of persecution, so now, after Constantine, he proceeds to show that Paganism under "Christian" emperors was all along in a state of persecution (Lardner's Works, vol. VIII, p. 164).

PERSECUTION OF "HERETICS"

Once started upon the policy of suppressing by force those of a different religion, "Christianity" did not stop with the persecution of the Pagans; bad and unchristian as that was, still more serious results occurred from the persecutions inflicted upon socalled heretics in the church, by those who were considered orthodox. It is true that there were heretics in the church before the days of Constantine; much progress had been made in the matter of paganizing "Christianity"; and more or less of intolerance was manifested by "Christian" sects towards each other; but it was the policy and example of this first "Christian" emperor that laid the real foundation for that monument of shame and disgrace to the "Christian" name which rises upon the plains of "Christian" discord and strife and war waged against heretics in the name and for the glory of Christ. It is this which constitutes the darkest page of ecclesiastical history.

It is a terrible arraignment which Gibbon draws against apostate "Christendom" in the concluding paragraph of his review of the persecutions which had been endured by the followers of Christ in the "Christian" centuries preceding Constantine. He says:

"We shall conclude this chapter by a melancholy truth, which obtrudes itself on the reluctant mind: that, even admitting, without hesitation or inquiry, all that history has recorded, or devotion has feigned, on the subject of martyrdoms, it must still be acknowledged that the Christians, in the course of their intestine dissensions, have inflicted far greater severities on each other than they have experienced from the zeal of infidels" (Decline and Fall, vol. II, ch. xvi, p. 284).

Both Guizot and Milman, eminent "Christian" scholars, annotated the work of Edward Gibbon (Decline and Fall of Rome), the former in French, the latter in an English edition; and at every point where they could modify a statement or soften a passage apparently unjust to "Christianity", they did so; but in the presence of the important and terrible passage just quoted, they remained absolutely silent!

Further on the author of the Decline and Fall of Rome, in the way of terrible illustration says:

"In the Netherlands alone more than one hundred thousand of the subjects of Charles the Fifth [emperor of Germany] are said to have suffered by the hand of the executioner; and this under a religious persecution; and this extraordinary number is attested by Grotious, a man of genius and learning. * * * If we are obliged to submit our belief to the authority of Grotious, it must be allowed that the number of Protestants who were executed in a single province and a single reign, far exceeded that of the primitive martyrs in the space of three centuries, and of the Roman empire" (Decline and Fall, ch. xvi, p. 285)! It is proper to say, however, that Fra Paula, an Italian writer challenges Mr. Gibbon's figures of 100,000 and reduces them to 50,000, as Mr. Gibbon himself admits in a footnote of his own work; but even so that computation would leave Mr. Gibbon's reflection unimpaired. This radio audience was shocked, doubtless, at the review of the Pagan persecutions of Christians through three centuries (see discourse No. VI of this series), but what are your feelings as you contemplate the solemn fact that in one single persecution, of one "Christian party" against another, and within one country, and within a few years, more executions—"Christian" martyrdoms—took place, than in all the three centuries of Pagan persecutions! Can any comment be made! Nor let any suppose that the incident here alluded to was not a war of religious persecution. "The Catholic princes" says our historian, Gibbon, "connected their own interests with that of the clergy and enforced by fire and sword the tenor of spiritual censures" (Id). Also in one of the phases of this war of persecution, when a massacre took place in France; its victims being variously estimated from 25,000 to 100,000; an event which made the heart of Protestant Europe stand still with horror, and the queen of England put on mourning weeds and spurned the apologies of the French envoy at her court with contempt. "At Rome", writes Motley, in his Rise of the Dutch Republic (vol. II, p. 60)—"At Rome, on the contrary, the news of the massacre created a joy beyond description"! "The pope", he continues: "The pope", be it remembered! The infallible head of an infallible church! The supposed vicegerent of God on earth, holding the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, successor of St. Peter—"The pope, accompanied by his cardinals, went solemnly to the church of St. Mark to render thanks to God for the grace thus singularly vouchsafed to the Holy See and to all Christendom; and a Te Deum was performed in the presence of the same august assembly" (Motley, vol. II, p. 60)!

The circumstance of the church elevated by Constantine becoming a persecuting church is a strong evidence of its paganized state; for the true Christian religion is not a persecuting religion; the true Church of Christ is not a persecuting church. When the Samaritans would not receive the Messiah, some of the apostles would have them consumed by fire from heaven; but the Master turned and rebuked them, saying, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them" (Luke 9:54-56). It is true that Messiah said: "Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own household" (Matthew 10:34-36). This, however, is but a prediction of the effect of the proclamation of the gospel, not an authorization to force the acceptance of Christianity by the sword; nor does it authorize the church to invoke the arm of the civil authority to execute by force her doctrinal decrees. The Gospel of Jesus Christ, it is true, did not bring peace to the world, but a sword; the sword, however, is to be found in the hands of those who rejected the Gospel, not in the hands of those who accepted and preached it. And when the church departed so far from the spirit of Christ that she grasped the sword in her own hands, or dictated the civil authority to wield it in her behalf, and that became the policy of the church, the adoption of that policy proclaimed her apostate condition to the world, in a manner to be known and read of by all men.

So far my remarks on "Christianity" becoming a persecuting religion and church, and therefore no "Christianity", have extended no further than to those Christian centuries which preceded the major schisms in the so-called "Christian Church". When, however, I come to deal with those major schisms, and the thereafter major Protestant divisions of "Christendom", I shall not forget that the "daughters of Rome" so far partook of the spirit of their mother in this matter; that they, too, on occasion, and where they had the power, gave ample evidence of the same debasement, and also were persecuting religions and churches—worthy daughters of a fallen mother!
