B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE VIII

The Rise of "The Papacy": Is it of Divine or Human Origin?

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: Crossing our course in the progress of our developing theme, "The Falling Away', or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church", is the question of "The Roman Papacy: Is it of Divine or Human Origin"? The text is as follows:

THE CHRIST: "Upon this rock I will build my church and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it" (St. Matthew 16:18).

VIEW OF THE CHURCH OF ROME ON THE PAPACY

The attitude of the Church of Rome with respect to the papacy is that upon the bishop of Rome was conferred a supreme, earthly headship of the Church of Christ; that the apostle St. Peter had received such a divine authority and appointment from the Christ, as made him in jurisdiction superior to the other apostles; also in administrative power and leadership; that for twenty-five years he was bishop of Rome; and exercised a universal presidency of the church from that city—his permanent See. Previous to his death all this primacy and authority St. Peter 100onferred upon one Linus, by making him bishop of Rome, and of all the world. All which authority was to be transmitted down the line of succeeding bishops of Rome, to the present bishop of that See, the pope, or "father" of all "Christendom', the true headshepherd of the "fold of Christ in all the world"; whom to be in union with is necessary to membership in the true Church of Christ. On this head a Roman Catholic authority says: "By * * * right ordination, legitimate mission, and pure apostolic doctrine, the Catholic Church of today is the continuation of the church founded by Jesus Christ and the apostles; forms with it but one living identical body, which carries on and transmits the mission which the apostles had from Christ, and is the only true abiding messenger sent by Christ for the guidance of men to eternal salvation" (Catholic Belief, Bruno, p. 162).

The right and title to all this spiritual power and authority and superiority came to St. Peter and his proper successors by reason of its being especially bestowed upon St. Peter 1n the following manner: The circumstance is related in St. Matthew's Gospel (ch. xvi:13-19 inclusive).

"WHOM DO MEN SAY THAT I, THE SON OF MAN, AM?"

Jesus seemed curious to know whom men thought him to be; hence his question in the passage: "Whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, am"? Various replies were made. Some, it was reported, thought him to be John the Baptist, raised again from the dead; others Elias, and still others Jeremias or one of the prophets. Then he said—and doubtless this was his purpose from the first in bringing up the question—"but whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". Then, to make more solemn the occasion and the importance of the really great thing which had taken place—he said: "And I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it".

THE ROMAN CATHOLIC INTERPRETATION

This question which so far rises out of this circumstance is, what is it upon which Christ declared his intention to build his church. The Roman Catholic answer is, "upon St. Peter". Their interpretation is found in their marginal comment upon the passage in their version of the New Testament, and this is what they say: "Upon this rock, etc. The words of Christ to Peter, spoken in the vulgar language of the Jews, which our Lord made use of, were the same as if he had said in English: Thou art a rock, and upon this rock I will build my church. So that, by the plain course of the words, Peter is here declared to be the rock upon which the church was to be built".

THE PROTESTANT INTERPRETATION

In opposition to this Roman Catholic interpretation stands that of Martin Luther, and the Protestant interpretation generally, namely, that the "rock" is Christ, himself, not St. Peter. Martin Luther, commenting on the conflicting interpretation given by St. Augustine on St. Matthew xvi, in relation to St. Peter being the "rock" on which Christ would build his church, says: "Even should St. Augustine and all the fathers say that the apostle (Peter) is the 'rock' of which Christ speaks, I would resist them, single handed, in reliance upon the holy scriptures; that is, on Divine right; for it is written: 'other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ' (I Corinthians 3:11)". Peter himself terms Christ "the chief cornerstone", and a "living stone on which we are built up a spiritual house" (I Peter 2:4, 5, 6; see D'Aubignes, History of the Reformation, vol. II, ch. v, p. 172, edition of 1848). This is quite generally the position of the continental Protestant churches.

A bishop of the Episcopal Church of America [which, of course, is in fellowship with the Church of England], prominent in this great controversy as to the meaning of Matthew xvi, John H. Hopkins, D.D., LL.D., Bishop of Vermont, and author of "A Refutation" of the Catholic Dr. Milner's End of Religious Controversy, says: "The first question presented is, whether the rock, on which the church should be builded was Christ himself, as the Son of the living God, whom St. Peter had just confessed, or whether this rock was Peter the apostle? And we maintain that the rock was Christ; while you [addressing Roman Catholics] hold that the rock was St. Peter" (End of Controversy Controverted, Hopkins, vol. I, p. 436).

To show how absolute and emphatic the division between these two major sections of "Christendom" is, I quote the following also from Bishop Hopkins' work:

"This assumption [i. e. that the bishops of Rome succeed to the primacy and full authority of St. Peter], on which rests the whole superstructure of papal despotism, we hold to be directly at war with true catholic principle [he means universal, not Roman Catholic principle], false in all its parts, and subversive, as your own history has proved, of the liberty, the purity, and the proper influence of the gospel. I shall therefore proceed to prove, by plain evidence, that it is contrary to the scriptures, contrary to the [Christian] fathers; contrary to the councils, absurd in itself, and historically fatal to Christian unity" (Id.).

PROPER LIMITATIONS OF THE QUESTION

But let us here rightly divide the word of truth. The question here is not what or who is the "rock" of man's salvation; the center and circumference of the gospel; the means and power of the world's redemption and the individual man's salvation. He who brings all that to pass, beyond all question is the Christ; and there is no other "rock" or foundation laid, "or name given under heaven whereby men can be saved" (Acts 4:10-12). That is as much believed by Catholics as by Protestants. The question here is the "church" and its foundation, not as to the whole plan of salvation; but the thing here is the church on earth as a means of promulgating and bearing witness and administering in the things of God; nor may Roman Catholics be charged with holding that St. Peter displaces the Christ in that organization even—the church. In their official exposition before referred to, marginal comment in their New Testament, they say: "Peter 1s here declared to be the rock upon which the church was to be built: Christ himself being both the principal foundation and founder of the same" (Douay Bible, marginal comment on St. Matt. xvi). But St. Peter and his alleged legal successors, in the Roman Catholic view, are made the earthly foundation of the church. In addition to quoting from the comment in their authorized Bible, as above, I give the following from an authorized book upon their doctrine: One at least approved by Henry E. Newman, Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster, 1884, Catholic Belief, pp. 122-23, by the Very Rev. Joseph Faa Di Bruno, DD., Burns and Oates, publishers, London and New York:

"Our Lord Jesus Christ being the Foundation of foundations (Isaiah 28:16), and Chief Cornerstone, has the fulness of authority over the whole church whether in heaven or on earth, whether present or future, and is the original source of all authority and jurisdiction. Compared with the authority of Christ, that of the pope [derived from St. Peter] over the church is dependent, temporal, and though ample, has its limits. The authority of the pope is from Christ, under Christ, and for Christ. He only possesses this authority over the church on earth during the few years of this pontificate. This is but a small portion of the immense flock of Christ, which consists of 'a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations, and tribes, and peoples, and tongues' (Apocalypse vii:9); and over the whole of which great multitude, when gathered together in the end of time from all the nations of the world, from all past ages, Jesus, the everlasting Shepherd of our souls, will himself, without the ministry of any representative, visibly preside for ever and ever in heaven". Such the Roman Catholic position as stated by themselves.

Let us come now more closely to the interpretations of the scripture:

INTERPRETATIONS—CLOSE-UPS

THE CHRIST: "Whom say ye that I am"?

ST. PETER: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God".

THE CHRIST: "Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona; [Why?] for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". And now, for solemn emphasis only: "And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter [referring to a name previously given to St. Peter 50ong before—see St. John i:42] and upon this rock I will build my church".

What did the Christ mean? "St. Peter", says Rome; "the Christ", says Protestantism.

It cannot mean St. Peter as Rome contends, for then it would undoubtedly have read:

Thou are Peter, and on thee I will build my church.

But it was not so phrased. An awkward detour of words is made by Rome's interpretation. Observe it:

"As if he [the Christ] had said in English: Thou art a rock, and on this rock I will build my church".

But why first have to refer to St. Peter as a "rock", and then to the "rock" as the foundation of the church? Or, having referred to St. Peter as a "rock", why not say directly, "And on thee I will build my church"? In any case put before this allusion to St. Peter the great fact that God had revealed to him that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the living God, and the "plain course" of the words, conveying the right and unstrained meaning of the passage will appear as follows:

ST. PETER: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God".

THE CHRIST: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father. * * * On this rock [principle] I will build my church".

The reference to St. Peter at best is but for emphasis of solemnity; "I say unto thee that thou art Peter", etc.; or else it was said in antithesis, to balance St. Peter's reference to the Christ as follows:

ST. PETER: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God".

THE CHRIST: "And I say unto thee that thou art Peter", etc.

As St. Peter had given to Jesus the new name and title "the Christ, the Son of the living God", so Jesus responded, renewing the new character-name he had long before given to St. Peter, Cephas, a stone. The preference of these alternatives, however, would be that the reference is made purely for the sake of solemn emphasis.

PROTESTANT VIEW EXAMINED

The Protestant view cannot be granted in this case, viz., that the "rock" here referred to on which the church would be built was the Christ himself. And here keep in mind what I have already said above in relation to the Christ being foundation, center and circumference as to the whole gospel scheme of things; and then the notion that we must affirm that Jesus must here be referred to in this St. Matthew passage in order to hold his place as the foundation of the whole gospel scheme, as held by Luther, will disappear. The Protestant claim that Jesus is the "rock" referred to in St. Matthew xvi, cannot be allowed, unless we could be assured, as the case requires, that as Jesus said "on this rock I will build my church", he pointed to, or in some way indicated himself. There is nothing in all the circumstances that gives the necessary evidence that this was done, or that it was the Christ's meaning.

THE TRUE INTERPRETATION

These claims disallowed let us find the true meaning of this important occasion and this passage of scripture. And in doing so let us strip the language to bare poles—yet retaining all essentials:

THE CHRIST: "Whom do ye say that I am"?

ST. PETER: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God".

THE CHRIST: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father; * * * and upon this rock I will build my church".

The answer is both obvious and inevitable: Upon that principle and power which had revealed to St. Peter that Jesus was the Christ—the rock of revelation. Upon that principle, I repeat for emphasis, had God made known to Peter the great and fundamental Christian truth, viz., Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God. And with that truth made known, not by flesh and blood, but by the revelation of God; and with that principle persisting and eternally active, as intended in the gospel, all things else are secure both for individuals and for the church, for they indeed are founded upon a "rock". Let us contemplate how strong is such foundation.

THE HOLY GHOST THE SOURCE OF REVELATION

"No man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed: and no man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost" (I Corinthians 12:3). It is evident then, that when the Father of the Christ, and not flesh and blood, revealed to St. Peter that Jesus was the Christ, he did so through the Holy Ghost. And through that means, others may know, as well as St. Peter, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God; even all who are called to obedience to, and who receive the gospel. That was St. Peter's own doctrine on the Day of Pentecost. Answering those who had asked: "Men and brethren what shall we do"? Peter himself at the time aflame with the Holy Ghost, as were his brethren, answered: "Repent, etc. * * * and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call" (Acts 2:37-39). All then may get their feet to this foundation; all may participate in Peter's knowledge, and stand secure on the same foundation—this "rock" on which the church is founded.

THE OFFICE WORK OF THE HOLY GHOST

Let us get clearly in mind the office work of the Holy Ghost. Already we have seen that "no man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Ghost"; and all that are called to the gospel are entitled to that knowledge. And what saith the scripture more on this head? Nay, what saith the Lord Jesus himself?

"I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of Truth. * * * These things have I spoken unto you being yet present with you. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things" (St. John 14:16-25).

And again: "But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send to you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of me" (St. John 15:26). That is, he shall testify that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, and with that goes all other religious truth.

The Holy Ghost is the very Spirit of revelation; as witnesseth again Christ's saying: "Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of Truth is come [which is the Holy Ghost], he will guide you into all truth, for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will shew you things to come" (St. John 16:13); the "spirit of prophecy" then; and "the testimony of Jesus", we are elsewhere assured, "is the spirit of prophecy" (i. e., of revelation—Rev. xix:10).

Here then is the office work of the Holy Ghost—this Spirit that reveals Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of the living God; which keeps alive both individuals and the Church of God—keeps alive the knowledge of God among men, individually and collectively as in the church, for instance; and by that knowledge keeps all things else secure, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

THE ANXIETY OF THE CHRIST FOR THE DISCIPLES TO HAVE THE HOLY GHOST

It is interesting to note the apparent anxiety of the Christ, and the insistence of the Christ that his apostles shall make no move in the matter of beginning their ministry until they should receive the promised coming of the Holy Ghost.

Witness that occasion, on the day of the Christ's resurrection, when he appears to the eleven apostles, and by the whole circumstance seems to start anew from the foundation upon which he had promised to build his church: "Peace be unto you" was his all hail to them. "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost" (St. John 20:21-22).

Witness that occasion when he was taken up from their midst on his departure into heaven after his resurrection—"After that he, through the Holy Ghost, had given commandment unto the apostles whom he had chosen". The account is given in the first chapter of the Acts: "And being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem but wait for the promise of the Father which ye have heard of me. * * * Ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence". The disciples seemed disposed to set aside this, and asked about the "kingdom" they were anxious to see restored again to Israel: "Wilt thou at this time again restore the kingdom to Israel"? This was not for them to know. "But"—more important—"But ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you; and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:1-8).

Why this anxiety about having his apostles endowed with the Holy Ghost, thence the promise of it, and the realization of it, extended to all that are called to obey the gospel, as we have seen? Because the Holy Ghost is the Spirit and the means and the power of REVELATION; the principle and power on which, and not on man, the Christ is going to found his church; the principle that will reveal that Jesus is the Christ the Son of the living God! The principle which can make both individuals and the organization—the church—secure against the gates of hell.

THE PRINCIPLE ACTIVE IN THE CHURCH

Let us see how it carries on in the church, this principle of revelation—how it works.

When the disciples of the little church at Jerusalem would have the vacancy in the quorum of the apostles filled, occasioned by the awful apostasy of Judas, two of the brethren who had consorted with the apostles from the beginning, were presented before the Lord; and the disciples prayed, "and said: Thou Lord * * * show whether of these two thou hast chosen; * * * and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven" (Acts 1:15-26).

On the Day of Pentecost, shortly after the ascension of the Christ, the Holy Ghost coming upon the apostles, so magnified them in the eyes of the people; and they so preached the gospel under its power, that three thousand people were converted in one day; and the nucleus of a church membership was thus formed.

When the Christ would have a special apostle added to the church, a man who could stand before courts and kings and meet the philosophies of the Greeks, through revelation—the foundation on which the Christ promised to build his church—through revelation Paul was called to the service of the church. "Paul, why persecutest thou me"? "Who art thou, Lord"? "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest". And humbled by the knowledge, Paul said, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do"? He was sent into the city of Damascus where it would be told him what he should do. Another revelation brought Ananias to him, and he straightway began that ministry which was to end only with his death (Acts 9);—yet how gloriously ended!

When God would have his gospel extended to the Gentiles, one of the most important as one of the most difficult events for the early church, a double vision and revelation was given; one to prepare St. Peter, the minister in the case; and one to Cornelius, the Gentile-convert-to-be. The voice warned St. Peter 1n the inspired vision not to call that unclean which God had cleansed. The just Gentile, who was to be the first of the Gentile converts, was prepared by revelation through the angel to send for the man of God who would tell him what he ought to do. And when these factors met to carry out the purpose of God, the Holy Ghost came upon the Gentiles in witness of God's acceptance of them; and the Holy Ghost came also to confirm St. Peter's faith that the gospel must go to the Gentiles—revelation active! (Acts 100h. x).

When the preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles again agitated the church and the apostles and elders met at Jerusalem to consider the matter, the council held resulted in a revelation being given through the Holy Ghost to the council of the apostles and elders, "It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you [the Gentile converts] no greater burden than these necessary things", which they enumerated (Acts 15:28).

When God would have Paul begin his great missionary work in the West, "The Holy Ghost said", to certain prophets at Antioch, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. * * * * So they being sent forth of the Holy Ghost departed", etc. (Acts 13).

Then Paul would have preached in Asia: "But was forbidden of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 16:6).

Then he turned to Bithynia: "But the Spirit suffered him not" (Acts 16:7).

In an inspired dream Paul beheld a man saying "come over into Macedonia and help us"; and—"assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them"—they departed thence.

When the Lord would have the churches in Asia set in order, "he sent and signified it by an angel, to his servant John", and John delivered God's message to the churches (Rev. 1, 2, 3).

And so on throughout, in the Apostolic Church; the ministry were called to their office by revelation; they were guided by revelation in all their movements; directed to go here, or restrained from going yonder; they were inspired to say this, or do that; and their whole effort seemed to be to lead their following into the same light of inspiration. Revelation was the teaching, guiding and confirming power of the Apostolic Church, and especially the witnessing power as unto Peter, "that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God"; and on that "rock" the Christ founded his church; and ultimately on that "rock", or principle, he will so preserve his church that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

THE RISE OF APOSTATIC TENDENCIES

But as we have seen, even in the days of the apostles, men began to arise and of their own selves taught "perverse doctrines, to draw away disciples after them" (Acts 20:30). False teachers appeared among the people, privily bringing in "damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them", and "many followed their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth would be evil spoken of" (II Peter 2:1-2, and context). The time came as predicted by Paul, when men would not endure sound doctrine; "but after their own lusts" would heap to themselves "teachers having itching ears; and they shall turn their ears from the truth", and turn them "unto fables" (II Timothy 4:1-4).

Immediately following the apostles' age, and making widening and deepening progress as the church further and ever further drifted away from the apostolic influence, which while it lasted hindered the development of that "mystery of iniquity", already at work even in apostolic times, then when that apostolic resistance was removed, then came the "falling away" predicted by St. Paul to the saints at Thessalonica; which was to end, and did end, in the rise of an apostate power, which exalted "himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sitteth in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God". "Remember ye not that when I was yet with you", says St. Paul, "I told you these things"? And thus that apostate power was revealed. But "whom", to quote St. Paul again, "The Lord will consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy by the brightness of his coming. Even him whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders" (II Thessalonians 2:1-10).

AUTHOR OF THE VIEW THAT "REVELATION" IS THE ROCK

The honor for this view I have here set forth as to "revelation" being the "rock" on which the Christ promised to build his church, belongs to Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the New Dispensation of the gospel that has come into the world. I know of no one else who has put forth such a claim. And he, as far as I know, never went into any exposition of it; he merely, as was becoming to him in his capacity of Prophet of God, announced the general truth, and placed his announcement upon his authority held from God. He was addressing himself to the elders of the church in 1843 on the subject of "Revelation"; in the course of which he remarked:

"Jesus says: 'Upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it'. What rock? Revelation" (History of the Church, Period I, vol. V, p. 258).

That, as far as I know, is all that he ever said. But behold, how fitting it is to the whole truth involved!

It is just here in this manner of revelation, where the position of Roman Catholics on the "papacy" breaks down. They not only do not build their structure—their papacy—upon this foundation on which the Christ promised to build his church—on continued revelation—but they repudiate such a position. In evidence of it witness the following from the Catholic work, The Faith of our Fathers, written by Cardinal Gibbons, of Baltimore, so many years the sole Roman Church cardinal of America. Explaining the doctrine of the infallibility of the pope, the cardinal says:

"The infallibility of the popes does not signify that they are inspired. The apostles were endowed with the gift of inspiration, and we accept their writings as the revealed word of God. No Catholic, on the contrary, claims that the pope is inspired, or endowed with divine revelation properly so called. For, the Holy Spirit was not promised to the successors of Peter 1n order that they might spread abroad new doctrine which he reveals, but that, under his assistance, they might guard inviolably, and with fidelity explain, the revelation or deposit of faith handed down by the apostles" (The Faith of Our Fathers, pp. 145-146).

"THE CHURCH" SLIPS FROM THE ROCK

It is here, but perhaps unconsciously, where the church of early centuries slipped from "the rock" on which the Christ promised to build his church. I know, of course, that the answer to this would be that "revelation properly so called" ceased with the apostolic age; that revelation was not intended to be continuous in the Church of Christ. Was it not? Is it true that the Bridegroom, the Christ, was divorced from the bride, the church? If so, where is the bill of divorcement? I challenge its production from holy writ, from divine authority. Who said it? Does it not arise from the fact that men in the early ages of the church, finding themselves no longer possessed of the power of revelation; no longer "speaking as moved upon by the Holy Ghost", the fountain source of revelation (II Peter 1:21), resorted to this human invention that it was the design of God to have revelation cease in his church, leaving only a sort of negative power to guard an alleged head of the church from making mistakes in "matters of faith and morals"? I am persuaded that that is the source of this doctrine that revelation was only to be a temporary power in the church. But it is without authority of scripture or reason to sustain it. On the contrary the whole genius of the church and its organization contemplates the continuance of revelation, as only in that way, and by that means, can there be assured a perfect church, with infallible leadership. I wish to emphasize the statement of Cardinal Gibbons that it is not claimed by any Catholic that "the pope is inspired or endowed with divine revelation properly so called"; because here is one of the prime powers and functions which St. Peter possessed as head of the apostles and of the church in his day, and which we have seen him exercise in the matter of taking the gospel to the Gentiles, and yet it is not even claimed that he transmitted this power to "Pope Linus" when, as it is alleged, he made him "pope or bishop of Rome". Yet the power of revelation existed in the church after St. Peter, and during three administrations of the "popes of Rome", in the person of St. John the apostle, though not held by these superior heads of the church! Why was it not held by these "heads of the church", as well as by St. Peter or St. John? And why was not such a splendid power preserved to these bishops of Rome, alleged heads of the universal church? They claimed all other powers that St. Peter held, why not this?

THE DENIAL OF DIVINE RIGHT TO THE PAPACY

The effect of all this that I have said is to deny to the "papacy" a divine origin. I am saying that it is not true that St. Peter 100onfirmed upon the alleged bishop of Rome, Linus, his apostleship; any more than St. Peter and the other apostles when they ordained bishops at other places conferred upon these their apostleship. Apostles and bishops are not identical offices. One is a general office of universal jurisdiction; "it implies a commission to the whole world"; the other is a local office of limited jurisdiction, confined to a particular diocese, a province, a city, or a given district of country. Even the Marcionites of the second century seemed to have comprehended that. They, of course, venerated Marcion as is evident from the fact that they took upon them his name, and called themselves Marcionites; but "when asked whom they most respected, Paul or Marcion, they answered 'Paul was an apostle, Marcion their bishop only' " (Lardner's Works, Vol. VIII, p. 459). St. Peter, therefore, was never the bishop of Rome; because the office would be incompatible with his greater office of apostle.

I am saying in this discourse that there is no trustworthy evidence, and there is no document whatever to be found respecting any actual transfer of either the primacy of St. Peter to Linus, or any other bishop of Rome, nor of the apostleship of St. Peter being conferred upon Linus.

I am saying that God ignored the assumption made by the Church of Rome that the bishops of Rome were set up by St. Peter, as the authoritative heads of the whole church in the world, by passing by those alleged heads of the church, Linus, Cletus, and Clement—within the jurisdiction of whom St. John 54ed—and honored St. John the apostle in the highest possible way in which God can give recognition to a superior authority, viz., by directing him by revelation to reprove, instruct, warn, and set in order a large section of the church—the seven churches in Asia; and in other parts of the same revelation, to give out revealed knowledge to all the kindreds and races of men in all the world (See whole Book of Revelation and St. John's Gospel).

I am saying, and especially saying, in this discourse, that in the conversation described in the xvith chapter of St. Matthew, as taking place between the Savior and St. Peter, that Jesus did not found, or promise to found, his church upon St. Peter; but he did promise to found his church upon the great principle upon which St. Peter had learned the great, central truth of the Christian religion, viz., upon Revelation.
