B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE IX

The Human Origin of the "Roman Papacy"

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I call your attention to the following text:

"Except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain" (Psalm 127).

The implication of the text I trust is clear. Surely if the Roman papacy, whose claims are just now under consideration, rise no higher than to be of human origin, then those claims are of no serious value or concern as a general factor or power of religion; nor of ecclesiastical government. Here more than in anything else the text selected to forecast our thought for the evening is appropriate: "Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it"! And if the papacy has but an human origin, they labor in vain who trust in it.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN PAPACY AND EPISCOPACY

Let a distinction be made, however, between the Roman episcopacy and the Roman papacy. No one questions but what Rome in the beginning had her bishops, as other cities had: Jerusalem—Antioch—Corinth—Alexandria. It is Rome's "papacy", or claim that her bishops were given a superiority over all other bishops, by falling heirs to whatever authority and primacy may have been possessed by St. Peter, over the other apostles, by which her bishops became successors of this apostle; and her bishops, the bishops of the whole Church of Christ; whom to be in union with, and in subjection to, is necessary to membership in the true Church of Christ. It is this assumed universal over-lordship of the whole Church of Christ that is in question—the papacy; not the episcopacy of the church of the city of Rome.

We saw in our discourse of last Sunday evening (1) that our Lord did not found his church upon St. Peter, as Roman Catholics claim; (2) that St. Peter was not bishop of Rome at all, as the offices of bishop and of apostle are incompatible, one being general and "implying a world commission", and the other being local, and limited to very restricted districts; (3) that St. Peter did not confer his apostolic primacy, or his apostleship at all upon the bishop of Rome, as the offices of apostle and of bishop are not identical, and so far as any evidence exists that St. Peter ordained Linus [the first alleged successor to St. Peter] he only ordained him bishop of Rome. Or, according to the likeliest tradition of that action, "the two most glorious apostles, Peter and Paul * * * * committed the office of administering the church [of Rome] to Linus (See Irenaeus and heresies). So that Linus, not St. Peter, became the first bishop of Rome, and in his jurisdiction was limited to Rome; as other bishops were limited respectively to their cities or districts.

Taking this view, then, that the bishop of Rome was not made universal bishop, or president of the whole Church of Christ; that no such divine appointment was given to the bishop of Rome, or to the whole line of succeeding bishops of Rome, whence comes the papacy? Or such alleged power of over-lordship of the church as is claimed for the bishops of Rome by Roman Catholics? To trace that claim to its source becomes the purpose of my discourse tonight.

THE FOUNDING OF CHURCHES

It seems, as far as the matter can be clearly traced, that whenever in their travels the apostles converted any considerable number of persons in a city, or in a country district, they organized them into a church, or, speaking more precisely, into a branch of the Church of Christ, and appointed either a bishop or an elder to preside over them. As long as the apostles lived they were regarded as the presiding authority of the Universal Church, and were looked to for counsel and instruction in all difficult matters that arose concerning doctrine or discipline. Their decisions were accepted as final, and well might it be so, since these men were guided in their counsels by revelation (Acts 15, passim; Rev. 1:4) as well as by the wisdom which their large experience and association with Jesus Christ had given them.

But when the apostles died, and no one succeeded to their authority, the branches of the church were left separate and independent organizations, united, for a time, it is true, in faith and charity, but the visible, general presidency recognized in the apostles and cheerfully submitted to by all sections of the church, ceased when the apostles passed away, and each branch was left an independent organization of itself. At this point, but only in passing, and in a very incidental manner, I make mention of the fact that the Church of Christ represents an arrested development of an organization. It never, in the age we have here reached, attained to its full unfolding of life as an organization. But of necessity I must leave all that to a future discourse.

Speaking of conditions in the second century Mosheim remarks: "During a great part of this century all the churches continued to be as at the first, independent of each other. * * * * Each church was a kind of small independent republic, governing itself by its own laws, enacted or at least sanctioned by the people" (Mosheim, vol. I, book i, cent. ii, part ii, ch. ii).

There is no evidence that there was such a thing as subordination among the churches when so left, or rank among the bishops. Each church was a sort of independent commonwealth, of which the bishop was president and a vassal to no other bishop. As might be expected, however, there was a peculiar respect paid to the churches founded by the apostles—the church at Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, Rome. Those churches were appealed to in controversies on points of doctrine, "as most likely to know what the apostles taught", but the appeal had no other significance than that.

THE GOVERNMENT BY BISHOPS

The manner in which bishops were first elected was for the apostles to nominate them, and then for the whole church over which they were to preside to sustain them by their vote. After the apostles had passed away, then "other men of repute" made the nominations and the people sustained them as at first. (Apostolic Fathers, Epistle of Clement of Rome to the Corinthians p. 49).

The duties and powers of the bishops in the first, and in the greater part of the second century, were limited to conducting the public worship, administering the ordinances of the gospel, settling difficulties which arose between brethren, attending in person to the sick and the poor. They also were made the custodians and managers of the public fund. In all these duties they were assisted by the elders [presbyters] of the church and the deacons. Yet neither the bishops nor the elders, nor both of them together, seem to have had power to ordain or determine anything without the approbation and consent of the members of the church. The principle of common consent was closely adhered to in the primitive church. The author of the Decline and Fall of Rome concludes the paragraph from which the above is condensed in the following manner: "The primitive bishops were considered only as the first of their equals, and the honorable servants of a free people. Whenever the episcopal chair became vacant by death, a new president was chosen among the presbyters [elders], by the suffrage of the whole congregation, every member of which supposed himself invested with a sacred and sacerdotal character" (Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol. II, ch. xv, pp. 192-3).

EQUALITY AMONG BISHOPS CHANGED

This equality of rank among the bishops, together with the simple form of church government, described above, however, was soon changed. The bishops who lived in cities, either by their own labors or those of the elders associated with them, raised up new churches in the adjacent villages and hamlets. The bishops of these rural districts being nominated and ordained by the bishops presiding in the city, very naturally felt themselves under the protection and dependent upon the city bishops. This idea continued to grow until these "bishops of the suburbs and the fields", were looked upon as a distinct order of offices, possessing a dignity and authority above the elders, and yet subordinate to the bishops of the cities, who soon came to be designated as "archbishops".

THE ORIGIN OF METROPOLITANS

Gradually and almost imperceptibly the church in its government began to follow the civil divisions of the Roman empire. The bishops of the metropolis of a civil province, in time, came to be regarded as having a general supervision of all the churches in that province, over the archbishops and indirectly over the suburban bishops or suffragans, as they began to be called, and finally, bishops merely. The bishops of these provinces were soon designated as "metropolitans".

CONDUCT OF THE LOWER CLERGY

As many changes occurred among the lower orders of the clergy as among the bishops. The elders and deacons became too proud to attend to the humblest of duties of their offices and hence a number of other officers were added to the church, while the elders and deacons spent much of their time in indolence and pleasure. To the evils of contention for power and place, which had its origin in arrogance and ambition—unbecoming those who professed to be followers and servants of Jesus Christ—must be added those of dissipation and voluptuousness. Many bishops we are told, in the third century, affected the state of princes, especially those who had charge of the more populous and wealthy congregations; for they sat on thrones, surrounded by their ministers and other signs of their power, and dazzled the eyes and the minds of the populace with their splendid attire. (Mosheim, vol. I, bk. i, cent. iii, part ii, ch. ii, p. 165).

CHURCH GOVERNMENT MODELED ON THE PLAN OF THE CIVIL GOVERNMENT OF ROME

It was reserved for the fourth century to see the church government more completely modeled on the plan of the civil government of the Roman empire, to witness more pride and arrogance in its rulers, and an increase of vices both in clergy and people. Early in this century, it will be remembered, Constantine, the emperor of Rome, avowed his conversion to "Christianity", and, as might have been expected, that fact produced great changes in the fortunes of the church. It not only put an end to its persecutions, but loaded its bishops with new honors and enlarged powers.

In saying that the church government was modeled upon the plan of the civil government, I would not be understood as saying that the first was a facsimile of the second; there were some differences between them, but the civil divisions of the empire undoubtedly suggested the ecclesiastical divisions.

Under Constantine the Roman empire was divided into four prefectures, containing thirteen dioceses, embracing one hundred and sixteen provinces. Officers called praetorian praefects presided over the four prefectures—exarchs over the dioceses, and governors over the provinces. The bishops of Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexandria, having gained a pre-eminence over all other metropolitans, were made to correspond with the four prefectures by Constantine; and assumed, before the close of the century, the title of patriarchs. Next to the patriarchs stood the bishops, whose jurisdiction extended over several provinces, corresponding to the civil exarchs, though the bishops of this dignity did not equal in number the civil exarchs. Next came the metropolitan bishops, whose jurisdiction was limited to a single province. They corresponded to the civil governors of the provinces, whose authority was limited in like manner. After the metropolitans came the archbishops, and then the bishops. Some of the latter were exempt from the jurisdiction of both metropolitans and archbishops, and hence were called "independent bishops".

PRE-EMINENCE OF THE BISHOPS OF ROME

The distinctions of rank among the bishops of the "Christian Church" first arose largely through the opulence and civil importance of the respective cities and provinces over which they presided—the membership of the church and its wealth usually bearing some proportion to the size and civil importance of the city in which it was located. The metropolitans and patriarchs also struggled for pre-eminence upon the same basis. All this gave the bishop of Rome great advantage; for, as stated by Gibbon: "The Roman Church was the greatest, the most numerous, and, in regard to the west, the most ancient of all the Christian establishments". Rome also was one of the cities to which tradition assigned an apostolic origin; and accounted both St. Peter and St. Paul as her founders [as we have seen]. Undoubtedly this would have effective force in granting to Rome and her bishops a great pre-eminence in the councils of the church, especially in connection with the prestige of occupying the capital city of the empire.

CYPRIAN: THIRD CENTURY

It has already been said that a certain attention was given, and respect shown to the bishops of churches founded by the apostles, and as two of the apostles, and two of the chiefest, St. Peter and St. Paul, are alleged to have founded the church at Rome, it could not be otherwise than that circumstance would aid the claims made in her behalf for superiority over other churches in the matter, at least, of "primacy and order". But in the earlier centuries there was never conceded to the bishops of Rome such authority as the popes wielded from the fifth and sixth centuries onward. The assumption of autocratic powers was resisted in the third century by Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, who contended for the equality and independence of all bishops.

"Rome experienced from the nations of Asia and Africa", says Gibbon, "a more vigorous resistance to her spiritual than she had formerly done to her temporal dominion. The patriotic Cyprian, who ruled with the most absolute sway the church of Carthage and the provincial synods, opposed with resolution and success the ambition of the Roman pontiff, artfully connected his own cause with that of the eastern bishops, and, like Hannibal, sought out new allies in the heart of Asia. If this punic war was carried on without any effusion of blood, it was owing much less to the moderation than to the weakness of the contending prelates. Invectives and excommunications were their only weapons; and these, during the progress of the whole controversy, they hurled against each other with equal fury and devotion" (Gibbon's Decline and Fall, vol. II, ch. xv, p. 196).

OPPOSITION OF THE BISHOPS OF CONSTANTINOPLE

After Cyprian the Roman pontiffs found their chief opponents in the bishops of Constantinople. That city was made the capital of the empire early in the fourth century; and became a "New Rome". It is an interesting story, how Constantine by founding "New Rome", gave to the papacy of the ancient city her most potent rival. So odious had become this first "Christian" emperor, and noted patron, if not master of the church—so odious had he become in Rome for his many murders that a pasquinade which compared his reign to that of the detested Nero was nailed to the palace gates. "The guilty emperor", says one, "in the first burst of anger, was on the point of darkening the tragedy, if such a thing had been possible, by a massacre of the Roman populace who had thus insulted him". His brothers were consulted on this measure of vengeance, however, and the result of their counsel was a resolution to degrade Rome to a subordinate rank, and build a metropolis elsewhere; and hence the new capitol of the empire rose on the shores of the Bosporus. The importance given to the city—the ancient Byzantium by this act, and the lavish embellishments and increase of population which followed it, conferred great dignity on the patriarch of the church, appointed to preside there; and the council of Constantinople, held A.D. 381, conferred upon him the second place among the great bishops of the world—the bishop of Rome being first. The council of Chalcedon, however, held in the next century [A.D. 451], decreed that the bishop of "New Rome" ought to be equal in power and authority with the bishop of Rome, assigning as a reason that the cities where they resided were equal in rank and dignity.

It would appear that second place ill-suited the ambitious prelates of "New Rome", and in this century—the fifth—began that struggle for supremacy between the bishops of the ancient and the new capital of the empire which ended finally in the division of the church in the ninth century. The strife raged with varying fortunes; but in the main the Roman pontiffs were most successful. Still in the last half of the sixth century the bishop of Constantinople, John 100alled the "Faster"—on account of the austerity of his life—assumed the title of universal bishop and continued to hold it in spite of all the efforts and threats of the Roman prelates. Early in the seventh century, the emperor, Phocas, being displeased with Cyriacus, the bishop of Constantinople, he divested him of the title of "universal bishop" and conferred it upon the Roman pontiff, Boniface III. "After Phocas' death the prelate of the east re-assumed the title. The two bishops, each preserved it, and with equal ambition strove for the pre-eminence" (Milner's Church History, vol. III, pp. 53, 69, note). Instead of dwelling together as brethren and working for the spread of truth, these rival bishops spent their time in vain disputes about the extent of their conquests and reprisals of each other's ecclesiastical provinces.

To follow this controversy further is impossible here within our time limits; let it be sufficient to say that the breach made in the church in the middle of the ninth century, and which had its origin in the mutual jealousies of the bishops of Rome and Constantinople, rather than in the wrongs done to eastern bishops by the emperors, or doctrinal differences which afterwards arose, continued to widen and has proven to be a chasm which up to the present it has been impossible to bridge.

THE DIVISION OF "CHRISTENDOM"—EAST AND WEST: PROTESTANT AND ROMAN CATHOLIC

It is important to note, at this point, the great permanent schism in the church in the ninth century—I say permanent because it has never been healed—it exists today. There was a still greater schism that took place in the 16th century—the great Protestant schism; which also was permanent, for it remains to this day, with no prospect of the chasm being closed. Both divisions resulted from the resistance of those great sections of "Christendom"—representing the fairest portions of that "Christendom"—to the preposterous claims of the papacy of Rome to universal jurisdiction over the church; and the despotic spirit in which the assumption has been asserted.

Strangely enough the existence of the papacy has been most strongly urged as necessary to the unity of the church! "It is essential to the constitution of the church", says one Roman Catholic writer, "that one of her bishops should be recognized as supreme in authority, otherwise it would be next to impossible to stay threatening abuses which local bishops might be unwilling or unable to correct; to apply a remedy if a bishop of any diocese has become perverted in faith and morals. * * * * Without this supreme authority there would be no union or sympathy between one part of Christendom and the other. * * * * Besides if such spiritual authority did not exist, there would be instead of one church many churches, opposed one to another. * * * * It could not in that case be said that the Church of Christ is one, nor could she then be compared to a human body with many members and one visible head"! (Bruno, Catholic Belief, ch. xxvii, pp. 109-10).

After that submergence I think one may be pardoned if he asks to be allowed to come up for air! When one listens to claims like the foregoing on the value and the virtue of unity for the church of God in the light of Roman Catholic general history, one is entitled to some relief. For while the establishment of the papacy has been invoked most strongly of all on the ground of necessary unity, no single thing in the experience of the so-called church, as embracing all "Christendom", has resulted in the production of discord, disunion, schisms, bitter strifes, and permanent breakings away of large sections of "Christendom" one from another, as the contentions and strifes that have centered about the papacy. Of all causes of disunion in the "church", at large, the papacy has been the most productive of schisms, in the "church", the most disgraceful wars among the "Christian" nations, and the most disturbing element of peace to mankind. One may concede the desirability of unity in the church and even the necessity for it; but in view of the history of the papacy and what has grown out of it since the times of the apostles, one must conclude that there has been somewhere a miscarriage of the principle as applying to the production of unity in "Christendom". It has produced the opposite, as witness the schisms of the ninth and sixteenth centuries, and all the sub-divisions and confusion that have come from those major divisions.

I have relied upon what I trust has been a clear, uninterrupted general statement of the human rise of the papacy so far as I have traced it, depending upon that statement's conformity to settled truths of history rather than with minutely following the utterances of so-called "Christian" fathers, the uncertain and often contradictory voices of early traditions, and the sometimes contradictory actions of councils; in the belief that such treatment will be more convincing as proving the merely human origin of the papacy.

TO FULFILL A PROMISE

Here I must suspend the pursuit of the subject for the evening, because I promised you last week that I would consider the important declaration of the Christ respecting the continuance of the Christian religion and church in the promise of the Savior to his apostles—when commissioning them to go into all the world to preach—"Lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world" (Matthew 28); and the words of the Christ to St. Peter, "Upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it" (Matthew 16).

"I AM WITH YOU ALWAYS"

The Roman Catholic version of the New Testament renders the first of these passages: "I will be with you all days, even unto the end of the world"; and their interpretation of the passage is as follows: "The event has proved that the apostles themselves were only to live the ordinary term of man's life; therefore, the commission of preaching and ministering, together with the promise of the divine assistance, regards the successors of the apostles, no less than the apostles themselves. This proves that there must have been an uninterrupted series of such successors of the apostles, in every age since their time; that is to say, successors to their doctrine, to their jurisdiction, to their orders, and to their mission" (Milner's End of Religious Controversy, p. 281).

Let it be observed, in passing, that this claim that the promise of the Christ to be with the apostles "always", or even "all days", must regard "the successors of the apostles no less than the apostles themselves", is purely assumption; it is nowhere so nominated in the bond, that the promise to always be with the apostles regarded their successors; and there is nothing in the necessity of the case that requires such an assumption. The promise of the Christ was to the apostles, and to the close of their mission on earth, and then on to "the end of the world", in such association as he would have with them in heaven and always thereafter. It is incumbent upon Roman protagonists to prove that the Christ has not been, or could not have been, with the apostles since their departure from this earth-life, before they can hold their interpretations proven. Neither the earth-life of man, nor the continuance of the earth itself marks off the limits of the Christ's promises of associations with his apostles and his saints; but they extend into heaven—into eternity; and these promises of the Christ to the eleven apostles was to them and not to their successors. Here suspend thought on this, for the moment, until I remark upon the other passage, and we can then conclude in respect of both of them together.

"THE GATES OF HELL SHALL NOT PREVAIL"

"And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it"—the church founded upon the "rock". Amen! say I. "The gates of hell", which may be held to be "the powers of evil", shall not prevail against the Church of Christ, notwithstanding the conflict which all along has raged in the world of evil against good. From the beginning the world has had the promise that the Seed of the woman [the glorious Christ] should bruise the head of the serpent—wound him in a vital part—destroy him utterly and all his works, and triumph gloriously! And the serpent—the symbol of evil—of Satan, shall only have power to bruise the Seed's heel—wound him in an unvital part, but will wound him, nevertheless. In the light of these truths let us view this promise that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the church founded upon "the rock". The trouble with the Roman Catholic Church's interpretations is that they take too narrow a view of the promises and prophecies of our Lord. To illustrate by brief allusions to great events:

ILLUSTRATIONS

The anti-diluvian world rejected the preaching of righteous Noah, and the floods came and destroyed the wicked. But the gates of hell did not prevail against the purposes of God; they were preserved and perpetuated in Noah and his posterity, and the earth was refilled with men.

"The gospel", we are told, "was preached unto Abraham, but the word preached profited them nothing not being mixed with faith in them that heard it". Then the "law"—meaning the law of Moses—a lesser law than the gospel—"was added" because of this transgression (Galatians 3); and so this kingdom of Israel on a somewhat lower plane than the gospel, was established as God's witness among the nations. And what a failure as a righteous nation and a prosperous one, Israel was! And yet the gates of hell did not prevail against the purposes of Jehovah! A new dispensation under John the Baptist, the Christ, and the apostles rescued those purposes from failure, and carried on.

The new dispensation of the Christ and the apostles, through a combination of circumstances and the perversity of the children of men but faintly understood this great truth of the Christ and of his gospel. False teachers perverted his truths; false prophets usurped powers belonging alone to God's appointed servants and priesthood; damnable heresies led away the saints from the truth; the kingdom of heaven suffered violence and the violent took it by force; corrupt men within the church transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, and—on the part of men—broke "the everlasting covenant"—"the covenant", "sealed with the precious blood of the Christ"—"the blood of the everlasting covenant" (cf. Isaiah 24:1-6 and Hebrews 13:20). What then? Why, even so the gates of hell have not prevailed against the cause of righteousness—the Church of Christ built upon "the rock". Certain men through a succession of generations did not remain steadfast to the truth of God revealed through the Christ and the apostles, and have been prevailed against, and their human institutions made to take the place of the things of God. As foreseen of Paul when those who "hindered" the evil development of the "mystery of iniquity", already working in his day, when they (the apostles) were taken out of the way, then that "Wicked" was revealed, who would oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God sitteth in the Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. But will "the gates of hell prevail" against the church founded upon "the rock"? No; for the very prophecy just quoted tells us that even that "Wicked" who shall usurp the place of God in the world, sitting in the very Temple of God—"the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming ** * * whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders" (II Thessalonians 2).

A FUTURE DISPENSATION PROMISED

St. Peter also felt the same thing when he said to the Jews who had been attracted to himself and to St. John by the incident of the lame man at the gate of Jerusalem being healed; St. Peter explained the appearance and the mission of the Christ to them, related their killing of the Prince of Life: "I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers", said he. "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:17-21).

Here the prediction of a new and final dispensation, and future from the days of St. Peter, is made! A dispensation to the rescue is promised! "Times of refreshing" from the presence of the Lord will come! God will again send Jesus Christ into the world which before was preached unto men! But meantime the heaven must receive and retain Jesus "until the times of the restitution of all things" spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began!

All which means the end is not yet. "Your words have been stout against me saith the Lord", to Ancient Israel. "Yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee? Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts? And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea they that tempt God are even delivered. Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another; and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not" (Malachi 3:13-18). The end is not yet. So now, wait! Wait, until the warfare is finished: And men shall see that the gates of hell have not prevailed against the church founded upon "the rock".

A VISION OF THE WHOLE CHURCH OF GOD: ON EARTH AND IN HEAVEN

Here a Catholic writer may help me. Last week I quoted from one of the Catholic writers a view of the whole church in heaven as well as on earth; the church triumphant as well as militant, with the Christ as the visible head of it—as it will be eventually. I quote him again:

"Our Lord Jesus Christ being the Foundation of foundations (Isaiah 28:16), and Chief Cornerstone, has the fulness of authority over the whole church whether in heaven or on earth, whether present or future, and is the original source of all authority and jurisdiction. * * * * This is but a small portion of the immense flock of Christ, which consists of 'a great multitude which no man could number of all nations and tribes, and peoples, and tongues' (Revelation 7:9); and over the whole of which great multitude, when gathered together in the end of time from all the nations of the world, from all past ages, Jesus, the everlasting Shepherd of our souls, will himself, without the ministry of any representative, visibly preside for ever and ever in heaven" (Bruno, Catholic Belief, pp. 122-123).

Will the gates of hell prevail against the Church of the Christ when so conceived? No indeed; though there may have been times when the powers of evil have prevailed against men, and against institutions and organized forces; times when the kingdom of heaven [on earth], even, may have suffered violence, and the violent have taken it by force; times when the same evil powers have made "war with the saints" and "overcome them"; times when power was given to evil forces "over all kindreds and tongues and nations" (Revelation 13:5-7); times when there have been periods of "falling away" from the truth; and when the Christian religion and church have become lost to the world; yet triumphant—triumphant through gain and loss, through glory and defeat, above the plains of earth where discord rears eternal Babel, the Church of Christ will abide eternally secure and triumphant, above the power of the gates of hell; and so too shall the church on earth be joined to that in heaven; and the Christ shall be with his saints and his apostles—"Lo even to the end of the world", or "all days"—eternally! "I will be with you always"! "The gates of hell shall not prevail". To evil shall not be given a lasting victory.
