B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE X

The Spirit of the Roman Papacy

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: My subject for the evening, developing the general theme of "The 'Falling Away', or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church", is "The Spirit of the Roman Papacy"; and I invite your attention to the following text:

"The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life" (II Corinthians 3:6).

This is generally conceived as applying to things that are good. But it is equally applicable to things that are evil. The disciples of the Christ had the humiliation of seeing their Master rejected by a village of the Samaritans. "Lord", said two of them, "shall we command fire to come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elias did"? And the Master rebuked them and said: "Ye know not what spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them" (St. Luke 11:54-5). And to St. Peter the Master once said, when Peter had reproved him: "Get thee behind me, Satan; thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men" (Matthew 16:23). Peter's spirit on that occasion was an offense to the Christ. Peter knew not "the spirit he was of"; but his spirit was revealing itself nevertheless; and it savoured of the things of men rather than of the things of God. The spirit of things do that—things good or evil. It is the spirit that reveals the life, or nature of the thing. And so this "papacy" may be known by its spirit. Its spirit will manifest its life; and its spirit will enable men to judge whether it be of divine or human origin—i.e. life. "It is the spirit" that determines the nature of things. Let us try the Roman papacy by that rule—the God-given rule.

I think we may thank God for standards; for measuring wands, by which we may found our judgments; and in nothing more so than in the means given by which we may form judgments as to church government and the administration of the affairs of God among men. The Christ himself sets forth some of those standards.

Two of the twelve apostles were ambitious to sit with him in his throne when he should come in his kingdom, the one on his right hand, the other on his left. The other apostles were indignant with the two brethren and murmured. The Master called the apostles about him and said: "Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many" (St. Matthew 20:25-28 and context). "My kingdom", explained the Christ to Pilate, "is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence" (St. John 18:33-36). No, not a kingdom like to the kingdoms of the world; for they rest on force, fines, imprisonments, capital punishments, ultimately on swords and bayonets, "effective government" men call it. But the Christ's kingdom, his government, is "moral government", and moral government only. Its force consists of truth, and the knowledge of it; its procedure is by teaching and witnessing the truth; by persuasion and brotherly kindness and by love unfeigned—moral and spiritual forces these—God's government! The kingdom of heaven! Not like the kingdoms of men.

Fortunately also St. Peter himself has set forth his views of church government, especially the spirit of such government as manifested in his instruction to the elders who were to take "the oversight" of the flock of God—the church. St. Peter's first Epistle is addressed to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, sent from "Babylon", supposed to be "Rome", figuratively referred to; but the tradition is seriously questioned. He pictures these people whom he addresses, as coming unto the Christ, "as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious". "Ye also", he continues, "as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ" (I Peter 2:5).

To others the Christ might be a stone of stumbling, "a rock of offense"—"but ye are a chosen generation", he says, "a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness unto his marvelous light" (Id. ii:9). And now "to the elders" governing among these people—and note the sympathetic touch in the opening verse of the address—"The elders [presbyters] which are among you, I exhort, who am also an elder"; one elder then to other elders! Not much of the world's "mastership", or of "lording it" over others in that, I ween! But you must have the whole brief chapter if you would find the heart of the whole government of the Church of Christ as expounded by St. Peter.

"The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed: Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away. Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time: Casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you. Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen" (I Peter 5).

I need not expatiate upon the excellence, the beauty and glory of all this; it speaks for itself as a system of church government—exhibits the spirit of God's moral government in the world, founded on teaching truth, persuasion, brotherly kindness, love unfeigned. In this, St. Peter's outline of church government, and in the teachings of the Christ noted, we have our standards erected; our measuring wand supplied.

Let us seek out the spirit of the "Roman papacy" to see how it measures up with all this.

Note has been taken already in these discourses of the "moral decline" the church suffered in the early centuries of the "Christian" era. In fact how the decline appeared, and also how false teachers arose even in the Apostolic Church, with prophecies of more false teachers to follow; and greater corruptions to arise (see No. III of these discourses). Also it has been pointed out during periods of toleration for the church and especially in periods of prosperity, interspersing periods of persecution, there was a tendency—and particularly among those who had the rule in the church—a tendency to pride, ambition, contention, longing for worldly fame, for princely estates and courts; a forsaking of the simple duties of the episcopate, and the multiplication of lower offices in order to relieve prelates, and even officers of lower rank, from the duties which had become onerous, that intemperance, licentiousness and the glory of the world might be indulged.

CENTRALIZATION OF POWER IN THE HANDS OF THE BISHOPS

The spirit of the brotherhood of elders above referred to by St. Peter was soon lost to the church. We are assured on the best of authority that during the second and third centuries it was the custom of the bishops to employ the elders as a sort of council; and to call upon the people for their assent in the important matters of church government. In course of time, however, early in the fourth century, respect for the principle of common consent was lost. The people were first altogether excluded from a voice in ecclesiastical affairs; and the next step was to deprive the elders of their former authority (Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, cent. iv, bk. ii, part ii, ch. ii. See also his remarks on the government of the church in cent. ii and iii). Thus power was centralized in the hands of the bishops, which enabled them to control everything at their discretion, and paved the way for those abuses of power which arose.

If, when the Christian religion was still prescribed in the centuries before the fourth, and the office of bishop was attended with danger and scant revenues—if even then it aroused the inordinate ambition of men to possess it, how infinitely more must the episcopal office have become the object of envy, strife and ambition when by the patronage of a Roman emperor [Constantine] it became not only free from danger but endowed with revenues that a prince might envy, and accorded an influence in the palace scarcely second to that granted to the governors of the provinces! Would the bishops then be likely to retain the humility of "the fisherman of Galilee"?

The answer to that question is that if the ambition of rival bishops distracted the church in the second and third centuries [and we are assured by the undoubted voice of history they did] much more did ambitious prelates—patriarchs and metropolitans—of the fourth and fifth centuries disturb its tranquility. They contended about the limits of their respective jurisdiction with all the bitterness of temporal kings seeking an enlargement of their dominions. They made conquests and reprisals upon each other in much the same spirit, and at times were not above resorting to violence to attain their ends.

We may not in a brief address such as I am making here trace step by step the decline of this spirit of church government set up in the doctrine of the Christ and of St. Peter, above quoted, to the despotism of papal Rome, which in the world's midnight of human affairs practically dominated Europe. The best I can do will be to name a few instances that exhibit such decline, such departure in Rome's papacy from the standards of the Christ and of St. Peter, and let you, my hearers, determine the spirit of that papacy, and judge if it savours of divine or of a human spirit, and of a very vicious human spirit.

NOT INDULGING IN PERSECUTION

Here allow me to say, that in making this inquiry, I am not persecuting any church, nor attacking anyone's religion, beyond what the nature of the facts enforce upon me; and that if the nature of the subject develops harsh facts, and deals with the dark and cruel things of human history, and calls for stern judgments, I may not be held responsible for that, I may only be required to set down nothing in malice, and render equal justice to all. Let it be remembered, however, that the Church of Rome presents to the world a line of alleged superior bishops extending from Linus in the first century to the present reigning pontiff of Rome [Pius XI], and claims for this line of men that they have been vicars of Christ, vicegerents of God on earth, bishops of the whole Church of Christ. This line of men, it is claimed, are the successors to the apostle St. Peter—to his doctrine, to his jurisdiction, to his orders, to his mission—infallible in defining officially matters of faith and morals—Very well: We have the right to inquire into this tremendous claim to see if it be true; as also to inquire as to whether or not this line of men has with reasonable uniformity reflected the spirit of the Christ's government established in his church. No one can dispute that right—or duty.

From my earliest reading in ecclesiastical history I have been impressed with the incident culminating in the humiliation of Emperor Henry IV of Germany at the feet of Pope Gregory VII [Hildebrand], early in the eleventh century, as marking off at once the extravagance of the claims of the Roman Church for her popes, and the climax of the papal power over the monarchs of the world. For this reason I give the case here as exhibiting the spirit of the papacy.

SUPREMACY OF THE PAPACY

On his side in the controversy the pope assembled the third Lateran council A.D., 1076. The Emperor Henry was placed under interdict, his subjects absolved from allegiance, and he was deposed from his throne. A series of constitutions, clearly defining the bases of the papal system, was proclaimed by the council to the following effect:

"That the Roman pontiff can alone be called universal [that is, in rule and in authority]; that he alone has a right to depose bishops; that his legates have a right to preside over all bishops in a general council; that he can depose absent prelates; that he alone has a right to use imperial ornaments; that princes are bound to kiss his feet, and his only; that he has a right to depose emperors; that no synod or council summoned without his commission can be called general; that no book can be called canonical without his authority; that his sentence can be annulled by none, but that he may annul the decrees of all; that the Roman Church has been, is, and will continue to be infallible; that whoever dissents from it ceases to be a Catholic Christian, and that subjects may be absolved from their allegiance to wicked princes" (Intellectual Development of Europe, John Wm. Draper, vol. II, p. 18).

The struggle between Pope Hildebrand and Emperor Henry IV, of Germany, was long drawn out and hard; but after many intrigues to draw the Normans over to him the monarch was compelled to submit to the pope. In the depth of winter the emperor crossed the snowy Alps under great hardships to seek absolution from his great adversary. His humiliation at the feet of the pope is described in a note in my old text book on General History designed for colleges, (Anderson's General History, note 3, opposite p. 230). The brief note there is one quoted from Sir John Stephens' Essays on Ecclesiastical Biography:

"It was the fourth day on which he [Henry IV], had borne the humiliating garb of an affected penitent, and in that sordid raiment he drew near on his bare feet to the more than imperial majesty of the church, and prostrated himself, in more than servile deference, before the diminutive and emaciated old man, 'from the terrible glance of whose countenance', we are told, 'the eye of every beholder recoiled as from the lightning'. Hunger, cold, nakedness, and shame, had, for the moment, crushed the gallant spirit of the sufferer. He wept and cried for mercy, again and again renewing his entreaties until he had reached the lowest level of abasement to which his own enfeebled heart or the haughtiness of his great antagonist, could depress him. Then, and not until then, did the pope condescend to revoke the anathema of the Vatican".

In the presence of this incident in the story of the papacy, what think you of its spirit? How well does it manifest or reflect those principles of the Christ we have noted? Or St. Peter's "taking oversight of the flock of God", but "neither as being lords over God's heritage"? "Oh yes"; I shall be told, "but this is but a single case". "I as well as Baronius, Bellarmin, and other Catholic writers", says the Right Rev. John Milner, in his The End of Religious Controversy (p. 232), "have unequivocally admitted that some few of our pontiffs have disgraced themselves by their crimes, and given just cause of scandal to Christendom; but I have remarked," he continues, "that the credit of our cause is not affected by the personal conduct of particular pastors who regularly succeed one another". Such is the position taken by Catholic protagonists now. It is repeated always in controversy by them, with emphasis on the "some few of our popes", etc. Of course the case before us of Gregory VII and Henry IV is not so much a case of morals as it is of pride, ambition and of fierce vindictiveness in the ruler of the church at the height of its power; and no one may deny that it exhibits the "spirit of the papacy" at the height of its splendor and attained ambition over princes of this world; and it marks off a wide departure from the spirit of the Christ and of his "kingdom of heaven", and of St. Peter's spirit of church government. And Gregory VII was a pope, one of the vicars of Christ, God's vicegerent on earth! Was he?

But inasmuch as it will be held that this represents but a single case—though in spirit it can be a number of times duplicated from the line of the popes—let us take a considerable section from that line that we may be free from the plea of "a single case". I propose a section covering a period of say three hundred years. That may give us an opportunity to better judge this line of popes and their departure from the true spirit of the Christ's "kingdom of heaven," and St. Peter's church government; and also their departure from the law of righteousness, which in spite of Roman Catholic pleading that although "some few of their popes have disgraced themselves by their crimes", yet this ought not "to affect their cause"—the cause of the papacy; but in spite of such pleadings, I say, adherence to the law of righteousness ought to be expected and realized in the lives of a line of men who are vicars of Christ, God's vicegerents on earth, infallible determiners of matters of faith and morals when speaking ex cathedra. All right; let us to the examination of our section of the papacy for three hundred years: Of course it will be intensively condensed.

"On the death of Pope Paul I, who had attained the pontificate A.D., 757, the Duke of Nepi compelled some bishops to consecrate Constantine, one of his brothers, as pope; but more legitimate electors subsequently, A.D., 768, choosing Stephen IV, the usurper and his adherents were severely punished; the eyes of Constantine were put out; the tongue of the Bishop Theodorus was amputated, and he was left in a dungeon to expire in the agonies of thirst. The nephews of Pope Adrian seized his successor, Pope Leo III, A.D.,795, in the street, and forcing him into a neighboring church, attempted to put out his eyes and cut out his tongue; at a later period, this pontiff, trying to suppress a conspiracy to depose him, Rome became the scene of rebellion, murder and conflagration. His successor, Stephen V., A.D. 816, was ignominiously driven from the city; his successor, Paschal I, was accused of blinding and murdering two ecclesiastics in the Lateran palace; it was necessary that imperial commissioners should investigate the matter, but the pope died, after having exculpated himself by oath before thirty bishops. John VIII, A.D. 872, unable to resist the Mohammedans, was compelled to pay them tribute; the Bishop of Naples, maintaining a secret alliance with them, received his share of the plunder they collected. Him John excommunicated, nor would he give him absolution unless he would betray the chief Mohammedans and assassinate others himself. There was an ecclesiastical conspiracy to murder the pope; some of the treasurers of the church were seized; and the gate of St. Pancrazia was opened with false keys, to admit the Saracens into the city. Formosus, who had been engaged in these transactions, and excommunicated as a conspirator for the murder of John, was subsequently elected pope, A.D. 891; he was succeeded by Boniface VI, A.D. 896, who had been deposed from the diaconate, and again from the priesthood, for his immoral and lewd life. By Stephen VII, who followed, the dead body of Formosus was taken from the grave, clothed in the papal habiliments, propped up in a chair, tried before a council, and the preposterous and indecent scene completed by cutting off three of the fingers of the corpse and casting it into the Tiber; but Stephen himself was destined to exemplify how low the papacy had fallen; he was thrown into prison and strangled. In the course of five years, from A.D. 896 to A.D. 900, five popes were consecrated. Leo V, who succeeded in A.D. 904, was in less than two months thrown into prison by Christopher, one of his chaplains, who usurped his place, and who, in his turn, was shortly expelled from Rome by Sergius III, who, by the aid of a military force, seized the pontificate, A.D. 905. This man, according to the testimony of the times, lived in criminal intercourse with the celebrated prostitute Theodora, who with her daughters, Marozia and Theodora, also prostitutes, exercised an extraordinary control over him. The love of Theodora was also shared by John X: she gave him first the archbishopric of Ravenna, and then translated him to Rome A.D. 915, as pope. John was not unsuited to the times; he organized a confederacy which perhaps prevented Rome from being captured by the Saracens, and the world was astonished and edified by the appearance of this warlike pontiff at the head of his troops. By the love of Theodora, as was said, he had maintained himself in the papacy for fourteen years; by the intrigues and hatred of her daughter Marozia he was overthrown. She surprised him in the Lateran palace; killed his brother Peter before his face; threw him into prison, where he soon died, smothered, as was asserted, with a pillow. After a short interval Marozia made her own son pope as John XI, A.D. 931. Many affirmed that Pope Sergius was his father, but she herself inclined to attribute him to her husband Alberic, whose brother Guido she subsequently married. Another of her sons, Alberic, so called from his supposed father, jealous of his brother John 100ast him and their mother Marozia into prison. After a time Alberic's son was elected pope, A.D. 956; he assumed the title of John XII, the amorous Marozia thus having given a son and a grandson to the papacy. John was only 19 years old when he thus became the head of Christendom. His reign was characterized by the most shocking immoralities, so that the Emperor Otho I was compelled by the German clergy to interfere. A synod was summoned for his trial in the church of St. Peter, before which it appeared that John had received bribes for the consecration of bishops, that he had ordained one who was but ten years old, and had performed that ceremony over another in a stable; he was charged with incest with one of his father's concubines, and with so many adulteries that the Lateran palace had become a brothel; he put out the eyes of one ecclesiastic and castrated another, both dying in consequence of their injuries; he was given to drunkenness, gambling, and the invocation of Jupiter and Venus. When cited to appear before the council, he sent word that 'he had gone out hunting'; and to the father who remonstrated with him, he threateningly remarked, 'that Judas as well as the other disciples, received from his master the power of binding and loosing, but that as soon as he proved traitor to the common cause, the only power he retained was that of binding his own neck'. Hereupon he was deposed, and Leo VIII elected in his stead, A.D. 963; but subsequently getting the upper hand, he seized his antagonists, cut off the hand of one, the nose, finger, tongue of others. His life was eventually brought to an end by the vengeance of a man whose wife he had seduced.

"After such details it is almost needless to allude to the annals of succeeding popes: to relate that John XIII, was strangled in prison; that Boniface VII, imprisoned Benedict VII, and killed him by starvation; that John XIV was secretly put to death in the dungeons of the Castle of St. Angelo; that the corpse of Boniface was dragged by the populace through the streets. The sentiment of reverence for the sovereign pontiff, nay, even of respect, had become extinct in Rome; throughout Europe the clergy were so shocked at the state of things, that, in their indignation, they began to look with approbation on the intention of the Emperor Otho to take from the Italians their privilege of appointing the successor of St. Peter, and confine it to his own family. But his kinsman, Gregory V, whom he placed on the pontifical throne, was very soon compelled by the Romans to fly; his excommunications and religious thunders were turned into derision by them; they were too well acquainted with the true nature of those terrors; they were living behind the scenes. A terrible punishment awaited the anti-pope John XVI. Otho returned into Italy, seized him, put out his eyes, cut off his nose and tongue, and sent him through the streets mounted on an ass, with his face to the tail and a wine-bladder on his head.

"It seemed impossible that things could become worse; yet Rome had still to see Benedict IX, A.D. 1033, a boy of less than twelve years, raised to the apostolic throne. Of this pontiff, one of his successors, Victor III, declared that his life was so shameful, so foul, so execrable, that he shuddered to describe it. He ruled like a captain of banditti rather than a prelate. The people at last, unable to bear his adulteries, homicides, and abominations any longer, rose against him. In despair of maintaining his position, he put up the papacy to auction. It was bought by a presbyter named John, who became Gregory VI, A.D. 1045.

"More than a thousand years had elapsed since the birth of our Savior, and such was the condition of Rome! Well may the historian shut the annals of those times in disgust; well may the heart of the Christian sink within him at such a catalogue of hideous crimes. Well may he ask, Were these the vicegerents of God upon earth—these who had truly reached that goal beyond which the last effort of human wickedness cannot pass" (Intellectual Development of Europe, Draper, vol. I, pp. 378-382)? And I submit to you this question: Were these men the successors of the apostles with whom Jesus declared his intention to be with "always, even to the end of the world"?

On this quotation—for it is a quotation—I only offer the following reflections: Is it not difficult to reconcile one's mind to the thought that these men who ruled in the Roman Catholic Church, intermittently yet within three centuries, were the vicegerents of God on earth? Or that through them a divine authority and a divine mission has been transmitted to later and happier times? To do so one would be under the necessity of maintaining that no amount of immorality, however infamous, can possibly disqualify men from acting as God's representatives. And such a position would be contrary to all the evidence of scripture, as well as revolting to sound reason.

THE WHY OF A QUOTATION

On the matter of the above review of the papacy being a quotation: I preferred to use a quotation in making the review in order to free it from several otherwise objections. It might be thought that if made by myself it would be prejudiced by my personal views; and, frankly, had I drawn the indictment of the line of popes from the materials—the facts under my hand—it would have been much more severe, for several important and damning incidents and circumstances are omitted in the period of time covered. But I preferred to quote it, and let it stand as it is, for in all conscience it is severe enough; and I am sure it may not be set aside as it stands, by a condescending gesture of admission to the effect that the crimes of "some few popes" ought not to affect the credit of the cause of the Roman papacy. The stern voice of God delivered by his servant St. John—and as directed by the revelation of God in him, and after this line of popes had been, as is supposed, commenced at Rome—the stern voice of God said to the church of Ephesus—the church founded by St. Paul—"I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love. Remember therefore from where thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come unto thee quickly and will remove thy candlestick out of his place" (Revelation 2:1-5). That is, destroy the church at Ephesus, it can have no other meaning, for these "candlesticks" of the respective churches are explained to represent "the churches" (Revelation 1:20). To the church at Laodicea, under a like commission and like circumstances, and at the same time, St. John was commanded to write: "I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth" (Revelation 3:15, 16). In the case of Ephesus, which had "left her first love"—unless she repented God would remove her candlestick, i. e., destroy her; in the case of the church at Laodicea, because she was "neither cold nor hot", God would—unless she, too, repented—God would spue her out of his mouth, i. e., contemptuously reject her! But these popes, this line of popes in which such ungodly wretches appeared during three hundred years of the papacy, and exercised the functions of a sacred office—this mass of putrid corruption—God is expected to endure without rejection; and we are asked to believe that the "crimes of a few popes" will not discredit the cause of the papacy! But may the "few popes" be allowed as to the section of this period of three hundred years?

AUTHORSHIP OF THE QUOTATION

The quotation I have used for this description of popedom through three hundred years is not from Fox's Martyrs, nor even from Dowling's History of Romanism, nor from Ranke's History of the Popes, nor from any "fulminated lies" of Protestants. It is from one of the most masterly and scholarly works (2 vols.) produced by American scholarship, The Intellectual Development of Europe. The author is a noted teacher in the higher institutions of our country, Professor of Chemistry in the University of New York, author of a Treatise on Human Physiology, Civil Policy of America, History of the Civil War, etc.—John William Draper, M.D. LL. D. His statement of the facts may not be contested; it is made not from malice: it is written in sorrow rather than in anger, as is to be seen in his introduction to it, at page 378, vol. I of his works.

There is one other item of interest in relation to the succession in this line of popes important for me to place in the record as affecting the integrity of the line of these "universal bishops" and their alleged unbroken succession. The tabulated statement following is made up from Dr. Lewis Ellies Du Pin's work, a Catholic writer of 1724. The tabulated information covers the period from 1261 to 1304-43 years.

"1261. Alexander IV [pope] dies June 24. The holy See vacant 3 months and 3 days. The cardinals who proceeded to the election, not being able to pitch on one among themselves, chose Francis, patriarch of Jerusalem, who takes upon him the name of Urban IV, and is consecrated Sept. 4.

(The italics in the above are mine.)

These are not the only lapses and variations in the line of elected popes, but mention of these will answer my present purpose. I merely wanted to place the fact in the record in order to submit to you the question: May these lapses be sufficiently accounted for by saying that while the "Vacancies may have occurred, the office itself continued" (!) as Roman Catholic advocates contend?
