B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE XI

How Has Protestantism Affected the Christian Religion and Church

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

"And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it" (Amos 8:11, 12).

* * * * *

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: On entering upon the inquiry proposed in the sub-title of my main theme, "The 'Falling Away' ", I must remind you, but more circumstantially, of the respective attitudes of both Roman Catholic and Protestant churches respecting the Christian religion and church.

In the very first of this series of discourses, I defined the relationships of the larger divisions of Christendom, that we now know as the Roman Catholic Church, and the group of Protestant churches, to Christianity. We then saw that the Roman Church claimed to be the immediate successor and continuation of the church founded by the Christ and his apostles; and that, without the intermission of a single day, has continued to be that church until the present time. That while there may have been a "few wicked popes"—supreme heads of the church—corrupt bishops, unfaithful priests, and even periods of great depression of righteousness and holiness in the church, yet, in spite of all these untoward circumstances, the church has remained and survived in the earth in the full vigor of her spiritual life and power, being God's instrumentality for the instruction and guidance of his children in matters pertaining to the salvation of their souls.

That there have been periods of corruption in the Roman Catholic Church even her protagonists concede. The late Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore graciously admits that, "it cannot be denied that corruption of morals prevailed in the sixteenth century [the period of Protestant 'Reformation'] to such an extent as to call for a sweeping reformation, and that laxity of discipline reached even the sanctuary". Meaning by that, as I understand him, the Roman papacy (Faith of our Fathers, p. 47, 11th edition, 1892). But if there is to be a "sweeping reformation" of morals effected in the church, the cardinal holds, with all Catholic authorities, that it should be by "a force within the church", and "not outside of it". But this as to the need only of a "moral reformation". As for reforming the church in the matter of doctrine, the cardinal holds that "the Catholic Church cannot be reformed"; and continues, "the church is the work of an Incarnate God. Like all God's works, it is perfect. It is, therefore, incapable of reform. Is it not the height of presumption for men to attempt to improve upon the work of God? Is it not ridiculous for the Luthers, the Calvins, the Knoxes, and the Henries, and a thousand lesser lights, to be offering their amendments to the constitution of the church, as if it were a human institution" (Faith of Our Fathers, Gibbons, p. 94)?

That outburst of indignant statement and inquiry, let me remark, in passing, is true, but only true, when it applies strictly to truths that God has revealed and ordained for man; but when asserted as to things that have passed into the hands of men, and men have perverted the things which God has revealed, and turned away from them, as men in various ages have turned away from the revealed word and law of God, as in the patriarchal age of our world, and under the Mosaic dispensation; and as the early Christian Church turned from revealed truth and even denied the continuance of revelation to that church—then the perverted or altered thing may not be shielded by such an outburst of indignant protest. Should my assertion here by some be called "a begging of the question", the answer is that I have as much right "to beg the question" as the cardinal has, or that the Roman Catholic Church has; and that is but what both the cardinal and the church do when in face of reason and right interpretation of scripture they but revamp their postulate that Peter 1s the "rock" on which the Christ promised to found his church, and that it should never fail. Listen to the following passage in which both by statement and argument Cardinal Gibbons sets forth the Roman Catholic charge against the Protestant Reformers, affirms the supposedly "impregnable position" of his own church, and the dire consequences that result to the Christian religion and church if Rome's dictum be not assented to. Incidentally, too, that "humility" which is so characteristic of the Roman Church, on which she prides herself, and which peeps between the cardinal's lines, as in all of Rome's controversial writings, is clearly manifest.

"The Reformers of the sixteenth century affirm that the church did fall into error; that the gates of hell did prevail against her; that from the sixth to the sixteenth century she was a sink of iniquity. The Book of Homilies of the Church of England says that the church 'lay buried in damnable idolatry for eight hundred years and more'. The personal veracity of our Savior and of the Reformers is here at issue, for our Lord makes a statement which they contradict. Who is to be believed, Jesus or Reformers?

"If the prediction of our Savior about the preservation of his church from error be false, then Jesus Christ is not God, since God cannot lie. He is not even a prophet, since he predicted falsehood. Nay, he is an impostor, and all Christianity is a miserable failure and a huge deception, since it rests on a false prophet.

"But if Jesus predicted the truth when he declared that the gates of hell should not prevail against his church—and who dare deny it?—then the church never has, and never could have fallen from the truth; then the Catholic Church is infallible, for she alone claims that prerogative, and she is the only church that is acknowledged to have existed from the beginning" (Faith of Our Fathers, Gibbons, pp. 86-7).

Whatever is added to that can only be in the way of emphasis: but this passage is worthy of a place beside it: "By * * * right ordination, legitimate mission, and pure apostolic doctrine, the Catholic Church of today is the continuation of the church founded by Jesus Christ and the apostles; forms with it but one living identical body, which carries on and transmits the mission which the apostles had from Christ, and is the only true abiding messenger sent by Christ for the guidance of men to eternal salvation" (Catholic Belief, Bruno, p. 162).

Such the position then of the Roman Catholic Church.

On the other hand the Protestant churches, while regarding the Christian religion and church as having been revealed by the Christ and given unto men for their salvation, yet there have arisen great and serious errors in that church by which the things of God have been perverted, and the church corrupted. So much so that Luther, the German Reformer, said of himself, "At first I stood alone!" Calvin, the Swiss and French Reformer, said: "The first Protestants were obliged to break off from the whole world"! And, as we have seen by brief reference to it in the quotation from Cardinal Gibbons, the great English Episcopal Church claimed that the church "lay buried in damnable idolatry for eight hundred years and more". This quotation, however, deserves a fuller setting forth than the Cardinal gives it, as it is an important monument in the controversy of Christendom as to the persistence of the Christian religion and church among men, and I shall quote it at large in the proper place.

Other divisions of the great sixteenth century "Reformation" claimed much for its achievements. Dr. J. H. Merle D' Aubigne, President of the Theological School of Geneva, in his work on The History of the Reformation, 1846, in the Preface says of the "Reformation":

IMPORTANCE OF THE "REFORMATION'

"Primitive Christianity and the Reformation are the two greatest revolutions in history. They were not limited to one nation only, as were the various political movements that history records; but their influence extended over many, and their effects are destined to be felt to the utmost limits of the world. Primitive Christianity and the Reformation are one and the same revolution, brought about at different epochs and under different circumstances. Although not alike in their secondary features, they are identical in their primary and chief characteristics. One is a repetition of the other. The former put an end to the old world; the latter began the new: between them lie the Middle Ages" (History of the Reformation, 1846, D'Aubigne, Preface, pp. 1, 2).

THE DOCTRINAL FEATURE OF THE "REFORMATION"

Later he remarks—and speaking now doctrinally: "The opposition between the true and false doctrine undoubtedly cannot be entirely summed up in the question of salvation by faith or by works. Nevertheless it is its most striking characteristic. But further, salvation considered as coming from man [the alleged position of Rome], is the creative principle of error and abuse. The excesses produced by this fundamental error led to the Reformation; and by the profession of the contrary principle [i.e., salvation of God and by his grace—the Reformers' position], it was carried out. This feature should therefore be very prominent in an introduction to the history of that reform" (Id., p. 14).

After drawing an awful indictment against the Church of Rome as responsible for existing abuses in centuries preceding the "Reformation", our author then remarks: "This picture undoubtedly demonstrates the corruption of the church, and the necessity for a Reformation. Such was our design in writing this sketch. The vital doctrines of Christianity had almost entirely disappeared, and with them the life and light that constitute the essence of the religion of God. The material strength of the church was gone. It lay an exhausted, enfeebled, and almost a lifeless body, extended over that part of the world which the Roman empire had occupied" (Id., p. 20).

To "reform" these conditions and bring the church from its apostate, and semi-apostate condition; restore the purity of Christian doctrine and the ordinances of the gospel; and re-establish within the church the divine authority that in its administration will show forth the spirit of the Christ's "kingdom of heaven", or the government of the church as described by St. Peter—this the task of the "Reformation"! Did that movement accomplish the end proposed?

WHERE WAS THE TRUE CHURCH BEFORE THE PROTESTANT "REFORMATION"

Here is where the issue is joined; and the Protestant movement is challenged by the question of Rome: "Where was the true church before the Protestant 'Reformation' "? Needless to say this question has been an embarrassment to Protestant writers: Where indeed was the true church before the Protestant movement began? If Protestants answer that the true church became extinct; that a universal and complete apostasy had taken place—as the quotation from the Church of England on the idolatry of the whole world would seem to indicate—then they would be open to this situation: (1) If there has been a complete and universal apostasy, what was there left for Protestants to "reform"? (2) And if the apostasy was complete and universal how could Christianity and the true church be re-established except by a New Dispensation of divine authority? Giving a new commission to re-establish the Christian religion and church? Has such a New Dispensation been given? All Protestantism would answer in the negative; for they, as well as Roman Catholics, cut themselves off from such a possible solution of the problem by declaring that revelation had ceased with the apostolic age, and has never been renewed, and will not be renewed. That "the faith once for all" has been delivered to the saints.

If Protestants, answering the question submitted by Rome, shall say: the church existed in the several centuries previous to the "Reformation" throughout the various divisions and fragments of Christendom, "being the aggregate of all the churches of Christendom, all of which belong to it precisely so far as they maintain the original faith, morals, worship and principles established by the authority of the inspired apostles"—and one great division of Christendom does so answer—the Church of England (End of Controversy Controverted, by John H. Hopkins, DD. LL. D., Bishop of Vermont, vol. I, p. 433); and if such is to be the accepted answer by the Protestants at large to the question proposed, [and I can conceive no other answer from their position], then it would be sufficient to say that such a "church" destroys the church idea of the New Testament. It is not and could not be the "Church of the Christ" and of the apostles; and if not the Church of the Christ and of the apostles, it is inadequate as an answer, and is outside the realm of "Christian" principle, doctrine, or reality. It is not a church, but an unorganized crowd; with center nowhere; and circumference everywhere; it is unofficered; without defined laws; it is responsible to no one, but each man standeth unto himself alone; it is not only undisciplined, but incapable of discipline. As well say no church exists as to say that "the church" is such a mere crowd. This is no such church as the Christ had in mind when he said—referring to the settlement of difficulties among brethren: If one offended will not hear those who seek reconciliation, "then tell it to the church; but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. And verily I say unto you [continued the Savior]: Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matthew 18:17, 18). That to the church! That is, the judgments of the church shall stand.

Also this "crowd" which formed "the church before the Reformation", is not the church of God which St. Paul described to the Ephesians when he said that Jesus had established his church: "and that he gave some apostles; and some prophets; and some evangelists; and some pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, * * * unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ: That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head even Christ [not the pope, by the way]: From whom the whole body, fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love" (Ephesians 4:11-16).

Or, for a second but like description, when the same apostle said to the Corinthians: "Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues" (I Corinthians 12:27, 28). And previously in the same chapter he had likened the church unto the body of a man; and as the body of man is "not one member but many"; so also is the body of Christ, the church. And the foot was forbidden to say because I am not the head therefore I am not of the body. "But now hath God set the members everyone of them in the body as it hath pleased him", and though there be "many members, yet are they but one body"; and the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; neither the head to the feet, I have no need of thee; all the members are declared necessary and all are to be actuated by one sympathetic spirit, binding all in union and oneness. Such is the Church of Christ, and it is not a mere crowd, such as Protestants describe the church to be before Protestant churches came into existence.

Yet Protestants dare not say that the church was totally destroyed previous to the "Reformation"; because that, as we have seen, would involve them in the question of considering the necescity of a Restoration of the Christian religion and church by revelation; by a new commission from God to effect such a restoration of that which men had lost through their apostasy from the Christ and his church. This, of course, would be altogether at variance with the principle in which Protestants are at one with Roman Catholics on the matter of once for all denying further revelation from God after the apostolic age.

For this reason Protestants have always exhibited a morbid fear in asserting the absolute apostasy of the pre-Protestant times; for in reproaching too severely the alleged "mother church", the Roman Catholic Church, they would reproach themselves also. Yet a church must have survived the Roman apostasy, else there would be no church to reform; and hence the task of Protestantism to eat their cake yet have it! They must from their position assume the existence of a church through the ages following the Apostolic Church, and up to the Protestant movement of the sixteenth century; yet when they describe that church it turns out to be no church.

That Protestants are sensitive on this question appears in the attitude of that great division of Protestantism known as the Episcopal Church of England and her branches in the United States and the British commonwealths, one time British provinces. And here I make use of that fuller statement I promised from the Book of Homilies on "The Perils of Idolatry": After making a statement as to the setting up of images by the church [led therein by the Roman Church], then the Homily:

"And thus you see, how from having of images privately, it came to public setting of them up in churches and temples, although without harm at the first, as was then of some wise and learned men judged; and from simple having them there, it came at the last to worshiping of them; first, by the rude people, who specially (as the scripture teacheth) are in danger of superstition and idolatry, and afterwards by the bishops, the learned, and by the whole clergy. So that laity and clergy, learned and unlearned, all ages, sects, and degrees of men, women and children of whole christendom (an horrible and most dreadful thing to think) have been at once drowned in abominable idolatry, of all other vices most detested of God, and most damnable to man, and that by the space of eight hundred years or more. And to this end is come that beginning of setting up of images in churches, then judged harmless, in experience proved not only harmful, but exitious and pestilent, and to the destruction and subversion of all good religion universally" (Book of Homilies of the Church of England, American edition, 1855, part iii, p. 216).

The late F. S. Spalding, Episcopal [Church of England] bishop of Salt Lake, thought that my use of this quotation in some of my writings affirmed too broad a condition of apostasy based upon this passage, and wrote me that this statement from the Homily should be restricted "to one definite case of superstition and religion, and does not involve the admission of the break in continuity [break in true church continuity] which you [myself] quote to prove". To which I answered at the time that while respecting his viewpoint, if what the Homily above quoted said about idolatry and Christianity was true—"after such a condition as to idolatry had prevailed universally, and 'for the space of eight hundred years and more', I am doubtful if any valid orders or true Church of Christ can survive such a wreck of religion—or, as the Homily puts it, 'the destruction and subversion of all good religion universally' " (See for complete copy of correspondence the writer's New Witnesses for God, 1911 edition, vol. I, pp. 132-6).

Undoubtedly, however, this position taken by Bishop Spalding is the position of the whole Episcopal Church with reference to this passage on idolatry; for the bishop quoted me another part of the Homily, "Canon 3 of the Canons of 1603, where is printed in the same volume with the Homilies", the following:

"III. The Church of England, a true and Apostolical Church: Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Church of England, by law established under the king's majesty, is not a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the apostles; let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the archbishop, after his repentance, and public revocation of this his wicked error" (New Witnesses for God, vol. I, p. 134, 1911 edition).

So tenacious is this great division of Protestants for the survival of a true Christian Church through her parliament-established organization. Throughout Protestantism one may say a like willingness obtains to hold that while the Protestant "Reformation" was necessary, there existed, nevertheless, in some form or other a true Church of Christ in those corrupted ages through which the world had passed from the early Christian centuries to the Protestant "Reformation"; else they would come to the necessity not of a "reform of religion", but a "Restoration" of both religion and church by a revelation from God, and a divine commission to reestablish that which was lost. As stated by one Church of England writer: "Our Reformers, for the most part, held that the pope was anti-Christ, sitting in the Temple of God, and usurping to himself a false, impious, and most dangerous authority; but they never denied that it was the Temple of God, that is to say, a true church, in which he was sitting, nor did they ever question, that by reason of the truth which remained from the beginning in that church, there had always been more or less of faithful Christians saved. * * * The original creeds and the early councils were there, only overridden by modern councils of no real authority. The succession of the apostolic episcopate was there, though sadly stained, yet genuine. The Church of England had become united with the Church of Rome since the sixth century, and had gone hand in hand with nearly all her innovations, but now [i.e., at the time of the 'Reformation'] awakened to the knowledge of the truth, she sought to return to her primitive purity of faith and practice, taking the same scriptures and the early fathers for her guide, and changing nothing of her previous faith except what she knew now to be a corrupt innovation" (End of Controversy Controverted, Bishop John H. Hopkins, vol. I, pp. 314-315).

Another eminent bishop of this same church, answering Rome's question, "Where was the Protestant religion before Luther", said: "It was just where it is now; only then it was corrupted with many sinful errors from which it is now reformed" (Dr. Porteus quoted by Bishop John Milner, Catholic, in his End of Religious Controversy, p. 277). Of course Roman Catholic authorities hold such answers to be mere subterfuges, and that the real truth is that "Protestancy had no existence at all before the sixteenth century" (Id.); and also that the true church existed in union with the See of Rome, and that Protestants were in revolt and apostasy from that church.

The position of the Episcopal Church is further illustrated by one of her bishops: "It must be quite obvious", said he, "that even though the church becomes corrupted by the introduction of errors and superstitions, fraud and despotism, yet she does not fail so long as the principles of the gospel hold a place in her professed system". Further the controversalists ask: "Does the fountain of water fail when it becomes impure from some foreign intermixture? Does language fail when it becomes corrupted by strange idioms"? This author holds that even Rome has been preserved a true national church, though not the universal church. Quoting: "The Church of Rome has kept those principles still [i.e., alleged essential principles of the gospel], notwithstanding her adoption of so many perilous and monstrous innovations. And for that very reason it was that the English Reformers did not propose to establish a new church, but only to cut off the novel corruptions, and thus restore the old church to her primitive purity" (End of Controversy Controverted, Bishop Hopkins, pp. 424-425). And further, "as to all the churches", this same writer holds: "And certainly, in so far as the faith of the apostles remains professed in the creeds of all the churches, notwithstanding their dissensions in other matters, and that pure and scriptural faith is received into the heart, and manifested in the life, there is a real unity and a real catholicity, which the subtlety of Satan has indeed disturbed and troubled, and yet not been permitted to destroy" (Id., p. 423).

This may be said to be the position of all the "Reformed" churches, both those established directly by the "Reformation" of the 16th century, and those churches which have come into existence by subdivisions from those major divisions, into an ever increasing number of "isms" and "churches" to suit man's "capricious whim".

Of course all this is open to the question: Is it true that the Church of Christ has survived and is expressed in this multitudinous, conglomerous and heterogeneous aggregation of conflicting sects, "isms", and alleged "churches"? To ask the question gives also the answer; for such a question when measured by the standards of the New Testament descriptions of the Church of the Christ and of the apostles, as we have seen, is revolting to reason and stands condemned as soon as stated.

What the "Reformers" did in the matter of their attempted reestablishment of the Christian religion and the Christian Church, was to link up their revolt from Rome in religious matters with the political interests of the dukes, princes, and kings of Europe, who were also weary of the restraints and tyranny of papal Rome; and accepted all who joined in the revolt—though not in religious agreement with each other—and recast religious faiths under revamped creeds, and established in the main national churches chiefly under episcopal forms. Since this main movement the sub-division into an ever increasing number of conflicting sects, "Christendom" has continued, resulting in the present-day confusion and laxity of all religion and its authority in the life of so-called "Christian" nations.

RECAPITULATION

And now let us, in a way, recapitulate: First stands out gloriously the fact that the Christ and his apostles taught true religion, gave the true conception and revelation of God through Jesus Christ; taught the true relationship of man of God; taught the need of a world's redemption and the need of man's personal salvation from the two great disasters that meet him in his life's experience: (1) physical death; and (2) spiritual death, or sin, and its consequences. Christ is offered as the means of salvation from both these evils through providing resurrection from physical death; and salvation from spiritual death or state of sin, by restoration of the human soul to union with, and fellowship with God. To accomplish these two supreme purposes of the Gospel, the Christ and his apostles founded a church to teach the truth and administer the ordinances of the gospel which led to man's salvation in this two fold manner. But from a combination of forces within and without the church thus founded, as predicted by Isaiah—and the word of God through him may not fail of fulfilment—men have "transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant, therefore hath the curse devoured the earth and the inhabitants thereof are left desolate", and even future judgments are pronounced against them in this prediction (Isaiah 24:1-6).

Now, where lies responsibility for this apostate condition? With those, of course, who brought it about:

With those who in the early ages of Christendom—the early Christian centuries—brought in damnable heresies by reason of which the way of truth was evil spoken of—even denying the Lord who bought them:

With those who turned to false teachers having itching ears, who turned their ears from the truth and turned them unto fables;

With the false teachers—"the grievous wolves" of St. Paul—men who arose of themselves "speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them";

With those who usurped authority and taught for doctrine the commandments of men;

With those who abandoned the plain doctrine of God revealed in Jesus Christ, who was God manifested in the flesh (I Timothy 3:16), and followed after and formulated into subsequent creeds the Grecian philosophical conceptions of God, rather than the revelations of God through and in Jesus Christ;

With those who departed from continuous church revelation from God as the "rock" on which God founded his church, and the means of perfecting the church and maintaining that perfection, and an infallible headship, and leadership of the church, the only way a perfect church and an infallible leadership could be maintained;

With those who substituted for a rule of apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, inspired teachers—a ministry supported by gifts of healing, inspirations of the Holy Ghost, looking to the "working of the ministry" for the "perfecting of the saints", until all come to the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ (I Corinthians 12; Eph. iv:8-17).

Those are responsible for the apostate condition of Christendom, who, for this inspired Church of the Christ, substituted a reign of bishops, with one supreme over-lord "bishop", following the lines of the government of an earthly empire—these are responsible for the shift that took place from the church of the living God to the more than imperial Church of Rome which usurped the Temple of God and exalted itself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, and unto whom power was given "over all kindreds and tongues and nations".

STATUS OF THE WORLD'S CHURCHES—I. THE GREEK CHURCH

In this general usurpation and apostasy the Greek Church [or the churches of the east] participated, for they were in union with this church of the western part of the Roman empire, the so-called Roman Catholic Church, until the middle of the ninth century; when they by formal act of excommunication of the western churches, separated from them; but they have made no such changes in doctrine or in church organization since then that has brought back to them the pure Gospel of Jesus Christ, or the Church of the Apostles.

II. THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND

The Church of England, by her own claim, walked with the general church of the first six centuries, thence became united with the Church of Rome, and went "hand in hand with nearly all her innovations", until the period of the "Reformation"; when again, according to her own representations, "she awakened to the knowledge of the truth and she sought to return to her primitive purity of faith and practice. * * * Of course, she only had to keep the Bible [as she claims] which she had from the beginning; the true faith, which she had from the beginning; the apostolic orders, which she had from the beginning. None of these things had the Church of England received from Rome, and what Rome had not given, it would be strange, indeed, if Rome could take away" (The End of Controversy Controverted, John H. Hopkins, Bishop of Vermont, 1854). I use this statement for the Church of England's case because of its brevity and its strength. I have seen that case nowhere else better stated. But it states too much for the Church of England's welfare. The six centuries of the Christian era—five centuries following the close of the Apostolic Church named above, bring her—if she can leap backward over a thousand years so—into that period when most of the great events of apostasy from the Apostolic Church took place; the substitution of the Greek philosophy respecting the being and kind of being God is, for the New Testament revelation of God through Jesus Christ, and which she still retains in her parliament-authorized Articles of Religion; the departure from the doctrine of continuous revelation to the church, the "rock" on which Christ promised to found his church and preserve it; the substitution of the church of the Roman episcopate, with her over-lordship bishop—the pope, for the church of the New Testament, and then the confessed union with Rome in "nearly all her innovations" for a period of a thousand years! All this so unites the Church of England with the universal "falling away" movement, that there is nothing that distinguishes her from the Church of Rome's apostasy, since in the so-called "Reformation" nothing has been done by her to bring her back to the religion of the Christ or the Apostolic Church.

III. THE REFORMED CHURCHES OF NORTHERN EUROPE AND AMERICA

For the continental "Reformed" churches, and those subdivisions growing out of the "Reformation" in the nations of northern Europe; whether forming episcopal systems of government, or presbyterian forms based upon equality of alleged Christian ministers, presbyters or elders, and functioning in church government through presbyters, synods and general assemblies; or found in congregational or other independent forms of government; and however varied in their doctrines, accepting the Calvinistic theology or the Arminianistic theology, or modifications of these two general Protestant schools of theology—of all these, mere outgrowth broods of the 16th century "Reformation"—of all these, it is enough to say, and I do it respectfully, and with profound regard for everybody's feelings, that these movements and the establishment of their varied schools of thought and their churches, and however well intentioned, earnest, sincere or talented their founders may be—they have not brought back into existence the primitive church and religion—the gospel of Jesus Christ; nor the Apostolic Church as seen to exist in the New Testament. Let me remark again that I do not say this offensively, but I do say it; for necessity is laid upon me. And it only requires you, my hearers, to compare anyone or all of these systems with New Testament standards to convince you that what I say is true.

And now my text at the head of this discourse:

"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the words of the Lord:

"And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it" (Amos 8:11-12).

This suitably refers to such a period as I have reviewed tonight—that long period from the existence of the Apostolic Church to the period of the so-called Protestant "Reformation". A period of fifteen hundred years! In which a famine for the word of God existed; a period when men wandered from sea to sea, and ran to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and found it not. How pitiful the picture of it! Will it always be so? Or will such a condition end? Let us hope that it will end—renew thy rainbow, God!
