B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE XII

The True Values of the 16th Century "Reformation"

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I call your attention to the following text of scripture, and to the two brief historical statements presented:

"Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up:

"Beat your plowshares into swords and your pruninghooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong" (Joel 3:9, 10).

The text I read from Joel is the most suitable I can find to represent the spirit of the period to be considered tonight; and constitutes the most vivid challenge to the Gentile forces that are to be engaged.

HISTORICAL STATEMENTS

I. GIBBON: "The Church of Rome defended by violence the empire which she had acquired by fraud; a system of peace and benevolence was soon disgraced by proscriptions, wars, massacres, and the institution of the holy office. And as the Reformers were animated by the love of civil as well as of religious freedom, the Catholic princes connected their own interest with that of the clergy, and enforced by fue and the sword the terrors of spiritual censures. In the Netherlands alone more than one hundred thousand of the subjects of Charles V are said to have suffered by the hand of the executioner; and the extraordinary number is attested by Grotius. [With this Hume agrees. History of England, vol. III, p. 562, Harper & Bros. edition 1879.] * * * If we are obliged to submit our belief to the authority of Grotius, it must be allowed that the number of Protestants who were executed in a single province and a single reign, far exceeded that of the primitive martyrs in the space of three centuries and of the Roman empire" (Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. II, p. 285).

II. BOSSUET: "* * * So little did an assassination disturb their [the leading Protestants'] conscience, provided religion were its motive * * *".

"There is no * * * question whether or not Christian princes have a right to use the sword against their subjects, enemies to sound doctrine and to the church; the Protestants being agreed with us [the Catholics] in this point. * * * Especially against those who teach new doctrine. * * * Calvinist writers upbraid the Roman Church on this subject with the cruelty of her doctrine, but subscribe to it in the main. * * * In a word, the right is certain, but moderation is not less necessary" (James Benign Bossuet, French Catholic writer and historian, Catholic Bishop of Meaux, France. The above is from History of the Protestant Variations, vol. II, bk. x, pp. 36-38).

Of the statements of Gibbon and Bossuet, I have only this to say at present. It was under these principles and policies that both Catholics and Protestants disgraced their cause; and deluged Europe with blood in the period of the so-called "Reformation"; and "both Catholics and Protestants", says Bossuet, "agreed on the question of punishing heretics" (Id., p. 371).

We have now reached the point of development of our subject "The 'Falling Away' " when we are to seek the true values of the movement known as the "Reformation of the 16th Century". From my discussion of the subject last Sunday evening you will remember the movement cannot be regarded as a "religious Reformation", such, at any rate, as brought back and re-established the primitive Christian religion and church. And yet it must have achieved something of immense importance in human affairs, else surely it would not be given such importance and held in such esteem by so many thoughtful and earnest men—amounting, all told, to millions—and be so placed by them as to be regarded as an event second in importance only to the introduction of Christianity itself. This argues that the movement must be of some high value to humanity. To find that real value is the task of the evening. Also I may say that consideration of it is necessary to that chain of events that enter into my main theme.

To ascertain this value of the "Reformation", it becomes necessary to get the background of it, that we may know in a general way, at least, the conditions out of which the "Reformation" moved—what produced it.

FEUDAL LAND TENURE SYSTEM AND SERVICE

Foremost in that background is the ancient land tenure system that obtained in Europe in the mid-centuries of our era. According to feudal principles, all the land of a country belonged to the king, as sovereign, feudal lord. Out of this land the king granted portions to his subjects, on condition of their paying him homage and fealty, and rendering him active military service a certain number of days in every year. The estates the king granted to his more immediate and distinguished followers, whom he called his barons—were styled "baronies", and were of large extent; the barons in their turn made undergrants to their own retainers, on similar conditions to those imposed upon themselves by the king. The relation between landlord and tenant, though at first merely lifelong, soon came to be regarded as hereditary, the heir becoming entitled on the death of the tenant to occupy his land upon the same terms (Smith's English Institute, pp. 8, 9). This order of things established a powerful landed aristocracy on the one hand, and a peasant tenantry on the other, whose vassalage was but little removed from absolute slavery.

THE CRUSADES

That movement known as the "crusades" and the development of a commercial class, living chiefly in the cities, in time wrought the destruction of feudalism. The "crusades" were religious wars carried on in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, between the Christian nations of the West and the Mohammedans of the East. It has for ages been looked upon as an act of piety to make a pilgrimage to Palestine and visit the various places hallowed by the presence of Messiah during his earthly career, especially his sepulchre at Jerusalem. These Christian pilgrims had been respected by the Saracens for centuries; but when the Seljuk Turks captured Jerusalem, towards the close of the eleventh century, the Christians met with insult and cruelty. The western nations, under the fervent preaching of "Peter the Hermit", a native of France, who had witnessed the atrocities practiced upon Christians in the Holy Land, were lashed into a fury of resentment against the Turks. Pope Urban II, took up the cause, and advocated wresting the Holy Land from the dominion of the infidels. Europe responded, "God wills it", and preparations were made for the "holy war".

To raise the money necessary to equip and transport their soldiers to the distant East, the barons had to sell their lands, which had the effect of breaking down to a very great extent the feudal system of land tenure, and with it the obligations that it imposed. The direct result of this was to enlarge the liberties of the people. For the same purpose—to raise money for carrying on the holy wars in the East—kings granted to the towns political privileges, a circumstance which also contributed vastly to the progress of popular liberty.

EUROPE'S AWAKENING FROM THE AGE OF DARKNESS

I have already spoken of the world's age of darkness, usually regarded as extending from the close of the tenth to the opening of the sixteenth century. That was the midnight period of our world truly. The papal power was generally supreme and ruled the nations with an iron hand. We saw an exhibition of this in the cited case of Henry IV of Germany and Pope Gregory VII, in the eleventh century (in No. X of this series of discourses). The controversy between popes and kings in the period of the dark ages was varying in success; now on the one side and now on the other, but with the successes chiefly on the side of the Roman pontiffs. By the opening of the sixteenth century, however, and this by the operation of forces presently to be noted, many of the temporal kings and princes of Europe—especially of northern Europe—were jealous of the power exercised within their dominions by the Roman pontiffs, as it lowered the dignity of their own position. They were tired, moreover, of the assumed right of the pope to enter their dominions, and, under one pretext or another, tax their subjects and thus not only impoverish the people, but reduce the revenue of the temporal rulers. It will be found, therefore, that the jealousy, ambition and interest of these princes, and not so much a desire to establish "pure religion", made them factors in the great "Reformation" (End of Religious Controversy, Milner, Catholic, p. 105 and note).

THE REVIVAL OF LEARNING

In the latter part of the fifteenth century occurred that event called by historians the "Revival of Learning". The intellectual stupor of Europe had been as profound as spiritual darkness had been dense. But with the close of the fifteenth century, literature, science and art seemed to spring into active life. The invention of gunpowder [it was invented by Schwartz in 1320], had completely revolutionized the modes of warfare; making the peasant more nearly equal with the master. The employment of the mariners' compass made ocean navigation less dangerous; the discovery of a new passage to India by the Cape of Good Hope, by Vasco da Gama, and the discovery of America by Columbus—1492—greatly enlarged the commerce of Europe and increased the comforts of life. Painting in oil came into vogue about this time and filled Europe with masterpieces of art; engraving on copper, invented early in the same century, multiplied and diffused them. Paper made of linen also came into common use; and finally, between 1436 and 1452 A.D., printing was invented, which gave to the modern world the intellectual riches of the ancients.

In the middle of this century—the fifteenth—Constantinople was taken by the Turks, and with that event the eastern division of the Roman empire fell. The fall of the great eastern capital drove many of the Greeks into Italy. They took with them a greater knowledge of antiquity than that possessed by the western nations, together with numerous manuscripts; and literature from that time may be said to have commenced its splendid, modern career.

On this head Guizot in his History of Civilization, says: "The classical school of that period [15th century], inspired its disciples with admiration, not only for the writings of Virgil and Homer, but for the entire frame of ancient society; for its institutions, its opinions, its philosophy as well as its literature. Antiquity, it must be allowed, whether as regards politics, philosophy, or literature, was greatly superior to the Europe of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. It is not surprising, therefore, that it should have exercised so great an influence; * * * and formed that school of bold thinkers, which appeared at the commencement of the fifteenth century, and in which prelates, priests and men of learning were united by common sentiment and common pursuits.

"Intellectual pursuits became not only a pleasure, but a passion; and it may be regarded as a maxim, that wherever the progress of intelligence is a true pleasure, a desire for liberty is soon felt, nor is it long in passing from the public mind to the state" (Guizot's History of Civilization—Hazlett's translation—edition of 1885, vol. I, p. 245).

It was so in Europe; for the "Revival of Learning" preceded, and there can be no doubt that it did much to produce that struggle for enlarged liberty which convulsed Europe in the century following its advent.

CONVERGING EVENTS OF THIS PERIOD

What a converging of numerous and important events at this particular period, the opening of the sixteenth century! May it not be reasonably concluded that the Power that rules the harmonious destiny of the world—"even better than prime ministers"—had some great project—some event, near or remote, to which all this was but the opening of the way? To intensify all this and give it a vitality otherwise unknown, comes the assertion of the right of religious freedom, the right of man to determine for himself his conceptions of God, his relationship to him, and the measure of his duty to the divine; the right of personal investigation and self-determination in relation to all these things—that is the meaning of the sixteenth century "Reformation", so far as it affects religion.

MARTIN LUTHER

It is a commonplace to note that the religious revolt of the 16th century began with the preaching of Martin Luther [about 1517 A.D.]. He was a monk of the St. Augustine order, and said to be good tempered [usually], industrious, and capable. In 1508 the vicar general of his order sent him to Wittenberg to be professor of philosophy, and here he applied himself to biblical theology and it is said his studies soon revealed to him a wide discrepancy between the religion of the scriptures and that of the church. A journey to Rome in the interest of the Augustine monks brought him in contact with the corruption of the Italian clergy; and that visit to Rome dispelled much of the veneration in which he had held the "Holy See".

The point of opposition at which Luther first struck was the "sale of indulgences" by the agents of the pope in Germany. It matters not how ingeniously Rome's advocates now explain the nature and harmlessness of indulgences in themselves, we know, historically, that the system so susceptible from its nature to abuses—and especially among the ignorant—was rankly and concededly abused in the operations of the agents of the popes in Germany and elsewhere at this period—early in the sixteenth century. These abuses, at first, Luther assailed; and finally assailed "indulgences" themselves—the whole scheme of them. The assault on "indulgences" led to a prolonged controversy between Luther and the pope's agents in Germany; with Luther generally condemned. The agitation grew to such importance, however, that a Roman Cardinal was appointed to hear the cause of the "Reformer". The cardinal treated Luther imperiously, and peremptorily ordered him to submit his judgment to the authority of the pope. This the "Reformer" refused to do until convinced of his error. The cardinal and the "Reformer" differed as to authorities appealed to. The former tried to convince Luther of his errors by appealing to the canon law, consisting of the enactments of the councils and decrees of the popes; and to the authority of Peter Lombard, who, in the twelfth century, collected and arranged systematically the theological opinions and decisions of the Latin fathers. On his part Luther refused to admit of any proof except that of the holy scriptures. Then came the peremptory demand that he submit his judgment to the pope and the "Reformer's" appeal to "the pope better informed". A month following, the pope, Leo X, issued an edict requiring the church to recognize his power to forgive sins, hearing of which Luther promptly appealed to "a general council of the church", for which it may be said outside of Italy there was a widespread demand.

THE DEBATE ON FREE WILL

Events now moved rapidly, with points of difference between the "Reformer" and his friends, and the defenders and agents of Rome multiplying. A discussion on "free will" took place between one of Luther's followers, Andrew Carlstadt, and John Eckius, on which subject a decided difference had developed between the "Reformer" and the Church of Rome, and which finally developed into a fundamental difference in the theology of the respective parties. On the part of the "Reformers" it was held that since the "fall" of Adam the natural power of man's will under his freedom—generalized under the phrase "free will"—is not strong enough to move him to that which is morally good, or to do the will of God, but that he must be moved thereto by the will of God. The Roman contestants on the other hand held that the "free will" of man may produce good works, and not merely the grace of God; that man's "free will" co-operates with divine grace in the production of good works, and that it depends on man's "free will" power whether he will give place to the operations of grace or will resist them.

This discussion was followed by another by Dr. Eckius and Luther himself on the question of the authority of the pope whether based upon divine or human right. Eckius maintained the orthodox or Roman view, that the pope's supremacy rested on divine right, that he was the successor of St. Peter, that the pope was the vicar of Christ, etc.; Luther's contention was that the supremacy of the Roman pontiffs was of human, not divine right. It was a human arrangement. If the words, "Thou art Peter" etc., be construed strictly, then they must be confined to the person of Peter, and therefore the authority conveyed by them ceased when the apostle died (Milner's Church History, vol. IV, cent. xvi, ch. iv).

Shortly after the close of the discussion, the "Reformer's" enemies hastened to Rome and induced his condemnation by the pope who issued a "bull" pronouncing forty-one of the tenets of Luther heretical; his writings were condemned to the flames, and he himself commanded to confess his faults within sixty days, beg the forgiveness of the pope, or be excommunicated from the church.

This "bull" of condemnation Luther burned, together with a copy of the pontifical canon law, in the presence of a vast multitude. By this act he meant to withdraw from the Church of Rome, that the excommunication which was expected to follow might be robbed of its force. About a month later—4th of January, 1521—the second "bull" of Pope Leo was issued in which the "Reformer" was expelled from the Catholic Church for his heresies, and for violating the majesty of the pontiff.

LUTHER BEFORE THE DIET OF WORMS

After issuing his "bull" of excommunication Leo X called upon the emperor of Germany, Charles V, to vindicate his title to "Advocate and Defender of the Church", by inflicting due punishment upon that "rebellious member, Martin Luther". Charles however was under deep obligations to Frederic, called "the Wise", Elector of Saxony, for his election by the states of Germany to the imperial dignity; and Frederic, being a warm friend of Luther's and favorable in the main to his doctrines, advised the emperor to take no action against the "Reformer" until he had given him a hearing. This course Charles resolved to follow, and therefore summoned Luther to appear before the diet which assembled at Worms in 1521. The diet was a great council of the German empire, consisting of the princes, provincial rulers and the chief dignitaries of the church. It was usually assembled only for the consideration of very important matters pertaining to the empire.

Before this august body the "Reformer" appeared to make answer to the two questions: First, if the books which he had written, the titles of which were read to him, were his; second, if he was prepared to retract those books and their contents, or if he persisted in the opinions he had advanced in them. He acknowledged the books to be his, and in a speech of some length, he explained his motives in writing his books, and refused to retract them. He thus concluded his speech:

"I cannot submit my faith either to the pope or to the council, because it is as clear as the day that they have frequently erred and contradicted each other. Unless, therefore, I am convinced by the testimony of scripture, or by the clearest reasoning—unless I am persuaded by means of the passages I have quoted—and unless they thus render my conscience bound, by the word of God, I cannot and will not retract, for it is unsafe for a Christian to speak against his conscience. HERE I STAND, I CAN DO NO OTHER, MAY GOD HELP ME! AMEN"!

Luther was protected by a safe conduct from the emperor—a written guarantee pledging the faith and honor of the empire for his safety for a limited length of time—or doubtless he would have been burned at the stake for his adherence to his doctrines and his defiance of the pope. Indeed some members of the diet advised the violation of the safe conduct, as the word of honor given to an heretic, according to the morals of the age, was not binding. Charles V, however, refused to listen to such perfidy. He dismissed Luther to return to Wittenberg in accordance with the terms of his safe conduct; at the same time condemning him as an heretic misled by his own folly.

DEATH OF LEO X: DEMANDS FOR A GENERAL COUNCIL

The year following the diet at Worms, Leo X died (1522), and was succeeded by Hadrian VI. This pontiff, while renewing the demand that the edict of the diet at Worms against Luther and his adherents should be executed, acknowledged the church to be in a lamentable condition and promised a general reformation. The assembled princes at the diet of Nuremberg, before which the demands of Hadrian were presented, thought the time propitious—Emperor Charles was absent in Spain—to insist upon a free council to be held in Germany, to deliberate in the ancient manner on a general reformation of the church. This Hadrian promised to grant, but before it could be assembled he died, having occupied the papal chair but two years and eight months. He was succeeded by Clement VII, who reproved the German princes for neglecting to proceed against Luther and his adherents. The emperor, Charles V, seconded the demands of the pope, and a number of the princes, awed by the united demands of the pope and the emperor, promised to enforce the edict to the extent of their power.

DEATH OF FREDERIC—DISTINCT CHURCH FOUNDED

In 1525, Prince Frederic, "the Wise", Elector of Saxony, and friend of Luther, died. He was succeeded by his brother John. Frederic "the Wise" had ever been an ardent admirer of Luther, but was extremely cautious in giving him any direct assistance. Prince John was of a different temperament. He believed the principles which the "Reformer" taught, but saw quite clearly that they must either be abandoned or the authority of the pope discarded. He resolved upon the latter; and taking matters in his own hands, determined to organize a church altogether distinct from that of Rome. To accomplish this he called upon Luther and Philip Melanchthon to draw up a formula for public worship, and draft a form of church government in harmony with their principles, fixing the salaries of the clergy, defining their official duties, etc. This the "Reformers" gladly undertook, and shortly afterwards had the pleasure of seeing other German princes pursue the same course that John had taken, and adopt the system of worship they had formulated.

THE RUPTURE BETWEEN THE POPE AND THE EMPEROR

This bold step threatened for a time to disrupt the German empire; for the princes who remained true to the old religion openly consulted together upon the advisability of taking up arms against the Lutherans; and the princes favoring the "Reformers" met to consider the necessity of forming an alliance to resist their enemies. In the midst of these threatening portents an event happened which was of great advantage to the Lutheran cause, and prevented for the moment any action against them. The emperor, Charles V, and the pope, Clement VII, became open enemies. The pontiff, fearing the increasing power of Charles, had formed an alliance with Francis I, king of France, against him. This so incensed Charles that he abolished the authority of the pope in Spain, made war upon him in Italy, captured the city of Rome, besieged the pontiff in his castle of St. Angelo, and subjected him to great indignities.

THE DIET AT SPIRE—1529

The difficulties between Charles and the pope were finally settled, however, and a diet was called at Spire in 1529, in which a majority voted to deprive the princes of Germany of the right to regulate religious matters within their respective territories—a right which a diet held three years before at Spire had granted. That is, such power was granted pending the settlement of religious difficulties by a free general council (Mosheim's Institutes—Murdock translation—vol. III, bk. iv. cent. xvi, part i, ch. ii). This second diet of Spire also declared all changes made in the public religion unlawful. This action was considered a hardship by those princes who had made such changes, and they protested against the action of the diet and appealed to the emperor. It was this protest which gave to the dissenting princes, and the followers of Luther generally, the name "Protestants".

The envoys of the dissenting princes sent to inform Charles of the stand they had taken in relation to the religious controversy in Germany were imprisoned by him, a circumstance which threatened hostility, and the Protestant princes at once took counsel for their safety and sought to form closer alliance with each other for mutual defense. Unfortunately, however, the would-be "Reformers" of religion were not united in doctrine, and the efforts of the princes at union were rendered vain by the disputes of the theologians.

DIET AT AUGSBURG—PROTESTANT CONFESSION OF FAITH

The emperor finally determined to settle this religious controversy within his empire, and appointed a diet to be assembled at Augsburg for that purpose. In order that the faith of the protestants might be clearly set forth, together with their reasons for separation from the Roman Church, Luther and Melanchthon, at the instance of the princes who favored their doctrines, drew up a confession of faith, known as the "Augsburg Confession". It consisted of twenty-eight articles, twenty-one of which stated the doctrines of the "Reformers", and the other seven stated their reasons for withdrawing from the Roman Church.

THE SEVEN ABUSES

These were:—Communion in one kind, by which the sacramental cup was denied the laity; imposing celibacy on the clergy; private masses; auricular confession; legendary traditions; monastic vows; and lastly, the excessive power of the church. In respect to this last "abuse", as these several above things are called, they discriminate between civil and ecclesiastical power, and insist that neither should infringe upon the domain of the other.

The diet of Augsburg assembled on the 20th of June, 1530; and after the Confession of Faith was read to the emperor, it was signed by John, Elector of Saxony, four princes of the empire, and the representatives of two imperial cities, Nuremberg and Reutlingen.

The friends of the pope at the diet presented a "Confutation" of the Protestant confession, and thereupon the emperor commanded the Protestants to abandon their whole cause of controversy. In reply they protested they were not satisfied with the "Confutation", and asked that a copy of it might be given them that they might make answer to it. This the emperor would not grant, nor would he permit an answer to be read before the diet which Philip Melanchthon had written out from memory. A number of conferences were held between the leaders of the contending parties with a view to reach an honorable compromise, but they had drifted too far apart, and all hope of reconciliation was lost. At last the emperor issued a decree commanding back to their allegiance to the pontiff the princes and cities that had become alienated from the "Holy See of Rome", on pain of incurring the vengeance of the emperor. The religious changes made in some of the principalities were censured and the edict of Worms against Luther and his adherents received new force.

THE LEAGUE OF SMALCALD

Nothing daunted by the unfavorable decree of the emperor, the Protestant princes assembled at Smalcald, and entered into a league among themselves, and made every effort to induce the kings of England, France, Denmark and other princes to join their confederacy. This movement seriously embarrassed Charles, for he was just on the eve of a war with the Turks, and needed the entire strength of his empire. He therefore entered into negotiations with the Protestant princes, and finally agreed to annul the edict of Worms and of Augsburg, allow the Protestants to regulate religious matters to please themselves until either a council of the church or a diet of the empire should determine what religious principles should be approved and obeyed—the council to be called within six months. Such were the concessions of the emperor. On their part, the Protestant princes were to contribute money for the Turkish war, and acknowledge Ferdinand, brother of the emperor, king of the Romans.

THE TRUCE OF NUREMBERG

This treaty of peace being drawn upon and accepted in the city of Nuremberg was known as the "Truce of Nuremberg", and under it the Protestant cause was materially strengthened; for every day men and cities threw off their allegiance to the pope and rejoiced in their new-found freedom.

DIFFICULTY IN LOCATING THE COUNCIL

The emperor urged the pontiff to call the long-talked-of council which was to settle these perplexing difficulties. But this Clement VII seemed not anxious to do. When he did propose a council it was at places in Italy, and to this the Germans would not consent, as a council held there would be under the influence of the pope; besides, the controversy had arisen in Germany, and there it should be settled. The Protestants also insisted that the decision should be founded solely on the scriptures, a point which required the Church of Rome to set aside all the former decisions of her great councils—a thing her pontiffs were in no temper to do, as they considered themselves in the position of a parent having absolute jurisdiction, dealing with a refractory child. Finally, the successor of Clement VII—Paul III—with the approval of the emperor, called a council to meet at Trent, in Austria [in the Austrian Tyrol]. But this was not satisfactory to the Protestants, and Charles X, despairing of settling the difficulties by peaceful methods and being urged to it by Pope Paul III, prepared to settle them by resorting to force. While the Catholics and Protestants were preparing for this conflict, Luther, whose preaching had begun this agitation, died at Eisleben, his native town.

In the war which followed the Protestants met with severe reverses, and were forced by the emperor to consent to refer the religious controversy to the council of Trent, but it being reported that the plague had broken out in that city the council was broken up, nor could Charles induce the pope to call another immediately; hence it became necessary to formulate a treaty which should bind both parties in respect to religion, pending the convening of a council. This treaty was called "The Interim", and was of course most favorable to the victorious party—the Catholics—and went far towards establishing the old methods of worship.

VICTORY OF PROTESTANTS—RELIGIOUS LIBERTY SECURED

At last the emperor persuaded the pope to reassemble the council of Trent, and gave notice to the Protestants to attend, promising to use his best endeavor to have everything done in a Christian manner and without passion. But before this council could assemble the Protestant princes revolted, took the emperor by surprise and forced him into signing a treaty at Passau, in 1552, which guaranteed religious liberty to the Protestants. This treaty was reconfirmed by the emperor in the diet at Augsburg, 1555. By that treaty all who had accepted the Confession of Augsburg were declared free from all jurisdiction of the Roman pontiff, and his bishops. They were to be permitted to live in peace and the quiet enjoyment of religious liberty. Men were to be left free to join either the Reformed or the Catholic Church, and any person making war upon others, or molesting them because of their religion was to be accounted the public enemy of Germany.

Such was the fruit of the great Revolution of the sixteenth century in Germany—religious liberty. To that end all these struggles tended, and its result was indeed glorious, worth all the suffering, the tears and the blood it had cost to gain it.

EXTENSION OF RESULTS TO ALL NORTHERN EUROPE

This result attained by this long struggle in Germany extended about concurrently into other nations of northern Europe—the Scandinavian countries, also into Switzerland, Holland, France, and England. And everywhere it attained primarily the same results—viz, a large religious freedom: and, moreover, wherever that result was attained by the "Reformation" it seemed content with its victory. As remarked by the French statesman and historian F. Guizot, in his History of Civilization of Europe:

"The 'Reformation' * * * was a great endeavor to emancipate human reason, and to call things by their right names; it was an insurrection of the human mind against the absolute power of spiritual order. Such, in my opinion, was the true character and leading principle of the 'Reformation'. * * * Not only was this the result, * * * but it was content with this result. Whenever this was obtained no other was sought for; so entirely was it the very foundation of the event, its primitive and fundamental character! * * * I repeat it; wherever the 'Reformation' attained this object, it accommodated itself to every form of government and to every situation" (vol. I, lecture xii, pp. 255-9, D. Appleton N. Y., edition 1885).

And you will note in all this how greatly political interest of the states of Europe entered into this conflict.

THE STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM COMPLETED IN AMERICA

But these results of the "Reformation" were not destined to be limited to nor indeed attain their utmost expansion in Europe. As noted in the necessary historical review in this address in recounting the events that enter into the awakening of the world immediately preceding the period of this so-called "Reformation", America was discovered, opening new opportunities to the restless activities and ambitions of men of the period. In the aspirations of classes of men for full realization of religious freedom, they could flee from those countries where it was suppressed or stunted in growth to the new world, and there found their homes and plant their colonies and seek the attainment of their desire for freedom. And this they did; especially did those people from England and Holland and France, who made their way to the Atlantic seaboard of the new world. Here, and more especially in those colonies established by people from England, the struggle for larger civil liberty and religious freedom continued, until it ended in the founding of a nation of united English colonies, under the name and title of the "United States of America", a nation dedicated to the proposition that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed; and resting upon these primary principles and human rights:—that all men are equal before the law; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, among which is the right to live; the right to be free; the right to pursue happiness. And to secure these God-recognized rights governments are instituted among men deriving their just powers—as stated above—from the consent of the governed; and that if any form of government becomes destructive of these ends, fails to secure these unalienable rights of men—it is the right of the people to alter or abolish them and create new governments that shall give promise of attaining these ends.

This view of government, it will be seen, enthrones the people as sovereigns; and recognizes them as the source of civil and political power. With this conception of government goes religious freedom, the right for each man to worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience; the right to express his thought in speech or in writing, hence freedom of speech and freedom of the press. All these rights defined, secured and guaranteed by constitutions, national and state; by laws enacted in harmony with these constitutions; interpreted by a judiciary created for that purpose, and in harmony with the whole system, and all administered by agencies created, and changed and perpetuated by the choice of the people themselves, under universal responsible suffrage by a free ballot—it attains the acme of human freedom voiced by the patriot when he said:

"I want men to be free! As much from mobs as kings; From you as me."

The above setting forth in rough outline, constitutes the American system of government, and of human regulated and protected freedom, the outgrowth and full fruitage of that struggle for human liberty reborn in that awakening from the world's midnight of ignorance, superstition, and tyranny prevailing in the sixteenth century. This movement, however, let it be remarked again, was not such a "Reformation" of the Christian religion and church as brought back the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, or that restored the divine authority and ministry of the Apostolic Church of the first century. But it was a "Revolution" of sublime proportions and world-wide influence, resulting in the creation of a nation in the new world founded upon those principles developed by the pain and the long struggle for human rights and human freedom made in both Europe and America, and made secure for the world by the demonstration of what a free people may be, and what become, when living under free institutions guaranteed by law and administered by agencies controlled by the people; in a word—government by the people; for the people; and answerable to the people. Human freedom then, established in the world and for the world is the outgrowth of that sixteenth century "Revolution" in Europe with its American extension of struggle and achievement in the last two hundred years; and made secure and irreversible by the demonstration of the truth of its principles, and the practicability of their application in human affairs. Giving also the sure word of promise of their perpetuation in the existence of the United States of America—which I pronounce the world's dream come true of human freedom! The full fruitage of that pain and struggle which men misname a "Religious Reformation". What in the future lies under its magnificent achievement as a "Revolution" making for human freedom, remains with God; but against the dark background of that fierce human struggle to be free, we have just reviewed, appears God's many-colored bow of promise that human freedom—so born—shall not perish from the earth.
