B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE XIII

The Reproach of the So-Called "Reformation"

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I read to you the following text:

"O Lord! * * * Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness; neither shall evil dwell with thee. * * * Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing [deceitfully]; the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man" (Psalm 5).

Perhaps I should have said "Reproach" in the title in the plural, for there is usually more than one "reproach" spoken of by the writers on the subject—always two, and I must add one more. The two always mentioned are: (1) the evil of the multiplication of sects; (2) tyranny or persecution; Protestants have persecuted "heretics" from their own doctrines; and also they have persecuted Roman Catholics and others, one another, when they possessed the power; and when time, place and their own interests seem to make it to their advantage to do so; or when hatred or revenge prompted them to do it.

My own additional "reproach" to the "Reformation" is that it was no religious "Reformation"; not only in that it did not restore primitive Christianity or the Christianity of the Apostolic Church; but doctrinally—theologically—it did not improve on the doctrine of the Romish Church. True the Protestants did not drag after them some of the "abuses" that had attached to the Romish system, but in the great fundamental things or doctrines of the gospel, they did not improve on the theology of Rome. Let us take up, then, these "reproaches" somewhat in reverse order from that in which I have named them.

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD NOT RESTORED BY THE "REFORMATION"

This will bring us first to my own charge or "reproach" that the "Reformation" did not restore primitive Christianity, as known in the Apostolic Church of the first century. Certainly the "Reformation" wrought no change in the doctrine of God as conceived by Roman Catholic theology. They adopted in the main, wholly, I may say, the Roman Catholic creeds of the first few Christian centuries, which led them, in defining God, to affirm him to be "incorporeal", without "body", meaning that he was "immaterial," as explained in discourse No. IV of this series, which I urge my hearers to review at this point, as I do not repeat here what was there set forth at some length. It will be sufficient here, to simply remark that accepting the whole revelation of God as set forth in the New Testament, it represents Jesus Christ as God completely manifested, or revealed in the flesh (I Timothy 3:16). To rightly apprehend this the reality of the Christ's resurrection must be remembered—the physical fact of it; the truth as the Christ himself presented it. "A spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have"; and he ate material food in their presence (St. Luke 24:36-43; Acts x:40, 41) to convince them of the reality of his resurrected status; and to confirm the fact that the resurrected and all glorious Christ was the same as their friend of the pastoral region of Galilee, their teacher in the temple at Jerusalem, and on the mount; their suffering, Anointed One, blood-covered through agony in Gethsemane, and at last triumphantly the Resurrected One, to whom was given all power in heaven and in earth; the Only Begotten of the Father, in whom dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily (Colossians 2:9); who was the express image of the Father's person, and the brightness of his glory, being the creating and upholding power of the universe (Hebrews 1:1-4); and in all things like his Father, God; and doing but the same things his Father had done (St. John 5:17-30); while out of his presence, proceeded forth, "the Spirit of God", the life and light of the world, the intelligence inspiring power in men, the creating and sustaining energy of the universe; God with power, and the attributes of God extended into the immensity of space, becoming God everywhere present and everywhere present with power; God immanent (St. John 1:1-9; Acts 17:22-28)! All this with fellowship provided with the Holy Ghost for those who obey the gospel, and hence with special contact and inspiration with the Godhead (St. John 14:17 and context). None of this true conception of God—Father, Son and Holy Ghost—did the Protestant "Reformation" give back to the world; they perpetuated on this head all the accumulated errors of the Romish theology.

Neither did the "Reformation" restore a church after the pattern of the Apostolic Church; with "first, apostles; secondarily prophets; thirdly, teachers; after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversity of tongues"; all suffused with and united by one spirit, acting in harmony as the members of the body of a man act in harmony, under the dominance of the mind or spirit of man; with no schism of the body, no rejection of the parts by the whole (I Corinthians 12); and the whole considered necessary for the working of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, for the perfecting of the saints, and to abide and be operative, all these officers and agencies, until all come to a unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ" (Ephesians 4). The Protestant "Reformation" of the sixteenth century brought back to humanity no such church as this—the Church of the Christ and of the apostles—neither in form nor in spirit.

AN INSPIRED MINISTRY NOT RESTORED—REVELATION

This Apostolic Church, the ministry of which I have just briefly sketched, had an inspired priesthood, or ministry; a ministry so connected with God as to receive guidance, correction, and unfolding knowledge by continuous revelation from God. The Apostolic Church contemplates, and its genius is founded upon contact with, and continuous fellowship with God; and its ministry—like the holy men of God of old time, who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost—so the men of the Apostolic Church, who constituted its ministry, spake; and that which they spake by the power of the Holy Ghost was of the value of scripture. It was the word of God, the will of God, and the very manifest power of God unto salvation. Revelation, clear, immediate, continuous, and authoritative was and is the distinctive feature and characteristic of the church of God in all ages, marking it off from other institutions and all organizations of men; giving assurance of a perfect church and an infallible leadership in that church, the only way in which a perfect church and an infallible leadership in that church, can be assured; and both are necessary as the ground and pillar of a church which is to guide men into, and instruct them, in a knowledge of the things that pertain to eternal life, the salvation of their souls. These are matters in which one can take no chances. One's teachers as to such matters must be perfect; he, who undertakes leadership in guiding men to salvation, must himself have access to the source and fountain of pure knowledge, which alone is God. To deny to the teachers of men access to this infallible source of enlightenment and truth by revelation from God, even as God in measure and occasion wills, cuts off the teachers of men from the only perfect source and adequacy of knowledge, and infallible leadership that can gain and hold man's supreme and perfect confidence.

"The things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out. Thy mind, O man, if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity—Thou must commune with God" (Joseph Smith, History of the Church, Period I, vol. III, p. 295)! And all that effectually by means of inspiration from God—revelation; by which the guidance and will of God is received; else inadequacy, uncertainty, doubt; and where these are, faith, essential to salvation, cannot abide.

The "Reformation" brought back no such renewal of revelation as this to the churches it founded. On this matter Protestants follow the leadership of the Romish Church in denying the very existence of continuous revelation to the church. With both the "awful voice of prophecy is * * * forever silenced"; the "volume of revelation completed, and forever closed"; "the visitation of angels as messengers of God ended". "The faith once delivered to the saints" (see Book of St. Jude—King James' translation), had become "the faith once for all delivered to the saints" (see Catholic Douay New Testament, Book of St. Jude), and with both divisions of so-called Christendom, notwithstanding the variation in that translation of the above particular scripture, the "faith"—the gospel and all that pertains to it—had been "once for all", delivered to the saints, and that was the end of further revelations respecting it. Henceforth it would be a matter of administering it by a church on the one hand; or by the interpretation of the Bible on the other. In both views, no further revelation from God to make clear that which was obscure, was expected. In this all had departed from the faith, and the hope, and promise, of "the faith once delivered to the saints".

A COMPARISON BETWEEN ROMAN AND PROTESTANT POSITIONS

Naturally in a question such as that now before us, a comparison arises between the party of reform—the Protestants; and the party from which they withdrew, and the reasons for the withdrawal. We referred already, in our last Sunday's address, to the Protestant Confession of Augsburg, drawn up by Luther and Melanchthon, expressing the faith of the German Protestants, which contained twenty-one articles affirmative of their own faith, and to seven reasons for withdrawing from the Church of Rome. These latter will always distinguish them from the Roman Church, hence they are given here.

ALLEGED ABUSES OF ROME

(1) The communion of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in one kind, by which the sacramental cup was denied to the laity; (see discourse No. V of this series); (2) imposing celibacy on the clergy; (3) private masses; (4) auricular confession; (5) legendary tradition; (6) monastic vows; and (7) the excessive power of the church. In respect of the last "abuse", as these several things were called, the "Reformers" discriminated between civil and ecclesiastical authority, and insisted that neither should infringe upon the domain of the other. All in all, when these several "abuses" of the Roman Church are named, one marvels a little at the fewness and the character of the complaints made; the mildness of the statement of them; and wonders in this age why such a furor should be raised about them as to involve such civil wars in the nations and extending through so many years.

Relative to the twenty-one affirmative doctrines of the Augsburg Confession and of the affirmative theological doctrines in other Protestant "confessions" of faith, we may not hope to consider all of them in this address. Neither is it necessary to my purpose. Brief allusion to one or two of those considered fundamental will be sufficient.

ROMAN AND PROTESTANT DOCTRINE ON "FREE WILL"

The one doctrine of the "Reformers" above all others which seemed to most widely separate the two parties was that which may be designated as the part the "will" of man performs in the matter of his salvation. I have already glimpsed this subject in the statement made of it by Dr. D'Aubigne (No. XI, this series), where the importance of the subject to the whole "Reformation" doctrinally is given, and stated in the terms of man's salvation "by faith or by works". This our author represents as the most striking characteristic of the "Reformation", the thing which produced it in fact. Also I have noted the discussion on this subject in No. XII, this series, between Carlstadt, a follower of Luther, and Dr. Eckius, of the Roman Church. The subject, as stated above, is of highest importance to the "Reformation", becomes the fundamental error of the "Reformers" [for quite generally they embrace it], and it was the most fruitful of those "reproaches" which attach to the "Reformation" doctrinally. The terms of the doctrine may be tersely put in this manner: Since the "fall" of man through Adam, the natural freedom, or will of man, is not strong enough to move him to that which is morally good, or to do the will of God which represents, of course, the highest good, or morality, conceivable. On the other hand it is insisted that the "free will of man produces good works" and not merely and alone the grace of God—an irresistible spiritual impulse to righteousness—but man's free will co-operates with divine grace in the production of good works—i.e. righteousness. The former was the position of the Protestants, the latter that of the Roman Catholics. Consideration of the fundamental psychological powers of man's mind, on which these doctrines rest must at least be stated: (1) the native power in man of deliberation respecting all the facts involved in a contemplated action; the consciousness of power within himself to determine what his action shall be in a given case after the deliberation—the fact of his own moral agency; (2) the modifying influence upon that self-determining power, the censure or the approval of friends, the personal and community interests involved, the consciousness of his duty—the "oughtness" of his action; (3) the consciousness of the need of help in the matter considered, the encouraging approval of friends, and of God; (4) the fact that man does find help from these sources if he appeals to them; (5) the further fact that man is conscious of external forces operating upon him, that he cannot refer to any act of his will, and produce in him different states of moral feeling at different times—this cannot be denied. All this cannot further be considered at this time. It must be enough to say that in the face of all these things and the right balancing of them, there comes out of them the fact of man's power to will and to do, within limits sufficiently large, to constitute him a free moral agent with power to act, and not to be acted upon merely; and he is responsible to God and to human society for his conduct. Duty is a possibility and a reality! Conformity to law is possible to man by the exercise of his free will with the modifications indicated, which are not sufficient to controvert the fact of "will" and all that goes with it; and without which there is no moral grandeur for man, he would be but a mere automaton, a thing to act upon—a something of not more importance than so much dead matter—mere stuff!

THE SPECIAL REPROACH OF THE "REFORMERS"

Luther, however, and the "Reformers" generally held otherwise and seemed to glory in the impotency of man. The doctrine found expression in such sayings as these: "The excellent, infallible, and sole preparation for grace is the eternal election and predestination of God". "On the side of man there is nothing that goes before grace, unless it be impotency and even rebellion". "Since the 'fall' of man, 'free will is but an idle word', and if a man does all he can, he still sins mortally". "We do not become righteous by doing what is righteous, but having become righteous we do what is righteous". "That man is not justified [before God] who performs many works; but he, who without works, has much faith in Christ". "What gives peace to our conscience is this—by faith our sins are no longer ours, but Christ's, on whom God has laid them all; and on the other hand, all Christ's righteousness belongs to us to whom God has given it"! This the socalled doctrine of "Imputed righteousness".

The doctrine of "grace" and "will" as stated by Melanchthon, Luther's right hand in the "Reformation", is: "Man's justification before God, proceeds from faith alone. Faith enters man's heart by grace alone". Again: "As all things which happen, happen necessarily, according to the divine predestination, there is no such thing as liberty in our wills".

This doctrine of the "Reformers" led to much mischief when carried to its extremes, and its absurdities are best discovered when contemplated in their extremes. When Luther was told that his doctrines were the delight of debauchers, and that many scandalous practices were even the consequence of some of his publications, he could not deny the charge; but contented himself by saying: "I am neither afraid of such censorious representatives, nor surprised at them". By denying the existence of human liberty and maintaining that all things happen necessarily, the "Reformers" laid themselves open to the charges that their doctrine threw open a door to the most boundless licentiousness, and furnished men with this defense of their crimes: "We could do no other, our fate did not permit us to do otherwise". Moreover the "Reformers", by saying that good works were not necessary to salvation, and assisted in no way to procure it, they took away the chief incentive to good works, and removed the principal restraint to the doing of evil. "To what purpose shall I labor in the service of God", wrote one? "If I am predestinated to death [spiritual death] I shall never escape from it; and if I am predestined to life [that is, to salvation, even though I do wickedly], I shall no doubt arrive at eternal rest" (Raban, quoted by Guizot).

The serious evil involved in Luther's doctrine of justification by faith without works is perhaps best seen in a quotation from Fletcher, of Madeley, the most able disciple of John Wesley and his successor. Fletcher accuses one Richard Hill, Esq.—who accepted in its widest sense the doctrine of justification by faith alone—with saying:

"Even adultery and murder do not hurt the pleasant children, but rather work for their good. God sees no sin in believers, whatever sin they may commit. My sins might displease God: my person is always acceptable to him. * * * It is a most pernicious error of the schoolmen to distinguish sins according to the fact, and not according to the person. Though I blame those who say, let us sin that grace may abound, yet adultery, incest and murder shall, upon the whole, make me holier on earth and merrier in heaven" (Quoted by Milner—Catholic—End of Religious Controversy, Letter viii, p. 101, note)!

An extreme statement of the outcome of the doctrine of justification by faith alone, of course, but who may say that it is not a logical, a legitimate outcome of the doctrine? Luther himself saw the danger of his doctrine and thus spoke of it: "If faith be preached, as of necessity it must be, the greater part of mankind will interpret the doctrine in a carnal way, and so understand spiritual liberty as to allow indulgences of the flesh. This we may see in all the ranks of life. All profess themselves to be evangelical; all boast of their Christian liberty; and yet give way to their lusts and passions, for example to covetousness, pride, envy, pleasures, and such like. Who discharges his duty faithfully? Who serves his brother in a true spirit of charity? The disgrace which such conduct brings on the profession of the gospel puts me sometimes so out of temper that I could wish these swine, that tread precious pearls under their feet, were still under the tyranny of the pope; for it is impossible that a people so much resembling those of Gomorrah, should be kept in due subjection by the mild maxims of the gospel of peace". It counts for nothing, however, that Luther denounced this corrupt state of morals among his followers; it was the legitimate outgrowth of his fundamental doctrine—the doctrine of nearly all Protestants—of justification by faith alone, a faith which man has no part in generating, but which comes through the grace of God alone. The tree of his planting produced bitter fruit; it was vain for him to proclaim against the fruit so long as he insisted that it was a good tree on which it grew.

And this is the leading theological doctrine of the "Reformation"! Its chief doctrinal "reform"! Need I follow the subject further to prove the inadequacy of the "Reformation" as a "reform" in the sense of being a return to the doctrine of the Christ and of the Apostolic Church? That Apostolic Church, whose story the New Testament records, in every admonition to righteousness, to obedience of God and of the church, to acceptance of the gospel and all the terms and means of the salvation it offers, is based upon and presupposes the power in man to rightly apprehend the truth; and likewise to possess the power of freedom, of will, to accept or to reject the same, to his own salvation or condemnation. God's grace goes only to the point of providing the gospel as a means and power of salvation when man of his free will accepts it. Of course, contemplating God as providing, out of his love for man, the gospel, as the means of salvation, it may be said that man is saved by the grace of God. Also when man in his struggle seeks to understand the truth and to accept it; and of his free will desires and seeks aid from God, he undoubtedly is helped by the grace of God. But that is far different from the doctrine of the "Reformers" who denied in toto the freedom of man, and the power in his will to do aught to place him in the way of salvation.

THE PROTESTANT "REPROACH" OF MULTIPLYING SECTS

The second "reproach" of the "Reformation" to be considered in this discourse is the multiplication of sects, or subdivisions in "Christendom". The "Reformers" having broken away from the authority of the Church of Rome, and set up the Bible and their own interpretation of it, as the final court of appeal in things religious, where was division and subdivision or multiplication of sects to halt? If "Reformers" could cast off the authority of the Church of Rome and interpret the Bible for themselves and to their own liking, how could they, legitimately, prevent others in turn, from casting aside the assumed authority of the "Reformed" churches, interpret the Bible for themselves, and found new churches? "You provoke licentiousness [meaning as to things of thought], you produce it; and after being the cause of it, you wish to restrain and repress it"; is said to the "Reformers". A thousand quotations would not exhaust the comments made by historians and theologians upon this "reproach" to the "Reformation"; but the one, given herewith, being composite in character, represents this evil of breaking with spiritual authority, and enthroning private interpretation of the Bible as a rightful means of determining true doctrine.

UNHAPPY DIVISIONS AMONG THE "REFORMERS"

"Capito, minister of Strasburg, writing to Forel, pastor of Geneva, thus complains to him: 'God has given me to understand the mischief we have done by our precipitancy in breaking with the pope. The people say I know enough of the gospel. I can read it for myself. I have no need of you' [i.e., a minister—a priest]. In the same tone Dutith writes to his friend Beza: 'Our people are carried away with every wind of doctrine. If you know what their religion is today, you cannot tell what it will be tomorrow. In what single point are those churches which have declared war against the pope agreed amongst themselves? There is not one point which is not held by some of them as an article of faith, and by others as an impiety'! In the same sentiment, Calvin, writing to Melanchthon, says: 'It is of great importance that the divisions which subsist among us should not be known to future ages: for nothing can be more ridiculous than that we, who have broken off from the whole world, should have agreed so ill among ourselves from the very beginning of the Reformation' " (End of Religious Controversy, Letter viii, p. 101, note)!

Undoubtedly this multiplication of sects among the Protestants was a great evil; much confusion and great scandal and disorder grew out of it. Yet how could it be avoided? Not at all on the principles upon which this alleged "Reformation" was founded; for the "Reformers" having themselves revolted from authority, in some cases against both spiritual authority and temporal, and who had taken it upon themselves to give their interpretation of the Bible as the true one, they were in no position to forbid others to do the same thing. The "Reformers" did not successfully prevent others from revolt, or stay the multiplication of new sects of religion, and have not succeeded to this day, since sects are all the while multiplying. All we may now say of that sixteenth century movement is, that it was a period when liberty was the cause of disorder, for the time being; and notwithstanding all the disorders that went with it the attainment of liberty was worth the price.

THE "REPROACH" OF TYRANNY OR PERSECUTION

Closely associated with the multiplication of sects and the efforts of the "Reformers" to suppress them, is the "reproach" of tyranny as manifested in Protestant persecutions. "You provoke licentiousness", it is said to the "Reformers"—"you produce it; and after being the cause of it, you wish to restrain and repress it. And how do you repress it? By the most harsh and violent means. You take upon yourselves, too, to punish heresy, and that by virtue of an illegitimate authority" (Guizot, History of Civilization, vol. I, lecture xii, p. 260).

The great error which the "Reformers" made was in not giving full application to their principle of the right of private judgment in matters of religion. They claimed the right to revolt from the Catholic Church, to interpret the Bible for themselves, and to found their mode of worship upon their own conceptions of what was required by the revelations of God; but when others differed from them, and desired to exercise the same liberty, the "Reformers" were themselves intolerant, and attempted to compel men by force to accept their religious faith and modes of worship. It is this intolerance which is the chief "reproach" applied to the "Reformation" by its enemies, and it must be admitted that it somewhat sullies the glory of its achievements.

THE VAIN DEFENSE OF PROTESTANTS

Some "Reformers" sought to excuse this error. They used the plea of "necessity". "They had", it was claimed, "the right to repress and punish error, because they were in possession of the truth"! Their articles of belief, they contended, were the only legitimate ones! "And if Rome had not the right to punish the 'reformed' party, it was because she was in the wrong and they were in the right"! (Guizot) Why of course! Oh, "most lame and impotent conclusion"! And utterly worthless. It is a mere pitiful begging of the question. It could be used with more show of reason by the Roman Catholic persecutors of the Protestants than by the "Reformers"; and when used by either or by any other persecuting power, is utterly contemptible.

That the Protestants became a persecuting body, as well as the Roman Catholic Church, admits of no doubt. History confirms the fact. It is sustained by the persecution of Catholics in England under the Protestant reigns of Henry VIII, of Edward VI, and Queen Elizabeth, as clearly as the persecution of Protestants under the Catholic reign of "Bloody Mary", though the victims were not so numerous; for her brief reign is credited with 284 religious executions in five years! (Wm. Smith's History of England, 1878, pp. 135, 136, et. seq. 156). The hanging of Catholics at Tyburn, and the burning of Protestants at Smithfield, bear grim witness against both Protestant "Reformers" and Catholic reactionaries, and of the damnable cruelties these religionists practiced upon each other.

CALVIN AND OTHER CONTINENTAL "REFORMERS"

Calvin, the leading "Reformer" of France, is generally held responsible for the burning of Servetus at the stake for heresy, and the "gentle Melanchthon," who of all the leading "Reformers" detested violence most approved the act (Calvin's Epistle, p. 147, edition Geneva, 1575). Calvin again in his letter to the Earl of Somerset, speaking of the papists and of the fanatical sect of the "gospellers", says "they ought to be repressed by the avenging sword which the Lord has put into your hands" (Calvin's Epistles, p. 67).

A brief summary of Protestant persecutions of others in England sets forth that many were put to death for their religion in the reign of King Henry VIII, some in the brief reign of Edward VI; one hundred and sixty Catholics in the reign of Elizabeth; sixteen or seventeen in that of James; "and more than twenty by the Presbyterians and Republicans". "Some of these were burned or hanged for their religious opinions; others executed under sanguinary laws enacted on supposed principles of state necessity" (Guizot). "It is evident from the fact", say our authorities here followed, "that the 'Reformers' just as much as the papists, held it right to inflict coercion, physical pains and death upon those who denied what they [the persecutors] regarded as the essential faith". Again quoting: "The Roman Catholics", says Robertson, "as their system rested on the decisions of an infallible judge, never doubted that truth was on their side, and openly called on the civil power to repel the impious and heretical innovators who had risen up against it. The Protestants, no less confident that their doctrine was well founded, required with equal ardor the princes of their party to check such as presumed to impugn or oppose it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the founders of the 'Reformed' church in their respective countries, inflicted, as far as they had power and opportunity, the same punishments, which were denounced by the Church of Rome, upon such as called in question any article of their creed" (History of Civilization, Guizot, vol. I, Lecture xii, p. 266).

There is much more evidence to the same effect. It is however, in the works of the Catholic writer Bossuet, that this subject is best set forth—because in the conclusion of his discussion he frankly affirms the rightfulness of the principle of suppressing heresies by violence. His treatment of the subject occurs in his History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches, (2 vols). His period was 1627-1704, so that he was well-nigh a contemporary of the events of which he writes. After detailing at some length the Protestant intention at the first of their movement in France, especially, to follow the principle and policy of "sufferance", as most suitable to "Reformers", by which is meant the eschewing of any appeal to force, or violence, in the prosecution of their "reforms", Bossuet traces Protestant departure from this policy, the abandonment of this principle, until from the facts educed he is able to charge:

"Here might that question be considered, whether it be true that the 'Reformation', as she boasts, never aimed at establishing herself by force; but the doubt is easily resolved by all the above mentioned [foregoing] facts. As long as the 'Reformation' was weak, it is true, she always seemed submissive; nay, gave out for a fundamental point of her religion that she believed it not only unlawful to use force, but even to repel it. But it was soon discovered this was of that kind of modesty which fear inspires, a fire hidden in ashes; for no sooner could the 'Reformation' attain to be uppermost in any kingdom, but she was for ruling uncontrolled" (Bossuet's Variations, vol. II, p. 29).

Our author details the assassination of the Duke of Guise by the Protestant zealot Poltrot. The duke had long been regarded as a "hardened persecutor" of Protestants, "from whom it was necessary to beseech God that he would deliver the world by some extraordinary stroke of Providence", hence Poltrot. The Duke of Guise was foully murdered: Then: "As soon as ever our 'Reformed' knew the thing was done, 'they solemnly returned thanks to God with great rejoicings.' [How like a counter-charge to St. Bartholomew's Eve!] The Duke of Guise had always been the object of their hatred. No sooner were they in a condition to effect it, but we have seen them conspire his ruin, and this by the advice of their doctors" (Bossuet's Variations, vol. II, p. 33).

Again, on the murder of the duke, Bossuet says: "So little did an assassination disturb their conscience, provided religion were its motive. * * * * There is no need here of explaining myself on that question, whether or not Christian princes have a right to use the sword against their subjects, enemies to sound doctrine and the church, the Protestants being agreed with us in this point! Luther and Calvin have written books expressly to make good the right and duty of the magistrate in this point. Calvin reduced this to practice against Servetus and Valentine Gentile. Melanchthon approved of this procedure by a letter he wrote to him on this subject. The discipline of our 'Reformed' likewise permits recourse to the secular arm in certain cases; and amongst the articles of discipline of the Geneva church, it appears that the ministers ought to inform the magistrate against the incorrigible, who despise spiritual penalties, and especially against those, without distinction, who teach new doctrine. And even at this day, the author, that most bitterly of all the Calvinist writers, upbraids the Roman Church on this subject, with the cruelty of her doctrine, subscribes to it in the main, inasmuch as he permits the exercise of the power of the sword in matters of religion and conscience; a thing which in truth cannot be called in question without ennervating, and, as it were, maiming the power of the legislature; so that there cannot be a more dangerous illusion, than to set down sufferance as a characteristic of the true church; nor do I know amongst Christians any but Socinians and Anabaptists that oppose this doctrine. In a word, the right is certain, but moderation is not less necessary" (Bossuet's Variations, vol. II, bk. x, pp. 37-38, et passim).

BACK REFERENCE TO ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S EVE

Here by the way, before leaving this unpleasant phase of the subject of justified persecutions in both great divisions of "Christendom"—permit me to refer to a matter of limited complaint against myself, by correspondents in the matter of quoting Motley, on the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve, and making some remarks on his passage in regard to rejoicings at Rome by the pope and his associates. Had I made my remarks on the authority of Motley alone, highest authority though he is on the period and upon the events of which his great work treats—The Rise of the Dutch Republic—yet had I made my statement upon his authority alone, and without a wider investigation of the subject, I should have felt censurable indeed. But many years ago in my ecclesiastical studies I became satisfied that Rome's alibi on this point could not hold. That attempted alibi is that Pope Gregory's procession and Te Deum at Rome was over the safe deliverance of that worthless thing, Charles IX, from wicked conspirators, and not a rejoicing over the destruction of Protestant enemies. That conviction became intensified by a recent review of the historical evidence. Hence the quotation from Motley and my remarks in NO. VII of this series. And now permit me to say to any Romish protagonist worth while, that if he thinks I have done to the Church of Rome an injustice by my quotation from John Lothrop Motley, and my remarks thereon, the lists are open to him, of course, for we live in a land and in an age of free speech and a free press; and when the bugle calls to the issue I shall not be far away. Other authorities than the author of The Rise of the Dutch Republic I have assembled. In fact my whole treatise is already written on the subject though I choose not to burden this series of addressed with it, unless some compelling occasion should arise. [^1]

* * * *

Here I may let the whole matter of Roman Catholic attitude in "Christendom" and Protestant "Reformation Reproaches" rest. History abundantly sustains ad-nauseam that both the Roman Catholic and the Protestant churches have been persecuting churches, and have claimed the right to be such—and the proof is in the fact of the thing—whatever their present attitude on the subject may be. They are not persecuting churches now both sections of Christendom would claim; both have so far yielded to the modern spirit of religious liberty that they now no longer claim the right to murder each other, but it is an acquired virtue. I am willing to go as far as he who goes fartherest, in granting the claim that Christendom is not in large part made up of persecuting sects now; but both Catholics and Protestants must excuse me from confessing myself so far a simpleton as to admit the claimed whiteness of their hands in relation to past ages on this subject. And even now the boasted tolerance of our age arises from the checks and balances of a religiously divided world—from mutual fears, or dread of consequences, in resorting to persecution—rather than from fixed principles of toleration, arising from a truly Christian spirit, and established Christian character. Even yet it may be said of our toleration, as of our manners, that—

"Our polished manners are a mask we wear, And at the bottom barbarous still and rude, We are restrained indeed, but not subdued"!

Our modern boasted toleration may be but a veneer! And there is yet the future!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. See Appendix at the end of this book for the treatment.
