B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE XIV

An Explanation

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: Before proceeding with the subject of the evening there is a matter I think I ought to refer to, bearing upon the apostasy from the true Christian faith, and which I ought to put into the record. It is not of much importance in itself, but our Roman Catholic friends attach very much importance to it, in their controversial literature, and I would not like to have them think I had not considered it.

WHEN DID THE FALSE CHURCH SUPPLANT THE TRUE?

I have in these discourses, especially in No. XI, given attention to the question with which Roman Catholics seek to embarrass Protestants, by demanding where the church was before the 'Reformation' ", etc. They also ask Protestants, and some of their representatives in controversy have asked me—hence it is pertinent here: At what time exactly did the apostasy from the Christian Church take place? I quote from Milner's (Catholic) End of Religious Controversy as setting forth this matter most completely:

"Protestants have maintained that the church in past ages, totally failed, and became the synagogue of Satan, and that its head pastor, the bishop of Rome, was and is the 'man of sin', the identical anti-Christ: But they have never been able to settle among themselves, when this, the most remarkable of all revolutions which have happened since the world began, actually took place; or who were the authors, and who the opposers of it; or by what strange means these authors prevailed on so many millions of people of different nations, languages, and interests throughout Christendom, to give up the supposed pure religion, which they had learned from their fathers, and to embrace a new and false system, which its adversaries now call Popery! In a word, there is no way of accounting for the pretended change of religion, at whatever period this may be fixed, but by supposing, as I have said, that the whole collection of Christians, on some one night, went to bed Protestants and woke up the next morning Papists" (End of Religious Controversy, Milner, p. 273)!

No one, it seems to me, not even Protestant controversialists, would make such a claim as that, conjured up, as I think it is, for merely a smart controversial situation. I am sure I would never think of arguing for or making such a claim. Things do not happen that way, either in history, or nature. I remember when a school student of zoology and physiology, my teachers pointed out how closely allied the great kingdoms were. There seemed to be no sharp diversion between them and yet they were divided. In the mineral kingdom there were classes of objects which approached very nearly to vegetable substances. Among species classes as vegetables there were some which seemed to act much as if possessed of animal instincts; and there was no sharp-drawn line between animal and vegetable kingdoms. So later, when I viewed the sky and observed the coming of morning and the departure of day, an hundred times I have watched the sunset and marked the on-coming of the night. Especially in those days of June when one may exclaim with Byron:

"The moon is up, and yet it is not night! Sunset divides the sky with her, * * * * As day and night contending were. * * * Parting day Dies like the dolphin, whom each pang imbues With a new color, as it gasps away, The last still loveliest, till—'tis gone— And all is gray"!

There is day, that we know; and there is night, midnight darkness, and that we know. But when we watch the sunset, and the day leaves the sky as described above, and we try to draw a sharp straight line in the western sky, marking off definitely where day ends and night begins, we cannot succeed; for there is a twilight zone that defeats such an effort; where gleams of light come from beyond our line, and shades of night that extend beyond our line into retreating day!

So with our effort to mark off the historic ending of the true church and the beginning of the false, or apostate church. But as we know that there is an effulgent day; and a midnight darkness, though a twilight zone may separate them, so, too, we know there was a true Church of the Christ and the apostles, and afterwards an apostate Church of Rome and churches born of her, until the true Church of the Christ was supplanted gradually by the false churches of men.

THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION AND CHURCH BY RESTORATION

"Hear O Heaven, and give ear O earth: for the Lord hath spoken" (Isaiah 1:2).

"* * * * All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye" (Isaiah 18:3).

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: I am very happy tonight in reading these texts, and in contemplating the turn my theme takes as foreshadowed by these scriptures and the announcement of the subject of the evening.

I feel that in the previous addresses of this series I have been as one who of necessity had to swim the river Styx, in all its darkness, its miasmas, and foulness; but now I am permitted to climb out upon the Elysian shore to where, from new heights, I may stand up in God's sunlight of clean environment, and present to you the message indicated in these texts and the theme named. All further introductory matter aside, this, O people, is the message I have to deliver and maintain:

MESSAGE OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

God had again spoken from heaven, and by that revelation has restored to earth the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ—the Christian Religion and the Christian Church; and renewed among men the existence of a divine authority to act for God—to work in the name of God; and he has commissioned men to preach the gospel among all nations, tongues and people; he has given a worldwide and an age-long message—has ushered in, in fact—"The Dispensation of the Gospel's Fulness of Times."

A bold declaration this, I know! One needs indeed the strength of God to make it. It is only in that strength it can be made. I marvel at my own temerity, now that I have said it. But it stands. "I can do no other. God help me". "To this end came I into the world".

And now, that you may have evidence that it is no mere wild fanatic that has spoken; no mere enthusiast that has broken loose—"to the law and to the testimony"; for if I, or other men, speak not according to that word, it is because there is no light in them or me (Isaiah 8:20).

A NEW DISPENSATION PREDICTED BY ST. PETER

You will remember the occasion of St. Peter and St. John passing the "gate beautiful" in Jerusalem and a maimed man sitting beside it? And how the two servants of God out of compassion for his plight healed him? How the man in his joy and exclamations attracted the passing crowd, who marveled at what had been done? How Peter then explained that what had been wrought was through faith in Jesus Christ. Then he preached Christ unto them; in the course of which he said: "But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, * * * * and killed the Prince of Life, whom God hath raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses". Through ignorance they and their rulers had done this thing: "But those things which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ which before was preached unto you: Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:14-21).

Note that here a dispensation future from the time in which St. Peter 1s speaking is proclaimed; a "times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord" shall be had, a dispensation from God, in which Jesus Christ, which before had been preached unto the people, should again be sent to the earth, but whom, in the meantime, the heaven must retain—i.e., keep, "until the times of Restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets".

TESTIMONY OF ST. PAUL

St. Paul says: "In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. * * * * Wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence: Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth; even in him" (Ephesians 1:7-10).

Here is promised also a dispensation future from the time of St. Paul, in which all things shall be gathered together in one—even in him, the Christ—"a dispensation of the fulness of times".

There can be no question of there being identity between this event and St. Peter's "times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord"—"the times of the restitution of all things". The points of contact are too many to admit of any doubt of identity of the things dealt with. And each is a promise of a dispensation or out-giving of truth from God by revelation, and future from the times of these apostles.

THE TESTIMONY OF ST. JOHN

Unto St. John, according to the Book of Revelation, were shown the things that were, and the things which should be thereafter; that is to say, future from his time (Rev. 1:19), Among the things shown to him which would be future from his time was the following vision which was to take place "in the hour of God's judgment", that is toward the end of the world.

"And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come; and worship him that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters" (Revelation 14:6-7).

Men at this epoch—"the hour of God's judgment"—must be regarded as being universally without the gospel, for it is to be preached, this restored gospel, to every nation, kindred, tongue and people; showing that all of these were without it—hence the need of restoring it to all.

The chief item of the message is to call men back to the worship of the true God—the worship of him "who made heaven and earth", implying that the world had departed from the worship of God—hence the commandment to return to it—the worship of the true God, and all that is implied by worship—right conception of, and obedience to God.

This great revealment unites with the other two: (1) St. Peter's "times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord"; "the times of the restitution of all things" spoken by the prophets, attended by the coming again of the Christ, who before had been preached unto men. (2) St. Paul's incoming of "the dispensation of the fulness of times", with all things gathered together in Christ—all former dispensations—gathered into one. What a blending of three great prophecies we have here, pointing to one great intent of God! A three-fold blending together of testimony for the truth! "A three-fold cord is not quickly [meaning easily] broken", say the scriptures (Ecclesiastes 4:12); indicating strength; so our three-fold cord of prophecy!

AN ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT

Here also as part of the preparation of mind for the reception of my message tonight, let me make good my statement in a previous number of this series (No. IX) that the church of apostolic times was an arrested development.

THE PRIMACY OF THREE APOSTLES NOT PERPETUATED

You will remember the incident of the mother of Zebedee's children who would have her two sons sit with the Christ in his kingdom, the one on his right hand, the other on his left (detailed in No. III this series). You will remember also, that there was no reproof from the Christ on this conception of such a ruling body in the Christ's kingdom; [He had doubtless taught it, hence the mother's idea]; only that it was not the Master's prerogative then to say who would receive this high honor; "but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father" (Matthew 20—where the whole incident is given).

Afterwards also we saw that Peter and James and John [the last two brothers—and the sons of Zebedee] were drawn into a nearness to the Christ, where special relationships were established and privileges enjoyed not shared by the other apostles: The privilege of presence at the healing of Jairus' daughter; the journey to the mount where they and the Christ met with the two great prophets of the ancient world, Moses and Elias, and where the Christ was transfigured before them; and where they heard the voice of God giving special witness of the Christ as the Son of God (Matthew 17:1-9); their special selection to be the closer companions of the Master's agony in Gethsemane (Matthew 26:36-38). Was the Christ preparing them as the head of the governing body when he should depart, and as contemplated in the full organization of his "kingdom" or church?

After the departure of the Christ from among the disciples the trio was early broken up in the church by the martyrdom of St. James 1n the persecution under Herod Antipas—he was "slain with the sword". Was his place afterwards taken by James, brother of the Lord, who figured so prominently at Jerusalem; and where Paul observed that these three, Cephas, or Peter, this second James, and John "seemed to be pillars" in the church at that memorable council relative to the Gentiles and their place in the church (cf. Galatians 2:9; and Acts 15)? But if so, the governing trio was not perpetuated beyond the lives of these men.

THE QUORUM OF TWELVE NOT PERPETUATED

The vacancy created by the apostasy of Judas, one of the twelve, was filled by the selection of another, Matthias, "and he was numbered with the eleven" (Acts 1). But beyond this the quorum of the twelve was not perpetuated, and its vacancies, as they occurred, filled. Paul, the apostle, presents no difficulty here, since Paul's "apostleship" seems to be something apart, a special or independent apostolic calling, and not associated with the twelve as a member of that quorum.

OFFICERS IN THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH TO BE PERPETUATED

All the descriptions of the church organization in the New Testament would lead one to look for the perpetuation of all the officers given: One acting at the head as eyes or ears, or the whole head, not being permitted to say to humbler members, hands or feet, I have no need of thee; nay we are given to understand that the very humblest members of the body are necessary; then how much more the major members of the body religious must be necessary, such as apostles, prophets, etc. (I Corinthians 12). "And God hath placed some in the church [we are told], apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers; and all this for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith to the knowledge of the son of God" (Ephesians 4). Most assuredly the New Testament description of the given organization of the Apostolic Church was given with the intention of the perpetuation both of the officers and of their gifts, graces and every spiritual power, and especially the master gift and right of communication with God for guidance for the unfolding of truth—the gift of continuous revelation from God. These officers and their spiritual graces were not perpetuated in such organizations and institutions as followed among men. These were not the continuation of, or the legitimate successors of this Apostolic Church; but men-devised institutions, forms of godliness, lacking the power thereof, mere usurpations and abuses of divine functions; and ultimately the climbing into power of him whom Paul to the Thessalonians described as the "man of sin", who would oppose and exalt himself "above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God sitteth in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God." The apostles would and did resist this rising of the "mystery of iniquity," according to the prophecy, until they were "taken out of the way." Then was that "Wicked" revealed, "whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming, even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all signs and lying wonders" (II Thessalonians 2:1-8). How consistently the word of God hangs together! Let us catch up and hold in our thought for a moment the things set forth:

RECAPITULATION

The promise of the coming of a New Dispensation, future from the time of the apostles who wrote of it; a uniting, and an all-inclusive dispensation, embracing all that has gone before—the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times—the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord—the times of the restitution of all things spoken by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world began;—the dispensation inclusive of all the others. The spiritual streams designed to flow into it. It is time to consider that.

THE MODERN PROPHET'S FIRST VISION

In the opening decades of the 19th century, in the United States, there was being manifested that remarkable experience among "Christian" churches, that was known as "Christian revivals", bringing together the people in great religious encampments continuing for many weeks at a time. In these gatherings a great excitement and religious fervor prevailed, some of it of the most extravagant character. At such times conversions were numerous; but sometimes rivalry and jealousies developed among the different sects of the supposedly common "Christian" churches, which dissipated the good feeling among them, and resulted in bitterness and unseemly effort made to benefit the respective churches by increasing their number. In the spring of 1820 such a "revival" carried on by the united sects was held in the vicinity of western New York. The excitement ran high, and especially in the matter of dividing the recent converts among the sects engaged.

Joseph Smith, then but a youth, witnessed the proceedings of this revival, and was much perplexed by the divisions that obtained. "What was to be done"? he would frequently ask himself. For being of a deeply religious nature he felt desirous of uniting with some one of these churches. "Who of all these parties is right, and which shall I join"? "If any one of them is right, which is it, and how shall I know it"? In the midst of his perplexities his attention was attracted to the passage in James which said: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. Let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord" (James 1:5-7).

With this he was impressed, as with the very voice of God to his soul; and he resolved to carry out the divine injunction. In response to his prayer "for wisdom", he received a direct answer in an open-day vision, in which God, the Father, attended by his son Jesus Christ appeared to him. And the first, addressing him, said:

"JOSEPH, THIS IS MY BELOVED SON, HEAR HIM".

Jesus Christ, the Son of God, to whom Joseph Smith was thus directed, answering the youth's question, "Which of these religious sects shall I join"? was answered—and I give the answer in the questioner's words:

GOD'S PRONOUNCEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE MODERN RELIGIOUS WORLD

"I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all wrong; and the Personage who addressed me said that all their creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors were all corrupt; that: 'they draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny the power thereof' " (Pearl of Great Price, p. 48).

The direction to join none of the sects was repeated; but the youth was promised that at some future time the fulness of the gospel would be made known to him, and that he was chosen to be an instrument in the hands of God to bring about his purposes in these modern times (Wentworth Letter, History of the Church, Period I, vol. IV, p. 436). Thus the vision closed, and the promised dispensation of the fulness of times was opened. In due course of time, and rapidly, the other things necessary to the unfolding of the Restoration followed:

INCIDENTS IN THE RESTORATION: THE BOOK OF MORMON

The Book of Mormon was revealed and brought forth; the American volume of scripture, which revealed the knowledge that the gospel of Jesus Christ was had among the ancient Americans; that the resurrected Christ visited them and established his truth and church.

JOHN THE BAPTIST

John the Baptist, raised from the dead, came and restored the priesthood he held—giving authority to baptize, and he, the Baptist, himself, directed the first baptisms of the New Dispensation—Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery—whom he authorized to baptize each other.

THE APOSTLESHIP RESTORED: PETER, JAMES AND JOHN

Peter, James and John—our trio of apostles of the New Testament special distinction—later appeared to the Prophet and his associate Oliver Cowdery, and conferred upon them the holy apostleship—plenary power to organize the Church of the Christ in its fulness and direct its course and procedure. They received the "keys of the kingdom of heaven" from him who had last held them in the earth and his associate apostles, James and John. Thus Joseph Smith succeeded to the primacy and power of St. Peter, which the Christ conferred upon him. Not however, through the tortuous line of popes—some of them the vilest and wickedest of men; and all of them, not merely questionable as to the line through which St. Peter's primacy and all his authority received from the Christ was transmitted, but demonstrably not such line: Not through such a line did Joseph Smith receive authority from St. Peter, but by direct ordination from the apostle himself and his associate apostles. Thus Joseph Smith, under direction from time to time or revelation from God, organized the Church of Christ, and developed anew the fulness of the Christian religion.

INCIDENTS IN THE RESTORATION RENEWED

Jesus, later, after the Kirtland Temple was built and dedicated to the Lord—Jesus again personally appeared and declared his approval of the work so far developed.

Moses, the prophet, appeared and gave the keys he held for the gathering of Israel; which gathering of Israel is to be consummated in modern times.

Elias, the ancient patriarchal prophet, came and delivered the keys of authority pertaining to patriarchal powers by which the children of the ancient fathers and modern peoples are to be blessed and united.

Elijah, the ancient prophet, who was translated to heaven without tasting death—death in him was suspended, hence the man of two worlds, capable of ministering in both heaven and earth—a very much needed sort of man. He came and restored the keys of the priesthood, having the singular power of turning the hearts of the children to the fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children, opening the way for vicarious work to be done by the children in behalf of the fathers, administering the ordinances for and in behalf of them; thus making possible the universal application of the gospel to men of all ages and races, revealing the grandeur, the largeness, and the glory of the fulness of the gospel of Christ (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cx).

In these splendid, and cumulative revelations of God, is the Christian religion and Church of the Christ restored to the earth—not by peeping and muttering and seeking after familiar spirits of an evil sort and in darkness; but openly, in the light of day, to chosen witnesses who are to carry the knowledge of these things and that which attends upon them, to every nation, kindred, tongue, and people.

REFLECTIONS ON THE RESTORATION

And now a closer word in relation to these things and more especially in relation to that opening message with which the New Dispensation begins—the first vision and revelation to Joseph Smith. It is a harsh message; The churches of "Christendom" are all wrong; they are not acknowledged of God as his church; "they teach for doctrine the commandments of men; they have forms of godliness but deny the power thereof". That is a tremendous arraignment. I scarcely marvel that some men shrink from declaring it, or having others declare it. A brother said to me recently, referring to this announcement, "I wish the Lord had been a bit more diplomatic". Another, upon my reminding him that it was God who had passed this judgment on the status of the "Christian" world, answered: "Yes, and I would not repeat that declaration before any intelligent and educated body of men, anywhere in this country"! "What", I exclaimed! Then I remembered Job's words: "Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake * * * the hair on my flesh stood up; * * * there was silence, and I heard a voice saying: Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man be more pure [in this case wiser] than his maker"?

Then I accepted the rest of Job's daring assertion: "Behold, he [God] put no trust in his servants, and his angels he charged with folly" (Job 4).

For my own part, I thank God for his message. I am grateful that this cause of the New Dispensation into which I have put my heart, and in which I have spent all the years of my young manhood, the years of middle life, and now the years where the shadows are growing longer, giving me notice that the end is drawing near—I am proud to know that this cause which I love, is not founded upon some mere differences of the schoolmen; such as a disagreement as to the form of church government, episcopal or presbyterian; or about the form or purpose of baptism; or upon which day of the week men shall worship. No: not upon these is it founded, but upon a great world need. There was, when it opened, a stern, hard necessity for it. The Christian religion and church was not among men—not on the earth; and the only way in which it could be returned to the earth was by making the world acquainted with its plight. By proclaiming the apostate condition of humanity, its alienation from God. That is the first step, and the necessary one toward a remedy of the situation. But One can take that step, pronounce that judgment; and that is God—the Son of God. And take note here, my audience, that it was God who did that—who made that revelation and announced that judgment on the world. It was not Joseph Smith. Confessedly he was incompetent to decide even for himself which of the sects was the true one. He sought God for knowledge, and wisdom founded upon it. And he found it; and what a volume of it, for himself and for the world!

As for this man I speak of who would shrink from repeating the words of God "before any body of intelligent or educated men", he neither remembers the rights nor the majesty of God in this. Is it so that God shall not tell his world-children their plight of alienation through apostasy, and the status of their creeds and their own standing before him? And in such terms as his own wisdom chooses for making the truth plain? Must he mouth his words to please the ear or meet the notions of propriety of weakling men?

I love to hear God say, as he does say, in his revelations in modern times, and in relation to these very matters of the status of the world: "What I the Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall all be fulfilled" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. i).

THE PRIDE OF PLACE GIVEN TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST

I bless God for the proud position he has given to his church brought forth in these days! It is not a large church in numbers—a mere hand full of people only. We are not a wealthy church, and our people, for the most part, are a people of humble financial circumstances. We are neither commercially nor industrially strong. We are not a learned people. Our scholarship is indifferent. We have not a noted, outstanding scholar among us, in any department of scholarship. While averaging fairly well in moral and spiritual virtues, we would have to confess ourselves as living on a plane far below our ideals; and we are a bit given to self-righteousness. We could well say with an early American minister speaking defensively of his congregation:

"We are not so pure, but that we have great cause to be humbled and ashamed that we are so impure; not so religious, but that those who watch for our halting, may see things in us whence they may take occasion to reproach us and religion" (Jonathan Edwards).

Our strength in all things, such as we have, comes from the fact of our faith in God, by which we believe in him, and in the fact that he has spoken through revelation in our day and time, and opened up to those who will receive it, access to his hidden treasures of knowledge, and wisdom founded upon it. By this simple means his knowledge, and the wisdom founded upon it, becomes our source of knowledge, and wisdom. His strength, as he wills it, and measures it out to us, and as we seek for it, becomes our strength, and learning, and wisdom. And behold, what a place by that means God has given his church!

The Romish Church stands at the corner of a triangle figure saying, we are the true Church of the Christ, for we are successors of the apostles and to their authority, to their orders, and to their mission.

The "Reformed" churches, standing at another corner of the triangle, say: The church succeeding the Apostolic Church, became unspeakably corrupted under the Romish regime, but we reformed it; plucked it out of its fallen state, and by that means restored primitive Christianity.

And now the Church of Christ, the Church of the New Dispensation, standing on the remaining corner of the triangle, in the authority of God can say to the Church of Rome: Your church is not the rightful successor of the Church of the Apostles and of the Christ. You have neither their authority, their orders, or their mission. To the "Reformed" churches, she can say, and does say: You have not reformed the Church of Rome; no, nor improved upon it in doctrine, in the sense of bringing back to the world primitive Christianity and a divine authority. Standing at the place God has given to her, formed by these positions, the Church of the New Dispensation proclaims the return of the Christian religion and church to the earth by a Restoration of it through the revelations of God, which make the truth of the gospel known, and at the same time bring into existence a church authorized by a divine authority to administer it.

Such the position of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the religious world! How splendid it is! How commanding! But its strength is of God, not of man. How the declaration of Joseph Smith is sustained by the facts and prophecies of scripture, by the testimony of history, by the force of reason! The young prophet knew nothing of the corroborating testimonies from all these sources when he made his declaration to the world that the churches were all wrong. God gave him the truth as to the world's religious status in a few words; and now behold, how wonderfully the message is proven true by scripture, reason, and history! I know of no one single thing, that makes for proof of a divine spirit of inspiration in, and the fact of revelation from God to our Prophet of the New Dispensation more than this proclamation of the Christian world's apostatic status, because of the proof that may be assembled to demonstrate the fact of it. How apparent it is now that the churches of "Christendom" are all wrong; that they teach for doctrine the conceptions and commandments of men! Or as Isaiah 50ong ago prophesied men would do. 'They have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, and broken the everlasting covenant. Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are left desolate" (Isaiah 24). And therefore the world stood in need of the restoration of the gospel here set forth.
