B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE XV

The Wholeness and Universality of the Gospel

"Paul, a servant of God, * * * in hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world began" (Titus 1:1, 2).

"For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things; * * * but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot: Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you" (I Peter 1:18-20).

"The Lamb slain from the foundation of the world" (Revelation 13:8). (Meaning, of course, Jesus Christ).

PRE-WORLD EXISTENCE OF THE GOSPEL

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: One of the things that prevents so-called "Christendom" from rightly apprehending the Christian revelation and the Christian religion is that they take too narrow a view of it; assign a too recent advent for it into the world. Quite generally they regard "Christianity" as originating with Jesus Christ some two thousand years ago, and they have little or no conception of "Christianity before Christ". For them the whole of it began with the birth of the Savior; this, or at most with the birth and ministry of John the Baptist, Messiah's forerunner or special minister. Really in their view, this was the beginning of the gospel as launched among men. None of their modern teachers have risen to the fine conception that:

"As many as would believe * * * in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved. Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, * * * should have eternal life, as well as those who should come after, who should believe" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx:25-6; Revelation given April, 1830.) In other words, those living before the coming of Messiah in the flesh, having faith in him and looking forward to his coming and his work of redemption for men, would have the same effect as when men living after his coming in the flesh look back upon such work and believe (Book of Mormon, Jarom i:11, also II Nephi xxv:26-30; Alma xxxix:15-18; Mosiah xv:11, 12; and elsewhere passim). Providing, of course, they knew of him, and of his coming, and of his work, and would accept of it in their faith.

In that event it may not be doubted that the psychical effect would be the same in the one case as in the other; for in both cases it would be a mental-spiritual act, or act of faith upon a reality to be, or that had been; and in each case reality to the mind; and equally effective before as after the physical event.

It will be observed that these scriptures which I have read and combined into a text, foreshadowing the main thought of my discourse this evening, give no restricted time to the gospel as to its beginning. St. Paul's "hope of eternal life" was promised of God, "before the world began"! Of great antiquity, then, if older than the world! The Christ, according to our scripture from St. Peter, was "a Lamb without blemish, and without spot: Who verily was foreordained, before the foundation of the world"; and whose blood is spoken of in Hebrews as "the blood of the everlasting covenant" (Hebrews 13:20, 21). This "everlasting covenant", through which men were to be made "perfect" in every good work and sealed by the blood of Christ, must be that same promise or agreement referred to by St. Paul as "the promise" or covenant, of eternal life, "which God promised before the world began".

THE EARTH ANTIQUITY OF THE GOSPEL

The reason why so little is known concerning the gospel in the ancient world, from the days, say of Adam, thence through the patriarchal period of Enoch to Noah, thence through Shem to Abraham, Moses and the prophets of Israel, is because of the fragmentary character of some parts of the Old Testament and of the New; in some cases whole books are missing. But in our scriptures as they stand there is much incidental mention of and allusion to the gospel previous to the coming of the Christ, as leads one to believe that the world must have had some knowledge of that coming and of the gospel, before the earth-advent of the Savior. For instance in the very earliest scripture, in the conversation of the Lord God with the serpent and the woman Eve, it is written: "I will put enmity between thee [the serpent] and the woman; and between thy seed and her seed; it [the woman's seed] shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel" (Genesis 3:15). Let it be observed here that the woman's "seed" is given in the singular number, "as of one"; "It shall bruise thy head"—that is the Christ to whom reference is made, shall bruise the serpent's head—shall wound him in a vital part; while the serpent shall have power only to wound the woman's "seed" in the heel—an unvital part. The victory shall be given to the seed of the woman. The Christ will overcome Lucifer. A prophecy of the future world-battle of good and evil forces—between the Christ and Lucifer, with assurance from God of victory with the Christ.

EARLY INSTITUTION OF SACRIFICE—THE "WHY" OF IT

There is also the strange fact in Genesis of the offerings of Cain and Abel—sacrifices; one an offering of the fruit of the earth, the other the offering of the firstling of his flock, and of the fat thereof—the first and choicest. "And the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering. But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect". And why? Why "offering" at all, in the first place? Whence came it? What is the occasion of it? Then why "fruit of the earth" in the one case, and "a Lamb without blemish" in the other? Did the father, Adam, teach these sons the offering of sacrifice? Did Adam offer sacrifice? Why was the fruit offering of Cain rejected and the necessary blood-offering of Abel approved and accepted? Surely it may be contended, and is, that the fruit offering of Cain must have been more beautiful than the blood-offering of Abel. Why did it not meet with divine approval? None of these questions find authoritative answers from the scriptures. Not only was Cain's offering rejected, according to Genesis, but Cain was severely reproved for his anger, at his offering being rejected; but he is told that if he doeth well he shall be accepted; "and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door, [here sin is personified] and to thee shall be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him" (Genesis 4:1-7). God took cognizance, then, of this matter of "sacrifices" by these brothers; but gives no explanation of the matter. What a mystery is here! This difference of sacrifices and what grew out of it resulted in the crime of fratricide by Cain. He became his brother's murderer.

In our New Dispensation, however, God reveals some of the writings of Moses that the world had lost and in those writings it is made known that sacrifices began with Adam, and that because God had so commanded him; also, it was commanded that men should worship the Lord their God, and they should offer the firstlings of their flock, for an offering to the Lord. And "Adam was obedient unto the commandments of the Lord". Then the following:

THE GOSPEL REVEALED TO ADAM

"And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me. And then the angel spake saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth. Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore. And in that day the Holy Ghost fell upon Adam, which beareth record of the Father and the Son, saying: I am the Only Begotten of the Father from the beginning, henceforth and forever, that as thou hast fallen thou mayest be redeemed, and all mankind, even as many as will. * * * * And thus the gospel began to be preached, from the beginning, being declared by holy angels sent forth from the presence of God, and by his own voice, and by the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus all things were confirmed unto Adam, by an holy ordinance, and the gospel preached, and a decree sent forth, that it should be in the world, until the end thereof" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, v:6-9; 58, 59).

Now we know the "why" of sacrifice: Why Cain's offering of fruit was not acceptable—God had not commanded that kind of sacrifice to be offered; it contained no element of a symbol of the "atonement" which the Son of God was to make for the redemption of man. No wonder God rejected it. In every way it was an insult to him. It was an impudent rejection of what he had commanded, and it substituted something else for the thing God had desired foreshadowed; it was a mockery of the means designed of God for the symbol of the redemption of the race and the salvation of man. It could well have been designed and the offering promoted by Lucifer who rebelled in heaven, and renewed his warfare upon the things of God among men on earth.

EFFECT OF THIS NEW LIGHT ON ANTIQUITY—ENOCH

But to return to this revealment made by the Mosaic scripture brought to light by the Prophet of the New Dispensation (some six months after the publication of the Book of Mormon); what a flood of light it throws upon the narrative of Genesis, and upon all antiquity! God did not leave men in ancient times in ignorance of his purposes as to their salvation and the means of it. One can understand now somewhat how the enlightenment came to Enoch, who with his people, "walked with God and he was not, for God took him" (Genesis 5:24). "Translated" him, Paul says, "that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him"; but "before he translated him he [Enoch] had this testimony that he pleased God" (Hebrews 11:5). Jude also tells us something of Enoch, "the seventh from Adam", how he prophesied of certain evil characters of the last days, saying: "Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly that are among them" (Jude 14, 15). Thus Enoch's knowledge of the things of God and his vision of the movements of our Lord was projected forward even to the glorious coming of the Son of God in the end of the world!

THE GOSPEL WITH NOAH

Noah, too, was "a preacher of righteousness". He also, as Enoch, "walked with God" (Genesis 6:9). His revelations from God are frequent, according to Genesis, and he is commended for righteousness, and obedience to God, as was fitting, truly, for one who was to witness God's judgment on the antique world, and become a second Adam to a new order to be instituted after the flood. Would not he have knowledge of the gospel as well as the first Adam, and Enoch? We may know from the scriptures that he had the gospel, and that he preached it in his time. Follow through as we obtain this knowledge.

St. Peter says: "The Christ * * * * being put to death in the flesh was quickened by the spirit by which also he went and preached to the spirits in prison, which sometimes were disobedient when the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah while the ark was a preparing" (I Peter 3:18-20). He [the Christ] * * * * preached to the spirits in prison"; and what did he preach? Undoubtedly what he preached on earth, the gospel, and as no other had ever preached it; attended with a majesty and power that made his work unique; and now "also" he went and preached it to the "spirits in prison" who had lived in the days of Noah, and had rejected the message of that righteous man.

Again St. Peter: "For this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to man in the flesh [i.e. as men in the flesh are judged]; but live according to God in the spirit" (I Peter 4:5, 6). So that "the Gospel was preached to them that are dead"! This could refer to no other "preaching" than that of the Christ just above mentioned, and to those who had once rejected that gospel in the days of the righteous Noah who had preached it unto them in earth-life in vain. But now it was preached to them in the spirit world by the Christ. We cannot suppose that the Christ "visited the underworld" and preached to them a gospel that was of no avail to them—that they could not be redeemed by! It would be out of character for the Christ to preach the gospel that could only be a taunt, a mockery, to those who heard it. In some way it would be effective in salvation to them.

Then we have St. Paul's startling inquiry: "What shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead" (I Corinthians 15:29)? Pertinent and pregnant question! How these fragments of revealed truth piece together! Noah who was a preacher of righteousness preached the gospel, but the people of his day rejected it; and were destroyed from life by the flood, and their spirits gathered to the prison-house where they are held inward, and under limitations imposed by their disobedience. Then after three thousand years they are visited by the Son of God in the spirit, who again preached to them the gospel; and for this cause; that they might be judged as men are in the flesh to whom the gospel is preached; but live according to God in the spirit, that is in loving obedience to it, if they will! And if they will, provision is made for them to receive that gospel by the sign of its acceptance through baptism—"baptism for the dead"! A vicarious work for the dead, in "this everlasting gospel".

OTHER DISPENSATIONS—ABRAHAM

Let us now renew our story of the dispensations of the gospel. We have come from Adam, through the patriarchal period, to the post-diluvian period. I quote a saying of St. Paul: "And the scriptures, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith preached before the gospel to Abraham; saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed" (Galatians 3:8). The question will here arise: What gospel? Fortunately in this same Epistle from which I quote, St. Paul lays it down most emphatically that there is but one gospel: "Some would trouble you", he says, to these same Galatians: "But though we or an angel from heaven preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed". There is but one gospel then; and when this same apostle, in this same book, says the "gospel was preached unto Abraham", he could mean no other than that same gospel which he had preached unto the Galatians; and this aforetime had been preached unto Abraham, as it had been to Adam, Enoch and Noah, they having looked forward to the coming of the Messiah, and to the atonement which was to vitalize all the preaching they heard and the ordinances they obeyed, by the pre-arranged and promised sacrifice of the Christ himself in the meridian of time; and it stands to reason as I have already pointed out, that this looking forward to the atonement to be made, would be as effective to salvation as it would be in the time when men looked backward to the same thing to vitalize their faith in the redemption proposed through Christ.

Paul further emphasizes his doctrine in Galatians of the gospel having been preached unto Abraham, by the following inquiry: "Wherefore then serveth the law"? Having in mind the law of Moses, under which Israel had lived from his advent into Canaan, at least, unto the coming of the Christ. That is to say, if the gospel had been preached to Abraham, "Wherefore then serveth the law"? Paul answered his own question: "It was added because of transgression until the seed [i.e. the Christ] should come to whom the promise was made". "It [the law of Moses] was added because of transgression". Added to what? Added to the gospel, of course, which before had been preached unto Abraham, and as we shall see, to Israel also. The whole of Paul's reasoning is in happy, that is to say true, sequence. The gospel had been preached to Abraham, as to the more ancient patriarchs, perhaps in the case of Abraham, by Melchizedek—that great "priest of the most high God" who brought forth unto Abraham "bread and wine", beyond question a sacramental ceremony of tremendous significance. Now observe:

THE GOSPEL GIVEN TO ISRAEL UNDER MOSES

Unto Israel, under Moses, as well as to Abraham, was the gospel preached. Paul again: "But with whom was he [God] grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell in the wilderness? And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not? So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. For unto us was the gospel preached as well as unto them; but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it" (Hebrews 3:17-19; iv:1-2).

And again Paul: "Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat: And did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ" (I Corinthians 10:1-5). Now we are prepared to better understand Paul's—"the gospel preached to Abraham", and also "the gospel preached to Ancient Israel under Moses", but the word preached profited them nothing, "not being mixed with faith in them that heard it"; and hence the law of Moses—confessedly a lesser law than the gospel—a law of "carnal commandments"—a law of "types and symbols of things and not the very things themselves"—continued in Israel. "For the 'law' made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did" (Hebrews 7:19): For the law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices * * * * make the comers thereunto perfect" (Hebrews 10:1). And so passim throughout the great Epistle.

THE DISPENSATION OF THE MERIDIAN OF TIME

From this period of Israel through that of the prophets we come to the forerunner of the Christ, and to the Christ himself, and the dispensation of things through him to the revelation of God through him, for Jesus was no other than "God manifested in the flesh" (I Timothy 3:16); he made atonement for sin; he revealed the love of God for man by that sacrifice; he created the possibility of fellowship with God through the Holy Ghost; he brought about the resurrection from the dead—bringing life and immortality to light through the gospel! All this the Christ did; and also taught by precept and lived in fact the perfect life—moral and spiritual—required by the gospel. His life and doctrine written by his followers made up the New Testament scriptures, thus reducing to permanent form, for the most part, the account of the things which Jesus both did and taught, and thereby conferred a most permanent blessing upon the human race.

This scripture [the New Testament] also recorded the things which the apostles and other inspired servants of God did in the times immediately following the Christ, thus increasing the value of the things Jesus taught by their admonitions upon them and by reducing them to an attempted practice by the community of his following—his church.

Then came the arrested development in the organization, as we have already seen (No. XIV this series); the failure to perpetuate the organization, especially in the major offices of the church, their high spiritual functions also, and the powerful gifts and graces inherent in them. Also the arrested development of some doctrines of the dispensation of the Christ and the apostles are to be noted; for example, the doctrine of the preaching of the gospel in the spirit world (I Peter 3; also I Peter iv); and the full outgrowth or significance of it. Also the doctrine of "baptism for the dead", definitely enough mentioned, and spoken of as a practice followed, but mentioned nowhere else than in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians, and no knowledge is there given of the procedure—though it is a doctrine of the utmost importance, if, as implied by the mention and practice of it, the dead may receive the saving grace in acceptance of, and obedience to, the gospel. It may affect the salvation of the larger part of the human race, did men but know the fulness of the procedure. It represents an arrested development of a most important part of the gospel in that dispensation. Then followed the era of "The 'Falling Away', or the World's Loss of the Christian Religion and Church"—the age of darkness—the midnight of the world—brought on by the Christian world's departure from the truth of God, the gospel and the corruption of the church by those appointed to administer it. Then the period of renaissance—the world's slow awakening to enlightenment and the final coming of the promised Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, which shall bring to light all the purposes of God, and gather together in one all things in Christ.

THE PRE-WORLD KNOWLEDGE AND PLAN OF THE GOSPEL

We have before us now in outline, the whole course of the gospel in the earth, but nothing of that pre-world situation respecting which the texts treat, we made use of in the beginning of this discourse. What of St. Paul and his "hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world began"? What of St. Peter and the "Lamb without blemish"—ordained before the foundation of the world, but manifest in these last times for men? What of St. John's "Lamb slain from the foundation of the world"? Are we to learn nothing of all this? And what of the "war in heaven" mentioned also by St. John (Revelation 12), where "Michael and his angels fought against the dragon [Lucifer] and his angels". A war in which Michael and his angels ultimately prevailed, and the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: "he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him". And there was joy in heaven that he was overcome, and a shout of "woe" went up for those who would inhabit the earth, for Lucifer would be there to persecute the saints, and make war upon them (Revelation 12). Are we to know nothing of all this, and what it was all about—these pre-earth experiences of the intelligences which in some way are associated with the inhabitants of the earth?

THE PURPOSE OF GOD IN THE CREATION OF MAN

Do not think me overbold in what follows, but does "Christendom" know anything definitely about these matters? If so, what is it? Think, I pray you! Neither Jew nor Christian from their scriptures in their hands can give you either from the Old Testament or the New a definite authoritative answer from either collection of books, saying just what is the purpose of God in creation! What the purpose and design of God is in the creation of man! David's great question, in the Psalm 8, and repeated by St. Paul in Hebrews 2:6-8 remain to this day unanswered from their scriptures either by Jew or Christian. "What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him"? asks David in the Psalm 8. But what is the answer? I do not ask for speculations from poets or philosophers, nor long drawn out deductions from theologians, but a plain, authoritative declaration from scripture—from the revelations of God—from God himself. Such an answer is not to be found in the New Testament or Old. The nearest approach to such an answer is in the following scriptures: "O Lord * * * * thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created" (Revelation 4:11). "Bring my sons from far * * * * everyone; * * * * for I have created him for my glory" (Isaiah 43:6, 7). How far all this is satisfactory as an answer, judge ye! It may be all very well to say that all things were created for the "pleasure" of God; and for his "glory"; but where does man appear in all that? What satisfaction to his questioning does it bring? Or how solve the mystery of life for him?

THREE GREAT NEW PASSAGES

In the New Dispensation, however, God by revelation has made known three very definite things:

(1) "Behold, this is my work and my glory, to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Moses, i:39).

(2) "All things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things; Adam fell that men might be [i.e. exist as men]; and men are that they might have joy" (Book of Mormon, II Nephi 2).

(3) "Man is spirit [i.e. mind in the chiefest fact of him]; the elements [i.e. meaning the final, simple stuff that things are made of] are eternal: and spirit and element inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy; and when separated man cannot receive a fulness of joy. The elements are the tabernacle of God; yea, man is the tabernacle of God, even temples" (Doctrine and Covenants 43:33-5).

In these newly revealed doctrines is disclosed the importance and purpose of human life: the union of spirit and element essential to the happiness of man, which God is engaged in bringing about—the immortality and eternal life of man: the existence of man that he might have joy; the inseparable union of eternal spirit with eternal element, necessary to that joy; and this God seeks to promote.

These three great declarations make up part of the knowledge that has been brought forth in this New Dispensation of the gospel. They represent three items of revealed truth brought together from widely separated revelations. I cannot at this time enter into the consideration of the circumstances under which they were brought forth, but I present them to you as possessed of intrinsic value in themselves; as being of self evident importance, respecting the purpose of God in man's earth-life. What think ye of them?

PRE-EARTH EXISTENCE OF HUMAN SPIRIT

And now with these purposes of God in mind, let us consider more revealments in this New Dispensation as to that pre-world knowledge of "eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world began". I must ask you to think rapidly with me:

Jesus in his prayer in Gehtsemane said: "And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory I had with thee before the world was" (St. John 17).

And again it is said: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God * * * * And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth" (St. John 1). All this establishes the spirit existence of the Christ before the world was. A score of other passages of scripture support these quoted.

And now as to man—the race of men—and spirit brothers to the Christ: "We have had fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live" (Hebrews 12:9)?

Again: "* * * * Both he that sanctifieth [the Christ] and they that are sanctified are all of One, for which cause he [the Christ] is not ashamed to call them [men] brethren" (Hebrews 2:11). An hundred scriptures could be cited in support of these. The sum of them all would be that both the spirit of the Christ and the spirits of all men had an existence in a spirit world before they existed in earth-life, inhabiting a body; that it was in that pre-existing spirit-life that the earth-life was proposed, and Paul's promise of eternal life was made by God—the inseparable union of spirit and element planned; without which man cannot receive a fulness of joy. Hence earth-life; hence the importance of human life; hence the importance of just being born because of the things that come of it. God must have mortals out of which to get immortals, through the resurrection; and we are assured that "as in Adam all die; so in Christ shall all be made alive", through the resurrection from the dead of course (I Corinthians 15:22).

Another item of modern revelation here enters into the unfolding of our new spiritual knowledge. God looking upon the broad expanse in the midst of his creations, said to his host of pre-existing spirits spoken of above:

A SCENE FROM PRE-WORLD LIFE

"We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them; And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; and they who keep not their first estate shall not have glory in the same kingdom with those who keep their first estate; and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever.

"And the Lord said: "Whom shall I send? And one answered like unto the Son of Man: Here am I, send me. And another answered and said: Here am I, send me. And the Lord said: I will send the first. And the second was angry, and kept not his first estate; and, at that day, many followed after him" (Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham 3:24-28). And he became the devil—this Lucifer; and those who followed him, his angels.

Here, then, in the pre-existing spirit life, is unfolding the beginning of that covenant which God made of eternal life before the world began; here the Redeemer chosen—the Lamb without spot, slain from the foundation of the world; God's intent declared, and his law of righteousness given—"We will prove them herewith, to see if they will do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them"; those who keep not their first estate—are not obedient in the spirit existence—shall not have glory with those who do keep it; they shall not have the same opportunity as those who accept the proposal of earth existence; and those who keep the first estate, and then keep their second estate—prove themselves true in earth-life—shall have glory added upon them forever and forever. In other words the way of eternal progress is open to them, and God can bring to pass in them immortality and eternal life, and eternal progress, according to his declared purpose.

THE WAR IN HEAVEN

And whom shall God send to bring all this about? That is, to manifest, or reveal to men, God in the flesh; reveal the love of God; redeem man from a necessary "fall" to bring to pass earthlife and its experiences; to bring a resurrection from mortality to immortality; to save men from any alienation from God that may occur in earth existence—bringing them back to spiritual union with him—for all this—"Whom shall I send"? For this high honor two present themselves; but one, we learn elsewhere, in such form that his plan would destroy the agency of man, and rob God of his glory: He is rejected, and God chooses his Son, Jesus; and the other, Lucifer, rebelled. Hence "the war in heaven", and all that followed in its train, the casting out of Lucifer into the earth, the world's pain and strife arising from opposite existences of good and evil, the trial of man in that struggle to do whatsoever the Lord his God shall command him to do.

This, briefly, the wholeness of the gospel. In that the gospel covers and applies to the whole race of man, and to all the period of the world's existence. Various and successive dispensations of it have been given out from the beginning, with interregnums occurring through the ages, as men from time to time rejected the counsels of God against themselves. This occasioned a succession of periods of apostasies, and dispensations of restorations of the gospel, until we come to the last, to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, in which all things will be gathered together in one—"all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him".

All rivers to the ocean trend! So the dispensations of the gospel in all the ages preceding the last dispensation—they trend toward, and are gathered into it; in the which shall be consummated all dispensations, and all that pertains to this present order of our earth's affairs, and the salvation of her inhabitants.

The gospel and its relations to the human race is of larger concern than the period between the advent of the Messiah in the flesh until now; even if full means of obtaining salvation had remained in force with all divisions of Christendom, from then until now. Even so considered "the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself upon it; and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it" (Isaiah 28:20); that is to say, inadequate to the needs of the human race.

LIMITATIONS OF "CHRISTENDOM"

All Christendom comprises, by rough computation, less than one-third of the inhabitants of the earth after two thousand years of supposed existence of "Christianity", and its propaganda! What of those thousands of millions of God's children who have not come in contact with Christianity in the meantime? Who have never heard of it even. And of those other hundreds of millions who have come in contact with it but have not been impressed by it? What of them? What of the Jews, the children of Abraham, the friend of God, and the father of the faithful? They have been in contact with "Christianity" for two thousand years, but remain isolated from it in their conviction. What of that say, fifty percent in our own and other so-called "Christian" lands, who are indifferent to the "Christian religion", and will die outside its pale? What means for reaching these with the gospel in the "Christian" sects' scheme of things? What of all the inhabitants preceding the coming of the Christ in the flesh? What of them? They died not knowing adequately of the coming of Christ. What of all these? Is it so that God has instituted a plan of "eternal life" for the race so imperfect that it reaches—if all be granted that "Christendom" claims—so very small a fraction of the human race? Thinking of hell as both a state of mind and a place, is it so that God's creative purposes so operate that the overwhelming majority of his children—allowing the universal Fatherhood of God—are enforced candidates for hell? That there will be real and many losses, may not be doubted in this world scheme of things; many losses, may not be doubted in this world scheme of things; but must such overwhelming majority perish, and without a chance?

Since this series of discourses began some good "Christians" have been startled by the assertion that a "falling away" took place by at least the early centuries of the Christian era, and have asked: "But if men turned from Christianity, lost divine authority, the orders and missions of the Church of the Christ and the apostles, then the ministry of the pseudo churches are void, and there was no power of salvation in them! What of the fate of their membership"? Just cause of anxiety, truly; but might not some concern be manifested also for the many more overwhelming millions who have had no opportunity of even hearing of the Christ, much less of hearing the gospel, being converted to its truths, conforming to its principles and ordinances, and thereby being saved! The number of Christians since the apostasy from the Church of Christ and of the apostles are insignificant in comparison to God's children who have never had their chance under revealed knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and therefore no way of being saved by it! Yet these are as important as God's children, as those living in alleged Christian nations since the apostasy: For these are children of the "All Father", and may not be set aside as unimportant, and not within the kingdom of love and grace! Mark this from St. Paul: "God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his offspring" (Acts 17:26-28).

Also mark this: "Be it known unto you all * * * * that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth * * * * whom God raised from the dead * * * * doth this man [one healed] stand before you. * * * * This is the stone [the Christ] which was rejected of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved" (Acts 4:10-12).

Well, how shall the world be saved by the "Christian" churches' conception of things—especially their conceptions of the preaching and the application of the gospel to the human race in all past ages where they have not learned of God and of Christ, and yet Jesus, the only name under heaven through which they may be saved? What of the hundreds of millions now perishing without that saving knowledge? What of those millions in contact with Christianity but, as at present preached, not impressed with it? Any chance for them hereafter? What of Judah, not only now, but also through the past since the Christ? Will they be given a second chance, as the people of Noah were—or not? Well, these are the problems of "Christendom"—Roman Catholics, Greeks, Protestants—all! I leave the questions to them—and to their theologians.

THE ATTITUDE OF THE CHURCH OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

For the "Church of the New Dispensation" I can only speak briefly with reference to the series of questions just closed respecting the application of the gospel to those who have lived in the earth in all those periods when it was not here; or when in the earth they had no knowledge of it; or when it was in the earth, and they knew of it—may even have heard it preached in fact, and yet were not impressed by it; or they may have rejected it, as the people in the days of Noah did. In all these cases pertaining to individuals or to groups, and nations of men, the Church of the New Dispensation, enlightened by the knowledge that has come to her by the restoration of the gospel, by revelation from God, has learned the solution to all these problems above pointed out. She knows the significance of preaching the gospel to the spirits in prison, which one time were disobedient when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was preparing. She knows the secret of the gospel being "preached to them that are dead that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit". She has been enlightened on the mystery of St. Paul's great question—"else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not, why then are they baptized for the dead"? All this knowledge comes from the mission of Elijah to the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Kirtland Temple, in 1836. Elijah, you will remember, in our discourse of this series (No. XIV) was the one who restored that order of the priesthood to the New Dispensation that turned the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest the Lord should smite the whole earth with a curse at his coming. Through the knowledge which Elijah imparted, the Church of the New Dispensation knows truly that the mercy of God endureth forever (I Chronicles 16:34I Chronicles 16:34); that those who have lived upon the earth in those periods of time when the gospel of Jesus Christ was not among men; when it was here, but nations and races of men did not hear it preached; or when they heard it preached, were not impressed by it; or when they heard it preached and even rejected it—as in the case of Noah's generation, after paying the penalty for such rejection—the gospel may be preached in the spirit world to all these classes of God's children, who may receive it in the measure and order of God's justice and mercy toward them. And all these classes so accepting the gospel in their faith, become heirs of salvation, and may have the necessary ordinances of the gospel vicariously performed for them—the symbols of their acceptance of the gospel and of their faith in it, by their earth representatives, their living kindred or their friends; such as baptisms, confirmations, or ordinations; in a word, all things necessary to their salvation if accepted by the spirits of the dead. Thus all may be saved by belief in, by acceptance of, and by obedience to, the gospel, whether in time or eternity. All men, save only the sons of perdition, they who once accepted the gospel and then commit high treason against it and against God; crucifying anew for them the Son of God both in the flesh and in the spirit—committing spirit murder, within themselves, as well as being guilty of the blood of the Lord Jesus. But aside from these, salvation in some one or other of the many mansions or kingdoms of the Father will be possible. And thus shall be realized the wider and deeper and higher mission of the Christ, as expressed by the Prophet Isaiah:

"The Spirit of the Lord, God, is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives; and the opening of the prison to them that are bound" (Isaiah 1xi:1).

In other words to teach the universal application of the gospel to the race of men, resulting in the highest good of which they are respectively capable of attaining. (The exception of the sons of perdition referred to above, as not subjects of salvation, form a special class that may not be treated here; and thank God, their number will be few and their fate unknown) (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxvi).

For the rest—in summary—this is our faith:

We have faith in God and in his wisdom and in his love for the human race—for all of it, and in all ages.

In that wisdom and love, God made the world, and all that pertains to it; "all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things";

He designed the planned earth-life of man to eventuate in his immortality and eternal life—this for the race;

God designs this immortality and eternal life of man to culminate in joy, and joy through growth, through progress from lower to higher things—never to highest, for this progress is eternal, and always there shall be something to attain—higher yet to realize;

The most important thing in life is life itself. The union of spirit with element, an eternal union, the body to become the everlasting garment of the spirit, without which man can never attain a fulness of joy, because unable to attain expression in all the phases of relations and experiences to come, without such a union:

The Gospel of Jesus Christ is the plan and covenant of guaranteed immortality and eternal life made of God with man.

This gospel is the "everlasting gospel", planned before the earth was inhabited, when God was contemplating the foundations of it; and when in contemplating the advantages of it, "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy (Job 38);

It will exist forever—this gospel; and it will forever be available to all races, kindreds, tongues and peoples—to all past ages, to all ages to come—it is human-race wide, as it is eternity long.

Obedience to it, however, acceptance of it in faith, obedience to its ordinances as sign and token of that faith and acceptance, must be given personally or vicariously, somewhere, sometime;

For the application of the gospel to the race there is infinite time. For the "many mansions" to meet the attained glories of the Father's children—judged and rewarded according to their works—there are endless creations of kingdoms—worlds without number;

There are no conditions or difficulties with reference to its universal application, as man prepares himself to receive it—that the wisdom of God and the love of God will not bridge over.

This the wholeness of the gospel; this the universality of the everlasting gospel—the larger hope for humanity!
