B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

DISCOURSE XVI

The Gospel: Or God's Plan for Human Salvation

"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith; as it is written, the just shall live by faith" (Romans 1:16, 17).

"Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him" (Hebrews 5:8, 9).

Ladies and Gentlemen of the Radio Audience: Tonight I am to preach to you THE GOSPEL. Not about the gospel, but THE GOSPEL. The first thing needed will be a definition, and I have one in the text at the head of this discourse; and from one competent to give it—viz. St. Paul. He writes to the Romans:

"I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation".

It has become trite, this definition, through much usage; yet I know no better one. The great trouble with its use is that people take it too much for granted; they do not analyze it, and hence, for the most part, do not understand it. Let me presume to correct that by giving you an analysis of it, and reading of it that I hope may be somewhat helpful.

"The gospel is the power of God unto salvation". The first thing to note in the definition is that the gospel is Power. It is not a book—not even the Bible. It is not an organization—not even the church. It is a Power. But what is "power"? The answer to that may be varied because there are different kinds of power; physical, mental, spiritual, moral, legal, even illegal power. But for our purpose here, "power" may be regarded as that which produces movement, that which causes effects. "Power", as related to the gospel is that which produces whatever is the objective of the gospel. In this case the objective is "the power * * * * unto salvation"; or that which produces salvation.

SOURCES OF POWER

Power may have a variety of sources, according to the kind of power it is. It may arise from gravitation, dependent upon the mass of objects, and the relative square of their distances from each other; upon the mass or weight of falling water; the muscular and nervous strength of a horse or other animal; upon the expansion and contraction of steam; the amount and control of an electric current, the agreement of intelligences upon a purpose expressed in plan or law, as enactments of a legislature, creating the power of law, or upon a proposition made by One of recognized superior wisdom, and character, and goodness; and accepted or agreed to by those upon whom the proposition is to become operative. The last two sources of power will be recognized as moral or spiritual sources of power; but none the less real because they are moral or spiritual. As related to the gospel, "power" will be recognized as moral or spiritual, or both; for they scarcely may be separated.

According to our definition this "power"—of the gospel—is the "power of God". Therefore it arises from the proposition made by One recognized as superior in wisdom, character, and goodness; and must be—as we shall later see—accepted by those intelligences whom it is to affect. But this gospel being "the power of God" it will not be disappointing; it is unthinkable to believe that it will be defeated; for not only being "power", but "power of God", we may be assured, from the beginning, that it will succeed in its purpose—the salvation of men.

With so much of analysis, let us proceed with our promised reading of it:

THE READING

The gospel is POWER—

The gospel is power of GOD—

The gospel is the power of God unto SALVATION.

Now read it through with all parts equally emphasized:

The GOSPEL is the POWER of GOD unto SALVATION!

How solid and substantial that all seems to be when you get the spirit of it! But salvation from what? There is the crux of the matter. Salvation means rescue. Salvation means redemption from. What are we to be rescued from by the gospel? What are we to be saved from?

MODERN PHILOSOPHY

Here a problem surges in upon us from this modern world, especially during this half century past. The great difficulty is getting men to understand that they are in any way in need of salvation. They are not conscious of having been lost; and if they have no consciousness of being lost, you will have hard work getting into their heads the notion of their being saved or rescued.

The philosophy that obtains in the world at the present time in relation to man and his existence in the earth, represents that he has come up from the lower and the simpler forms of life, until he has differentiated into the kind of being we now know him to be, a sentient, intelligent personage, a man of marvelous intellectual power and understanding. All life according to this theory, began in some very simple substance, a splash of what men call protoplasm, from which, through differentiations come the various forms of life; until life, climbing out of the slime of the ocean, won its way to becoming some simple form of land animals, and then to animals that fly in the air; as well as those that stalked the earth. Through various gradations and slow processes, taking millions of years, life went on in this course of evolution, taking advantage of favorable variations and improving upon them until we have the present manifestations of life, in the world in all its varied forms—vegetable life, animal life and human life.

The "story of evolution" has been one of continuous increase of excellence and development until we see it now manifested in a well-nigh perfect animal that we call man. There may be here and there lines of arrested development, but quite generally there has been no break in this line of development. The line of man has been constantly progressing. He has not fallen back; therefore he needs no redemption; there has been, with the exception noted, unbroken progress. Those who have given earnest thought to the theory hope that this evolutionary progress will go on from man's present excellence, until it shall result in producing some kind of super-man. A man of higher development than we now know.

And so all this talk about "salvation"—saving men from something, rescuing them from something—is foreign to the thoughts of this generation. They are not conscious that they were ever "lost", I say again, and hence scoff at the idea of being "saved".

THE THREE IMPORTANT THINGS IN LIFE

Let us investigate this idea. Suspend your thought for the moment along this line, and let me submit some questions to you. What would you say were the three most important things within human experience as to individuals, or for the race? Of course, I cannot get your answers to my questions, and so I must hope you will accept my suggestion about them.

I. Life: The first most important thing in human experience is the fact of life, of birth; of existence itself, with all its mystery and wonderfulness. For it is both mysterious and wonderful—the fact that we do exist, that we are born, and that we live!

II. Death: The next important fact in our human experience is death, and it is universal. It seems to be so permanent, too! It is a tremendous fact in human experience, and it confronts all of us. All who have preceded us in earth-life have passed through the experience of it, and in a short time no one of us now living upon the earth will be alive. The average generation of man is about 33 years. The population of the earth changes three times in a century. So from that reckoning none of us is going to be here very long. It is a tremendous fact that we are facing death! It does not matter how bright your eyes today may be, or how erect your form, or how elastic your step, or how beautiful the bloom of health is upon your cheek. All that will fade, and pass away. The strong body will be bent and the elastic step will begin to drag and falter, and the erect body will be bent under the weight of the passing years. Old Father Time will draw his fingers through your hair and either take it off or turn it gray; and twisted wrinkles—let us not speak of them!

Well, this change is coming, and at last we shall fall into death's oblivion; as Shakespeare puts it: "Sans eyes, sans teeth, sans taste, sans everything",—death! This, one of the most important facts in human experience; and it is only a few steps from birth to death, even in the longest of lives!

III. Sin: Now what lies between birth and death? Life's experience; much of which is made up of sin; and sin produces a sense of shame, humiliation, a sense of being out of harmony with the good, and the beautiful, and the true. Sin alienates men from the best things that exist. Sin is the transgression of law, and there is no man without law in this world. Oh, it may not be the law of the Christian man or woman. It may not be the law of the philosophically good man, who acquires his sense of uprightness and of moral life from his own deductions of what is good, better, and best in life; and a sensible adherence to it. It may not be that, because we have men in the world who fear not God and who regard not man; and seemingly are a law unto themselves. But, nevertheless, I proclaim all men as being under law and if it is not the law of righteousness as revealed in God's commandments, nor the conception of the moral law acquired by reasoning upon what produces the greatest happiness, the righteousness of the philosopher, then it is the "gang law" of the wicked. The honor which is said to obtain among thieves. Or the sense of honor each man builds up in his own conscience. When he is untrue to those standards that he raises, whether of the gang or of himself, when he violates them, the result is always the same, that is, it produces sorrow, fear, and trembling and consciousness of having not lived up to his ideals; and hence depression of spirit in consequence of his not being true to his conceptions of what should control him—the "oughtness" of his life.

REALITY OF SIN AND DEATH

And so sin is a reality; and the suffering it produces is a reality. It drags upon the life of man and hinders his boldness and freedom, which can only be born of a consciousness of rectitude and uprightness, according to his law. Here then is something for salvation to work on—sin and death—facts inseparably connected with human life.

Death is called the dread monster of the world; and all must die; and with death goes everything else; wealth, fond associations, the ties of friendship are broken; husband and wife are separated, children and parents are rent apart. And oh, the sorrow of it all, and the pity of it! Much of death comes to the human race in infancy and youth, but whenever it comes it is always a terror to the human heart; for men know not what lies beyond. "And oh, this dread of sinking into naught! If one could be but saved from it—this death! How pitiful life seems to be as we see how short the journey is between the cradle and the grave, and how disappointing it is, even in the most fruitful and best of lives!

I happen to recall an expression made by that splendid English statesman, Cecil Rhodes, one of the most noted British figures in our modern history. His life is wonderfully interesting. At fortynine, after a most brilliant career, Rhodes lay dying, and to his friend Jameson by his bedside he said: "Jameson, the great trouble with life is that it is too short. You no sooner become acquainted with the game and learn how to play it, then you have to give it up."

That might be said by all men—"Life is too short"! Men achieve so little, but some of them reveal to us life's tremendous possibilities—great leading minds do: a Cecil Rhodes, a Bismarck, a Gladstone, a Disraeli, a Washington, a Jefferson, a Lincoln, a Wilson, and all the great leaders in our world—sculptors, philosophers, statemen—by whatever they achieve, they reveal to our vision what life might be if only instead of the limited three score years and ten there could be, say, five hundred years, a thousand, five, ten, a hundred thousand, a million years! What could not such minds achieve if blessed with physical vigor such as they knew in manhood's prime, with such intellectual power as they then possessed, with a constantly growing experience—hiving wisdom and skill with the passing years, on and on in the development of the possibilities of man's power! In a few million years men might become intelligences worth-while. But alas! Death steps in and cuts them off before they reach the development of the fulness of their powers. How sad that is! Oh, for some salvation from this monster death, which strikes down not only the common people but the shining examples of the better order of the sons of men!

MESSAGE OF THE GOSPEL

Well, think I pray you: The gospel is the power of God unto salvation! And salvation from this thing we call death, through the resurrection from the dead, this is one of the things it proposes to save men from—death. It is written, and it is the Christ speaking of himself: "The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost" (St. Luke 19:10); but what was lost? Time will not permit a developing scriptural answer to be made as to what was lost, and the manner of it. The answer must be made directly: Life—man's life is limited. He is but mortal. His life being mortal; is inadequate to life's conceived ends; and man loses even that by death. Righteousness—man's sense of contact with, and complete accord with the highest and best in life—man's union with God is lost through sin. To give these two things back in their completeness to man was the mission of the Christ. "I am come", said he, (1) "that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly" (St. John 10:10). How better "abundantly", than changing mortal life, to immortal life? (2) "Thus it behooved Christ to suffer", said the risen Lord Jesus, "and to rise from the dead; * * * that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name in all nations" (St. Luke 24:46-47).

God also sent this thrilling message through his ancient servant Isaiah, when he would comfort his people as they lay beneath the consciousness of failure in the achievement of the things that had been promised to them. Their prophet, Isaiah, took their troubles to Jehovah: "Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening hand was upon them. Like a woman with child that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs so have we been in thy sight, O Lord" (Isaiah 26:15-16, 17).

And Jehovah to comfort them said:

"Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust; for thy dew—[the evidence of their sorrow] is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead" (Isaiah 26).

Seven hundred years afterwards the historical even of the prophecy happened. It is recorded by Matthew that at the death of the Son of God, the veil of the temple was rent from top to bottom, an earthquake made the ground to tremble and many of the ancient saints arose from their graves and appeared unto many in the holy city, thus fulfilling the words of Isaiah, at least in part, and giving us the assurance that that thing is going to be universal—the resurrection from the dead. That "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive". And it is going to be a real life too. It is not going to be a life the like of which is promised by other cults and philosophies, a mere survival of life in some sort of consciousness or other, something that shall survive as the perfume of the rose survives the petals of the flower, as they die. No not that; but a reunion of the body and the spirit, element and spirit brought together again by resurrection, the spirit of man clothed with a garment—the body; to become indissolubly united into one personage, the spirit taking on the body as a garment, and becoming blended into one inseparable spirit-body personage. This the physical immortal life promised in the gospel: And in contemplation of it men may well sing—"O grave where is thy victory? O death where is thy sting"? For as the Christ was literally raised from the dead, so shall all men be raised from the dead.

You remember, do you not, how strong and positive the testimony is about the reality of that resurrection? All the evangelists speak of it. There can be no doubt about it. The Savior dispelled all doubt as to the nature of the resurrection, when he appeared to the disciples. They thought they were looking upon a spirit. He corrected them by saying, "Behold, it is I, myself. A spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have". And while they still could not comprehend the reality of it, he said: "Have you any meat here"? So they brought him a fish and a honeycomb and he did eat in their presence. Afterwards, having heard doubtless what Thomas, one of the twelve had said, viz: that he would not believe the testimony of his brethren unless he could thrust his fingers into the wounds in the Lord's hands and feet—"Until I can thrust my hand into the wound in his side, I will not believe"—A week later the Savior came and once more stood in the presence of his disciples, then—"Come hither, Thomas, reach here thy finger and thrust it into the wounds of my hands and my feet, and behold the wound in my side, reach hither thy hand and thrust it into it". And he did. Then he fell at the feet of the Christ, face downwards, as was fitting to humility, saying, "My Lord and my God"! Thus his testimony comes down through the ages to us.

St. Peter said to the first Gentile convert: "Him [the Christ] God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead" (Acts 10:40-42). We have this assurance, then, not only of a resurrection from the dead but of the reality of it; and the reality of that future life which follows upon it. We shall live, believe me, not in decrepit, worn-out or deformed bodies, but in bodies restored to the full stature of the spirits they are to clothe. We shall inhabit them erect and strong and young and unwrinkled; with every power increasing and developing through all the ages in which we shall live. The Christ is the type of the resurrection; and he was raised at about 33 years of age, in the perfection of his manly beauty and powers and so ultimately shall it be with man. If not immediately raised to it, he shall attain unto it. Men will have their opportunity to achieve, not limited to three score years and ten, nor to a few thousand years, nor a few millions, or hundreds of millions of years, but eternally; for while "the sun itself may grow dim with age, and nature sink in years", yet resurrected man shall "flourish unhurt amidst the war of elements, the wreck of matter, and the crash of worlds". They will stand secure from destruction in that immortality that God has promised as a heritage unto man through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SALVATION FROM SPIRITUAL DEATH

Nor is the foregoing the half of the gospel as "the power of God unto salvation". For we are to be saved likewise from spiritual death—from sin and its effects, or consequences. There are two kinds of death, spiritual and physical. I have said all I care to on the subject of physical death, and physical immortality. But I want to say a word to you about this thing that we recognize as spiritual death. I hope what has been said about the physical death will help us to understand the spiritual death. I pointed out to you the fact that physical death consists of the separation of the spirit from the body, and when so separated the body dies, turns to dust, it mingles with the elements. Spiritual death is closely analogous to that; only spiritual death is the separation of man from God, instead of separation of man's spirit from man's body. Man's spiritual life depends upon his union with God. I presume that statement is sufficiently clear without making any lengthy argument about it. Let me present this to you, however, as an explanation of this thing we call spiritual death:

Spiritual life means union with, relation to, and participation in, all the higher and better things; the good, the true, the beautiful, the pure, the refined, the noble, the courageous, the unselfish, the merciful; united with perfect justice, knowledge, wisdom, power, intelligence. To be identified with, and to participate in these moral and spiritual qualities, and the life of it is and must be God; and to so deport oneself that he is thrown out of harmony with all this, separated from it, means separation from him who is the life of all this volume of higher and better things, this body of soul qualities, this ocean of righteousness—to be separated from it, I say, is death indeed! Yes, spiritual death, death as real as any physical death can be. For what could consciousness amount to if it were only a consciousness of evil that had befallen it?

The following is an inspired statement from one of our modern revelations on this subject of spiritual life and death.

"Wherefore, it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation". "Wherefore, I, the Lord God, caused that he [Adam] should be cast out from the Garden of Eden, from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein he became spiritually dead which is the first death; even that same death which is the last death, which shall be spiritual, which shall be pronounced upon the wicked when I shall say: Depart, ye cursed" (Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxix:40, 41).

There was separation from God, and separation from God is spiritual death. The Lord said to Adam, respecting the forbidden fruit: "In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die". A good many infidels have pointed out how the scripture here is not consistent with itself, for the scripture says, "In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die", and "Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years after his transgression". He did not die, they say, in the day that he partook of the forbidden fruit. Oh, yes, but he did die. He died spiritually, and because fallen man, alienated from God by his act of disobedience to the commandments of God. Afterwards he fulfilled the decree respecting physical death—"Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return".

Now this gospel, the power of God unto salvation, has provided a salvation from the spiritual death—for this separation from God—as well as from the physical death. And this provision for salvation from the spiritual death is by a re-birth. We must be born again, a re-birth into fellowship and union with God by which we shall have access to this great fountain of righteousness and truth, and beauty and power, to which I have called your attention, and of which God is both center and circumference, and the life-giving force and source of it. Men are to be "re-born" into fellowship with him, which means that our spirits are to be taken up into communion with his Spirit, and we shall know the throb of spiritual life as his rich, spiritual life touches and flows into our spirit life, and we become one with God; ultimately, too, like him, as sons of God, possessing the nature of the Father.

"Behold [saith the apostle], what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons of God! * * * Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure" (I John 3:1-3).

ETERNAL PROGRESS

"The gospel is the power of God unto salvation". What does it mean, this salvation! It means to be put in the way of eternal progression; to be associated with the church of the First Born, both on earth and in heaven; to be associated with angels and archangels as companions and guides; increasing in knowledge and wisdom with the passing years. Having triumphed over death, physical and spiritual, there is no more fear of death, or estoppage in the path of progress. With good men for associates and God for leader and guide, men may go on and up the shining heights of God's great highway, until they make themselves masters of the surrounding universe in the midst of which they live. Light and intelligence and love will be aglow in their hearts then. All the beautiful relationships that were formed in earth-life will be re-established there; husband and wife, children and parents, kindred and friends, knitted together in kinship; and brotherhood; all this will abound; touching the life of that brotherhood which binds God's moral and spiritual universe together through the union of all the great Intelligences governing therein. Those who participate in this gospel, in this salvation, will be members of such brotherhood, going on in spiritual, and moral, and intellectual, progress without limitation!

OBEDIENCE TO THE GOSPEL

This brings us to the matter of acceptance of the plan proposed of God for salvation, and to the second text at the head of my discourse: "Though he were a son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him". Obedience to the gospel, in order to its effectiveness, is as necessary as the plan of the gospel itself. No matter what the wisdom or perfection of a plan if not accepted and worked, it is vain. Hence the importance of obedience. Acceptance of the gospel is expressed in compliance with its ordinances, by performance of the symbols which stand for its realities, and by observance of its moral and spiritual laws and obligations. Thus when repentance of sin—which is a deep sorrow for violation of God's law, accompanied by firm resolution to sin no more—is prescribed as a pre-requisite to forgiveness, repentance of sins may not be set aside as of no very great importance in the gospel scheme or plan. It would estop the effectiveness of the gospel if repentance was set aside by refusal of compliance on the part of the candidate for salvation through the gospel. In like manner if the acceptance and performance of the symbols of the gospel were rejected it would have the same effect. Under commandment of God in the New Dispensation, water baptism, under the form given—immersion of the entire body—represents the death, burial, resurrection, and the new life of an immortal; and therefore baptism in the manner prescribed by the gospel may not be set aside, it represents too many of those realities of the plan devised by the Superior Wisdom who designed the plan of it; and whose wisdom perceived the most impressive means by which man could manifest his acceptance of the plan proposed, and be committed to it by a life of righteousness in harmony with the sacrifice made for him. So water baptism may not be omitted from the obedience prescribed.

Likewise as to the ordinance of confirmation by the imposition of the hands, by those having authority to thus confer the Holy Ghost, bringing those who receive it into spiritual union and life and fellowship with God. This laying on of the hands in confirmation of membership in the church, through the water baptism which has preceded it, is the sign of the baptism or birth of the Holy Ghost, so frequently mentioned in the New Testament scriptures. It is the beautiful symbol that signifies that one inflamed soul, having authority from God to that end, may enkindle another soul, even as one torch lighteth another nor is diminished; and thus pass on the divine afflatus from soul to soul until the whole world shall be lighted by its glory.

For the perpetuation—also by symbolic media representing realities of the gospel—of continuous fellowship with the Christ, and remembrance of the great sacrifice by which man was brought to immortality and eternal life, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is given, in which broken bread symbolizes the broken body of the Christ; the wine, the shed blood for redemption; and by eating and drinking these tokens manifest their union with him by expressing a willingness to take upon them his name, covenant always to remember him, and to keep his commandments, and thus win title and right to always have the Christ's spirit to be with them. A spiritual rallying point this, truly! Well calculated to perpetuate in vivid consciousness the essential things of the gospel, and keep alive in the soul of man the spirit of it.

THE ATONEMENT

Shimmering under all these symbols of man's redemption—baptism, confirmation, the Lord's Supper, or Sacrament—giving validity and reality to all of them, and without which there would be no effectiveness to any of them, is the atonement of the Lord Jesus, the very heart of the gospel, whose vibrations give life to it all. I can but regret now that we have come to the very thing that is the life center of all the gospel, because I can only make brief mention of it.

The atonement made by Jesus Christ for the redemption of man is perhaps the most difficult part of the gospel, and yet the most positively asserted by the word of God—the scriptures:

"Christ also hath once suffered for sin, the just for the unjust that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit" (I Peter 3:18).

"Who did no sin, [speaking of the Christ] neither was guile found in his mouth. * * * Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed" (I Peter 2:22, 23, 24).

"God commendeth his love toward us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us" (Romans 5:8).

And the Christ said: "Thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations" (St. Luke 24:46, 47).

"When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. * * * God commendeth his love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. * * * Being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. * * * We also joy in God through Jesus Christ by whom we have received the atonement. Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: * * * Therefore as by the offense of one [Adam] judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one [the Christ] the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life" (Romans 5).

Again Paul: "Since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead; for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (I Corinthians 15:22).

"God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us because God sent his Only Begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins" (I John 4:8-10).

Passages could be multiplied indefinitely but the above set forth the doctrine of the scriptures sufficiently. However, while settling the fact of the atonement, they do not settle the philosophy, or the "why" of it; neither is the "why" of it elsewhere settled by the scriptures—New Testament of Old. It still leaves men to ask the question, and they do ask it: How may the suffering of the innocent atone for the sin of the guilty? How may we hope that the vicarious suffering of the Christ shall pay the penalty of, and put away man's sin?

Briefly: I have already in previous paragraphs pointed out to you that sin—which is the breaking of law—produces sorrow for the sinner—sin and suffering may well-nigh be thought synonymous. Nor is the one who sins alone in his suffering. He almost invariably involves others in his suffering though they may have had no part in his sinning. A score of illustrations will occur to your mind: the trusted man that robs a bank; what a large circle are swept into his ruin! Wife, innocent children, parents, aged and broken, but who have built up an honored name that this thief disgraced! How they will suffer! How unjust that they should suffer! The same if a daughter goes wrong and outrages decency and morality; or father, or brother, or any favored man of a community or city, or state. No man lives unto himself alone; no man may sin and he, himself alone be the sufferer. The innocent suffer because of the sins of the guilty, and often they suffer even more than the sinner himself. Also men suffer with each other: they suffer with the ones who suffer because of the sins of others. Thus many suffer with the father or mother whose son or daughter has disgraced an honored name; and they sorrow with a community whose hitherto honorable citizen has brought disgrace to his city or state, by an act of shameful betrayal of trust. Innocent men suffer then with others who suffer on account of sin directly and indirectly, too, and all this without responsibility on their part; without the exercise of their agency. It arises from an inescapable bond of sympathy with which we are darkly or brightly bound. Unjust, we say, but would you have it otherwise? Could you have it otherwise without losing the best things in human life?

At this point there is another element enters into our theme, viz: The willingness of men to suffer for each other. David in the case of his worthless son Absalom is an illustration of sufficient clearness. Absalom had planned rebellion against the old king; he would have snatched the crown from the head of David and put it upon his own. In every way he had warred against the honor and the interests of his father. Yet when news was brought to the king that the worthless young man had been caught in the battle and slain, the old king was stricken with sorrow, and gave vent to the father-cry that rings through all the ages—"Oh Absalom my son! Would to God I had died for thee"! In this experience of David's we see the willingness of one to suffer for another. Nor is this willingness confined to parents alone who would so often and so willingly take upon themselves the consequences of their children's sins, though those consequences involved death if only the children could go free. The same willingness exists on the part of the children, but perhaps is less frequently manifested, to suffer for their parents. The same is true also as to brothers and sisters, and among friends, where no tie of consanguinity exists; and even among strangers, on the occasion of great, imminent danger, this impulse in man, this willingness to risk—nay to give—his own life for others is frequently manifested. Such experiences make up the history of heroism, which is the chief glory of our human race.

Here let it be understood that I am not introducing the question as to whether men can or ought to suffer one for another in breaches of the moral law. I am inclined to doubt that, as it might lead to the thwarting of justice rather than to the promotion of it in our human life; but I am discussing the evident willingness of men to suffer for the sins of others if they could, up to the point of laying down their lives for them. I am pointing out the existence of such an impulse, inclination or principle in men, in human nature, in order to argue from what we know of this well attested fact, that there being such a disposition in man, it may be reasonably concluded that such a disposition but more abundantly, and more perfectly, and more intensely, will be found in the Divine Intelligences who at need, as in the case of redeeming man from the "fall", and from the consequences of personal sins—would, through love, make the necessary sacrifice for the sins of the world, as did the Christ. For if this disposition exists more intensively in Divine Intelligence than in men, what an infinite pity it would be should there be no means in the moral economy of things for such expression of self-sacrificing love! And, on the other hand, if such a possibility of suffering for others could bring salvation to them—immortality and eternal life; with forgiveness of sin and reunion with God in spiritual life—a new birth to righteousness—what a reproach to Divine Intelligences, if none could be found to give his life in such a cause!

VICARIOUS SUFFERING NECESSARY TO SUPREME LOVE-MANIFESTATIONS

"Vicarious suffering", says some now forgotten author, "seems supremely unjust, yet it is blessed and glorious; for in no other way can love so intensely be expressed—that one suffer for his friend through love". And I will add the suffering victim being himself innocent, would make his sacrifice all the more impressive.

This is the basis of the gospel, the principle that makes of it a "power, unto salvation", when accompanied by obedience to its principles and ordinances, and its law of moral and spiritual life. I commend it to your consideration, to the acceptance of its saving power. My office in the church to which I belong makes me a Witness for the Lord Jesus Christ. Here I fulfill that office on this occasion by bearing solemn testimony to the truth of THE GOSPEL here set forth as "the Power of God unto Salvation".
