B. H. Roberts, Falling Away ( 1931)

APPENDIX

DID POPE GREGORY XIII HAVE A PROCESSION IN ROME AND TEDEUM SUNG IN HONORABLE CELEBRATION OF THE MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S EVE

In No. VII of the radio discourses on "The 'Falling Away' ", I incidentally referred to the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve in France, beginning at midnight of August 24, 1572, and lasting in the city of Paris through several days, and throughout France some two months. For bringing up this subject I was censured by some of my Catholic correspondents as misrepresenting history and doing an injustice to the Roman Catholic Church. In radio discourse No. XIII I referred to these charges against me, and said:

"Permit me to refer to a matter of limited complaint against myself, by correspondents, in the matter of quoting Motley, on the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve, and making some remarks on his passage in regard to rejoicing at Rome by the pope and his associates over the slaughter of Protestants. Had I made my remarks on the authority of Motley alone, highest authority though he is on the period and upon the events of which his great work treats—The Rise of the Dutch Republic—yet had I made my statement upon his authority alone, and without a wider investigation of the subject, I should have felt censurable indeed. But many years ago in my ecclesiastical studies I became satisfied that Rome's alibi on this point could not hold. That attempted alibi is that Pope Gregory's procession and Te Deum at Rome was over the safe deliverance of that worthless thing, Charles IX, from wicked conspirators, and not a rejoicing over the destruction of Protestant opponents. That conviction became intensified by a recent review of the historical evidence. Hence the quotation from Motley and my remarks in No. VII of this series. And now permit me to say to any Romish protagonist worth while, that if he thinks I have done to the Church of Rome an injustice by my quotation from John Lothrop Motley, and my remarks thereon, the lists are open to him, of course, for we live in a land and in an age of free speech and a free press; and when the bugle calls to the issue I shall not be far away. Other authorities than the author of the Rise of the Dutch Republic I have assembled. In fact my whole treatise is already written on the subject though I choose not to burden this series of addresses with it, unless some compelling occasion should arise" (Discourse XIII, this edition).

This discourse (No. XIII) was delivered on the evening of June 9, 1929; and I closed my radio series of addresses on June 30, 1929. Meantime no protagonist for the Roman Catholic Church, appeared to accept my suggestion.

Some months afterwards, however, my attention was called to an article which appeared in the Extention Magazine of the National Catholic Monthly, (Chicago) for January, 1930, under the caption "Among the Mormons in Utah", making the following bitter and unjust complaint against the "Mormon" Church and its "Leaders" as to their attitude towards the Roman Catholic Church and its course in Utah. The article is supposed to have been written by Monsignor Hunt, of St. Mary's Catholic Cathedral, Salt Lake City, Utah. The whole article is a treatise on the difficulties of the Catholic Church in Utah, and deals with social, economic and religious aspects of the case. However, I am interested only in the following excerpt as it, in the main, I think, refers to the radio addresses which I myself delivered during the spring of 1929:

ROMAN CATHOLIC COMPLAINT AGAINST "MORMON" CHURCH LEADERS IN UTAH

"During the past winter and spring another situation has brought to light an active hostility from Mormons. The Catholic Church has used the radio for weekly sermons on the doctrines of the church. This activity created so much interest and brought so many questions that a Truth Society was organized for the purpose of distributing Catholic literature. It goes without saying that no attack has been made upon any other religion. The radio sermons have been devoted exclusively and entirely to the Catholic religion; likewise the work of the Truth Society. No mention directly or indirectly has been made of Mormonism. And yet the Mormons resent, apparently, this Catholic activity. They have turned their heaviest guns against the Catholic Church. Their ablest speakers have been giving weekly addresses over the radio in which, with only incidental attention to the Mormon religion, bitter attacks against the Catholic Church are indulged in. We are in the midst of a series of such attacks at the present time. Threadbare arguments of the bitterest days of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries are brought to light; calumnies in which the Protestant people have lost interest are resurrected. Some of the worst allegations invented against the church are now being purveyed by the Mormon Leaders to the world through radio addresses. These addresses furthermore, are printed in the Mormon daily paper, and printed also in pamphlet form for free distribution.

"In connection with these attacks, it may be said that the Mormon speakers draw their information from the most prejudiced sources. Their statements about history, are so palpably false that it seems that no one of intelligence would accept them. Yet there can be no doubt that the Mormon people drink in these falsehoods with implicit confidence in their leaders".

In order to exhibit how wholly unfair the above statement is respecting the radio addresses on "The Falling Away' " delivered by myself, it is only necessary to quote here the passage on the last page of discourse No. 1 where in referring to the "spirit" in which the discussion would be conducted, it was said:

THE "SPIRIT" OF THE TREATISE ON "THE 'FALLING AWAY"

"In the treatment of this theme, however, let us have some plain understanding about the spirit in which the investigation is to be prosecuted. Naturally to proclaim the loss of the religion and Church of Christ by the world seems an ungracious task. Let it be understood, however, that it is not my purpose to prosecute that investigation in any spirit of harshness. Certainly there will be no bitterness in it; and no vindictive attack upon any one of the divisions or subdivisions of 'Christianity.' I shall not manifest, for I do not entertain, any bitterness against any one of those divisions or subdivisions of 'Christendom'; nor do I summon any one of them more than another to the bar of inquiry to denounce it; nor to say there is nothing good in any one of them or all of them. I intend to seek only the establishment of the truth, and this in the interest and for the welfare of 'Christendom'; and in holding that there has been a 'falling away' from the whole and complete authoritative religion and Church of the Christ and the apostles. I do not intend to infer that there is nothing good in the so-called 'Christian' world. This theme as I intend to treat it, while necessarily holding that the sun of true 'Christianity' set many centuries ago, yet, as when our sun of the day sinks behind some western range of mountains, and disappears from vision, as we turn to the eastern mountains we find them lighted with the sunshine still lingering on their summits. Or, it may be that cumulous clouds are floating in the sky, and these touched by the rays of the visiondeparted sun are turned to purple and gold; to crimson here and there; and then opalescent lights are seen through broadening rifts, giving glory to departing day and creating a twilight that holds in check the blackness of the night:—so when official and formal, authoritative Christianity was lost to the nations, yet, some of the light which Christianity brought into the world, lingered for the blessing of mankind with a knowledge of the spirit and moral truths she left in her scriptures and traditions; and these, though fragments, were seized upon by men of good will and perpetuated, and have blessed the world, and bless it now.

"My mission while here proclaiming the 'falling away' will be pursued in this spirit; and while I must needs make clear the melancholy truth that there came to pass the predicted 'falling away', yet also it is to be my pleasing task to announce, at least, that this but prepares the way for the recognition of the New Dispensation that shall restore all things, and end in that salvation of man which God from the beginning designed for him" (Discourse 1, this edition, p. 11).

In the radio addresses, there was no special attack made upon the Roman Catholic Church, and no more prominence given to her in the discussion than to other divisions of Christendom only as she occupies a larger space in the history of the "falling away" than to the Protestant churches. That this is true, I especially call attention to the passage in the foregoing quotation:

"I shall not manifest, for I do not entertain, any bitterness against any one of the divisions or subdivisions of Christendom; nor do I summon any one of them more than another to the bar of inquiry to denounce it; nor to say there is nothing good in any one of them, or in all of them".

After consideration of this passage I do not think there is any justification for representing my radio addresses as any special attack upon the Roman Catholic Church.

MONSIGNOR HUNT

In the following month, viz. February 2, (1930), in a radio address from Salt Lake City, KSL, Monsignor D. G. Hunt of the Roman Catholic Church, made what was generally taken for an answer to my treatise on "The 'Falling Away' ", so far as it relates, at least, to the Catholic Church's responsibility in the St. Bartholomew Affair; and that I may give full justice to the Reverend gentleman's argument I will quote him in full as to what he says in defense of his church on that particular subject. The Monsignor discussed three topics that evening: (1) The Spanish Inquisition; (2) The St. Bartholomew's Massacre; (3) The Persecution of Protestants by Queen Mary of England. I am interested on this occasion only in the second feature—The French-Catholic Massacre of Protestants—St. Bartholomew's Eve.

DEFENSE OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH IN THE MATTER OF THE ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S EVE MASSACRE

Monsignor Hunt: "The second topic that I discuss is the Massacre on Saint Bartholomew's Day in France. During a few days beginning August 24, 1572, many French Protestants were massacred. The number is inaccurately fixed at several thousands; very probably the number was over one thousand. The charges against the church are usually these: First, that the assassins themselves were Catholics, acting out of zeal for the Catholic religion and under orders from the pope; second, that long before the event the pope had plotted the crime and had urged it upon the officials of France; third, that the pope rejoiced at the news of the massacre and held a public service in Rome to celebrate the event.

"The facts are these: Catherine de' Medici, the mother of the king, was the dominating spirit in France at the time. Jealous alike of both Catholic and Protestant princes and their influence over the king, she played one against the other in an effort to eliminate both. When Coligny, the Protestant leader, began to overshadow her in influence with the king she set out to kill him. Through various means she finally succeeded in making the king believe that Coligny and his associates were planning to kill him and seize the crown; she thus obtained a royal order for their execution. Then, fearing that the king might change his mind, Catherine put into immediate operation the machinery for the sudden killing of the Protestant leaders. The assassination did not stop with Catherine's plans, but was quickly carried on by irresponsible mobs in Paris and other cities until it became widespread slaughter. The French court was surprised and did not know what defense to offer to the world. So it was that the king stated that he was responsible, alleging that he had ordered the massacre to frustrate a conspiracy against himself and the other members of the royal family. The French parliament accepted this as the truth and published it. It was this version of the matter that was at first accepted throughout Europe as the true explanation.

"As to the accusations against the Catholic Church. The pope had nothing whatever to do with the massacre; the bishops of France had nothing whatever to do with it. Even the Catholic princes and governors throughout France were wholly innocent. The truth is that some of the bishops of France, notably the Bishop of Lisieux, actually protected as many Protestants as he could. And many priests also sheltered the fugitives until the fury of the mobs had abated. The most guilty person was the queen mother; after her, of course, the king. On this point I quote Van Dyke: 'Upon Catherine, therefore, the chief responsibility must always rest'. He adds: 'No one who knows anything of her character could suspect for one moment that there was in her anything resembling religious fanaticism'. She had no zeal whatever for the Catholic religion; she was a free thinker of the old school of Machiavelli. The innocence of the church is confirmed by two prominent Protestants, the Lutheran theologians, Andrea and Selnecker. In their report to the Elector of Saxony they stated that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day was a political affair.

"It is also said that the pope had plotted the crime and urged it upon the king and queen mother. Of course, that is wholly absurd. There is not the slightest evidence upon which to suspect such a thing. And finally it is charged that the pope expressed his joy on learning of the massacre. Let us be fair. The pope believed that a conspiracy against the king and the royal family had been thwarted. That is all. When he finally learned the truth, according to reliable historians, he wept bitter tears. Be that as it may, he denounced the conduct of the king, to use his own words, as 'exceedingly unlawful and forbidden by God'.

"The Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day was wholly different from the Spanish Inquisition. In Spain the church officials and church machinery were used by the state for political purposes. In France, however, the church was not even a tool; the church had nothing to do with the whole affair, either officially or privately, directly or indirectly. The massacre was the result of the criminal schemes of Catherine de' Medici, the weakness of the French king, and the excitability of the mobs" (Taken from Intermountain Catholic, Salt Lake City, Utah, February 8, 1930).

PERSECUTING CHURCHES NOT CHURCHES OF CHRIST

It should be remembered that where I made my brief reference to the St. Bartholomew's Eve Massacre in Paris and largely throughout France (discourse No. VII), I was making the point that the so-called churches of Christendom had become persecuting churches; that they persecuted each other for heresies, and enforced and maintained alleged orthodoxy by physical force and punishments—hence the rack, burning at the stake, flagellations, imprisonments, banishments, confiscation of estates, deprivation of civil rights,—to all kinds of tortures and deaths known to the wicked ingenuity of man—including mass murders sometimes under the guise of civil and religious wars. All this indicated that such churches (and they included practically all churches whenever and wherever they rose to power) had lost the spirit of the Christ and of his gospel; all which went far in proclaiming the "fallen-away" condition of Christendom, contended for in this treatise.

This part of the argument remains untouched by complaints made of me for the reference I made to the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve; which reference was but an incident of evidence; the fact of persecution; of which incidents there are many but on a smaller scale. It remains true that churches resorting to persecution and violence to enforce opinion or uphold supposed orthodox discipline give evidence of the departure from the spirit of the Christian religion and is proper evidence of apostasy.

BACKGROUND OF THE WHOLE REVIEW OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S MASSACRE

As background of the whole discussion to be here presented, I call attention to the declaration made by the Twelfth Ecumenical Council of the Roman Catholic Church—Fourth Lateran—held at Rome, 1215 A.D., under the pontificate of Pope Innocent III. It was the first Ecumenical council that made Articles of Faith of the tyrannical decrees in relation to the extermination of heresies and of heretics, and the thunders of ecclesiastical wrath that were to be hurled at princes and the punishments to be inflicted on them in case they should refuse to join in punishing heretics when required to do so by the pope. Following is a literal translation of the most important part of this decree from the Latin original as found in the summa conciliorum of Caranza, a celebrated Romanist author. I copy the passage from Dowling, the third chapter of the translation:

"We excommunicate and anathematize every heresy extolling itself against this holy, orthodox Catholic faith which we before expounded, condemning all heretics by what name soever called. And being condemned, let them be left to the secular power, or to their bailiffs to be punished by due animadversion. And let the secular powers be warned and induced, and if need be condemned by ecclesiastical censure, what offices soever they are in, that as they desire to be reputed and taken for believers, so they publicly take an oath for the defense of the faith, that they will study in good earnest to exterminate, to their utmost power, from the lands subject to their jurisdiction, all heretics denoted by the church. * * * So that every one, that is henceforth taken into any power either spiritual or temporal, shall be bound to confirm this chapter by his oath. * * * But if the temporal lord required and warned by the church, shall neglect to purge his territory of this heretical filth, let him by the Metropolitan and Comprovincial bishops be tied by the bond of excommunication; and if he scorn to satisfy within a year, let that be signified to the pope, that he may denounce his vassals thenceforth absolved from his fidelity (or allegiance), and may expose his country to be seized on by Catholics, who, the heretics being excommunicated, may possess it without any contradiction, and may keep it in the purity of faith, saving the right of the principal lord, so be it he himself put no obstacle hereto, nor oppose any impediment; the same law notwithstanding being kept about them that have no principal lord. * * * And the Catholics that taking the badge of the cross shall gird themselves for the exterminating of heretics, shall enjoy that indulgence, and be fortified with that holy privilege which is granted to them that go to the help of the holy land. * * * And we decree to subject to excommunication the believers and receivers, defenders and favorers of heretics, firmly ordaining, that when any such person is noted by excommunication, if he disdain to satisfy within a year, let him be, ipso jure, made infamous" (History of Romanism, Dowling, pp. 332-3).

Thus by direct action of a general council of the "infallible church" it clothes itself with the power to employ the political officers and powers of a secular government to punish heretics reserving to itself the right at its own judgment to excommunicate and free from their allegiance the subjects of rulers who refuse to punish the church members for all that falls under the term of "heresy".

It follows then under this decree of the twelfth council (1215 A.D.) that the king, queen, and officials of France or any other country could be called upon to exterminate the Protestants or other supposed heretics. Commenting upon the application of this official decree and giving examples of its operation, Dowling says:

"The dogma on which all these transactions [persecutions] were founded is that the church possesses the right to extirpate heresy, and to use all the means which she may judge necessary for that purpose" (Id., p. 320).

Later he adds: "The church itself has never generally and explicitly renounced this claim, and long after the 'Reformation' in Germany, continued to exercise it. And notwithstanding the professions made by modern Catholics, history does not furnish an instance of anybody of the profession interposing its protest against the persecution of heretics by the Church of Rome" (Id., p. 321). Nor from the policy of the Roman Catholic Church in respect to the decrees of Ecumenical councils need it be expected that said church will ever make such renunciation. For her to do so would be to destroy her claims to infallibility. For one pope or council to change the ex cathedra decree of another such council or pope, would mean the council or pope whose decree was so changed had been in error—hence amen to infallibility.

Commenting on the effectiveness of the decrees of Ecumenical councils, Bruno, author of Catholic Belief, says:

"And there is no instance of a doctrine on faith or morals defined by one general council having been changed by another general council or by any pope" (Catholic Belief, Bruno, p. 124). And I may add that such a thing never will happen so long as the Roman Catholic Church holds to the doctrine of infallibility. It follows therefore that the council decree of the fourth Lateran council against the destruction of heresies and heretics still exists.

Later in my text is given a perfect example of the predecessor of Pope Gregory XIII—Pope Pius V—exercising a temporal power in demanding the extermination of the French Protestants.

* * * * * * * * *

Now to our discussion:

SUMMARY OF MONSIGNOR HUNT'S STATEMENT OF THE ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S CASE AGAINST THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

"First, that the assassins themselves were Catholics, acting out of zeal for the Catholic religion, and under orders from the pope;

"Second, that long before the event the pope had plotted the crime and urged it upon the officials of France;

"Third, that the pope rejoiced at the massacre and held a public service in Rome to celebrate the event".

This statement, of course, goes far beyond any remarks of mine in my addresses touching this subject. First, I nowhere, for instance, charged that the assassins "acted under the orders of the pope of Rome", for it is evident from all history that the order for the direct massacre was given by the Catholic king of France; though undoubtedly the assassins were French Roman Catholics. Neither did I charge, second, that long before the event the pope had plotted the crime and had urged it upon the officials of France. I made no reference to this because I knew it could not have been "a long time" before so plotted by Gregory XIII, for the great crime was committed in the first year of the reign of that pontiff, as he himself lets us know by the medal he had struck off at Rome which celebrated the slaughtering of the Protestants. But now, since Monsignor Hunt reminds me of the circumstance, while I do not know of any direct proof that Pope Gregory XIII ordered the slaughter of the Protestants upon the king and officials of France, I do recall that his immediate predecessor—Pope Pius V—and only the year before—did urge upon King Charles IX the complete annihilation of all the Protestants of his realm, and I will prove that in the proper place; and it is just as criminal and murderous in one pope as in another, and it may be that the influence of Pope Pius V in urging King Charles IX and his more infamous mother, Catherine de'Medici, to annihilate the hated Protestants of France, might have been been as influential in projecting the massacre, as if the urging and planning had been done by Pope Gregory XIII.

And here, let it be noted that when speaking of the "pope", we are often speaking not so much of an individual as of an office. the "popedom"—the whole line of popes, any one of whom may stand for or represent the whole line; as for example: if for one of the line infallibility is claimed, such is the equality of the office they hold, that the claim of infallibility holds for all. So too, in the matter of punishing heresies and heretics; if one pope has the right to inflict physical torments upon the heretical, so has the popedom—all the popes. Therefore to prove that Pope Pius V issued directions to Charles IX—as we shall see he did—to exterminate the French Protestants, it would establish the right of Pope Gregory XIII, according to Catholic principles, to give an order to French officials to exterminate the Protestants. If it is the right of one of the line it would be the right of the whole line of the popedom. And if one of the line exercised the power it is just as execrable as if another had done it. The burden is upon the popedom—on the Roman Catholic Church.

Monsignor Hunt's third item of the things charged against the reigning pope at the time of the massacre was that he rejoiced at the news of the massacre, "and held a public service in Rome to celebrate the event".

To this last I plead that my statement was to that effect. I assumed that the awful mass murder was an act in the supposed interest of the Roman Catholic Church, and that the official head of that church, and his official associates at Rome and Catholics in other nations—especially in Spain—rejoiced at a Catholic triumph over Protestants, as generally conceded by the concensus of historical opinion. If the pope so rejoiced, it rendered him and with him his church post facto guilty in the crime—in the whole of it—in the planning and in the execution of it.

Let it be understood that I make no complaint against Monsignor Hunt for widening the discussion somewhat beyond the limits of my remarks in discourses No. VII, and No. XIII, since his attempted reply would require that he should have the whole case before him, and that could be by implication only from what I had said.

On my part I shall ask that Monsignor Hunt and my Catholic complainants will not regard this Appendix as an attempt at "persecution" of them or of their church; I am utterly free from any desire or intention to do so. But several months after the close of my radio addresses which make up this treatise on "The 'Falling Away' ", I had my attention called to what I regard as an unfair statement by Monsignor Hunt in the Extention Magazine of the National Catholic Monthly in relation to unjust and bitter attacks of "Mormon" Leaders on Catholic Church activities in Utah; and the month following (February 2, 1930) the radio address of Monsignor Hunt setting forth the Roman Catholic alibi in relation to the St. Bartholomew affair—of course, opposite to the view I had presented—there was nothing therefore to do but to make a defense of the case as I had presented it. And this Appendix is that defense. As evidence that there was no intent on my part to over-emphasize the case of this Bartholomew incident, I call attention to the fact that while the evidence assembled in this Appendix was in hand and largely organized, none of it was used in the main body of the treatise, when it could have been then used as well as now.

The Catholic case is now before you, reader; stated presumably by a skilful protagonist. Let us consider it. Only permit me to say that I shall discuss the subject in a somewhat freer hand than Monsignor Hunt has done, and necessarily more at large. [^1]

In my own brief reference to this subject in discourses VII and XIII, of the radio addresses (pp. 77 and 158 this edition), I quoted briefly from The Rise of the Dutch Republic, by John Lothrop Motley, D.C.L.LL.D., A.L. (Burt, N.Y., publisher, vol. II, p. 60) in connection with passages from Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire; also from the Catholic writer Bossuet's History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches to prove the Roman Catholic Church was at that time a persecuting religion and church. It was my reference to Motley, however, which seemed to stir up most of my Roman Catholic critics. It may be remarked in passing, that Motley is the historian of first excellence in the matter of which he writes.

Those who would satisfy themselves as to the high standing of Motley as an historian, will only need to read the biographical note of him in the Encyclopedia Britannica, Article "Motley", from which I make the following excerpt:

MOTLEY

The Rise of the Dutch Republic: A history published in 1856:

"This work, which has a large historical introduction, minutely follows the history of the low countries from the abdication of Charles [emperor of Germany] in 1555 down to the assassination of William the Silent in 1584, immediately became highly popular by its classic manner and the warm and sympathetic spirit in which it was written. While at the same time it was frankly recognized by scholars as a painstaking and conscientious piece of original work. It speedily passed through many English editions, was translated into French with an introduction by Guizot in 1859; and also into Dutch; the introduction and notes by Bakhuizen van den Brink, himself a distinguished historian, as well as into German and Russian. * * * The merits of Motley as a historian are undeniably great. He has told the story of a stirring period in the history of the world with full attention to the characters of the actors and strict fidelity to the numerous fixed details of the action" (Encyclopedia Britannica, Article "Motley").

Nor is Motley's mention of the awful and nation-wide massacre incidental; he devotes largely the whole of the seventh chapter of volume two to the subject, and in other chapters passim.

But notwithstanding this—the high authority of Motley—had I given expression to the incident of a solemn procession at the Vatican and Te Deum sung in rejoicing over a notable victory of the Catholic party in France over the Protestant party, without further information sought and obtained upon the point of issue, I should have considered myself properly subject to censure. But such was not the case, and I ask the consideration of the passages I quoted from Gibbon in my text in discourse No. VII and also Bossuet's Variations (a Catholic work) in No. XIII, where that eminent writer considers the attitude of both Catholics and Protestants in respect of persecution for heresy and where he admits that both were persecuting churches.

Many years ago, when writing my Outlines of Ecclesiastical History, I had learned of the Roman Catholic attempted alibi much to the same effect as this of Monsignor Hunt's viz. that Pope Gregory XIII "had been misled", by "garbled information", to believe that on that "memorable night"—Eve of St. Bartholomew—by the destruction of a "few seditious men", the king (Charles IX), "had been delivered from immediate danger of death, and the realm from the perpetual terror of civil war". This on the authority of the Catholic work, Faith Of Our Fathers, Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore, Md. (p. 298). On the next page the cardinal tells us: "Pope Gregory XIII, to whom also an envoy was sent [to carry the false report], acting on this garbled information ordered a Te Deum to be sung, and a commemorative medal to be struck off in thanksgiving to God, not for the massacre of which he was utterly ignorant, but for the preservation of the French king from an untimely and violent death, and of the French nation from the horrors of a civil war".

Such the Roman Catholic alibi given by the American cardinal, (and such the reader will observe, is the alibi pleaded by Monsignor Hunt in his article quoted above, this edition, pp. 223-4). The cardinal quotes no authority on the "alibi" except that he says that Sismondi, "a Protestant historian tells us that the pope's nuncio in Paris was purposely kept in ignorance of the design of Charles [IX]; and Ranke [a Protestant author], in his History of the Civil Wars, informs us that Charles and his mother suddenly left Paris in order to avoid an interview with the pope's legate, who arrived soon after the massacre; their guilty conscience fearing, no doubt, a rebuke from the messenger of the vicar of Christ [mere speculation] from whom the real facts were not long concealed"(Faith of our Fathers, p. 299).

This is all the reference the cardinal makes to any authority on the subject. I must conclude that this is all there is, or at least the strongest evidence there is, else the learned cardinal would have given us more and stronger in his angry protestation of the St. Bartholomew affair. He also represents the pope as deploring the event and "weeping over the unhappy victims" (Id. p. 297-9)! Monsignor Hunt has it that when Pope Gregory XIII learned "the truth according to reliable historians, he wept bitter tears" (!) Who are these historians? "Be that as it may"—goes on our Monsignor—What! Is it in doubt then?—reality of the "bitter tears"?

Cardinal Gibbons closes the few pages he gives to this important and highly sustained historical charge against the pope of Rome in these words: "Thus we see that the church slept in tranquil ignorance of the stormy scene until she was aroused to a knowledge of the tempest by the sudden uproar it created. And like her divine spouse on the troubled waters, she presents herself only to say to them: 'Peace, be still' " (Ibid., p. 300)!

Unfortunately for the cardinal's cause he does not indicate in what way his church said "Peace, be still" to the troubled sea of fierce persecution against the Protestants then raging, not only in Paris but throughout France, where the number of Protestant in Paris but throughout France, where the number of Protestant victims are variously estimated from 20,000 to 100,000 (I see in our quotation from Monsignor Hunt, given above, p. 223, that he concedes the number to have been "very probably over one thousand"!). As a matter of fact the Roman Church made no effort to check this madness of slaughter. Cardinal Gibbons' reference to "Peace, be still", and the "weeping bitter tears" is merely an empty rhetorical flourish.

Catholic protagonists must think upon themselves as writing to a kindergarten class in a Sunday School, when thus defending their church against one of the most serious charges against her, and one of the alleged vicars of Christ—a successor of St. Peter!

One cannot help but wonder if it ever occurred to the cardinal or to any of those who wrote in support of this alibi, to ask the question how it came about that this "vicar of Christ", "by the grace of God", Pope Gregory XIII, "infallible" under the Romish principle of infallibility—not empowered to receive revelation, of course, but "preserved from error by the special guidance of the Holy Ghost in matters of faith and morals"—How comes it, I repeat, that Gregory XIII, being such an one, could be misled by "garbled information" about the St. Bartholomew's Eve Massacre, and commit the palpable blunder, of making a solemn procession to a cathedral, and offering Te Deum on a wholly misrepresented state of facts? And especially Te Deum for the preservation of the life of so worthless a king, such a craven wretch as a man, and for such "indifferent Catholics" as the mother and son are represented to be by these Catholic protagonists? How comes it—all this? Perhaps we shall learn that right or wrong apprehension of "information" that is going to lead the official head of the Roman Catholic Church into the important blunder of celebrating by solemn procession of the pope and his cardinals to a cathedral and singing Te Deum blasphemously, is not a question that concerns "morals"! And hence escape from a troublesome question!

Yes, the massacre was terrible enough to be named as one of the most horrible events of all human history, involving the butchery of tens of thousands of helpless men, women, and children! " 'They spared', saith your [Catholic] historian, 'neither old men, nor children, nor pregnant women, and carnage reigned on every side'. At the palace of the Louvre, 'the galleries and the staircases were almost covered with dead bodies, and the assassins pursued their unhappy victims even into the apartments of the princes' " (Fleury, tom 35, pp. 141-2, quoted in The End of Controversy Controverted, vol. I, p. 251). But this was the massacre in the city of Paris alone. "Other towns followed the example of the capital", to say nothing of a number of provinces to which the plots extended. "Nearly 20,000 victims fell in this massacre" (Students' History of Modern Europe, Lodge, p. 121). The same authority asserts that the Huguenots were assembled in great numbers (i.e. in Paris) to celebrate the wedding of Henry of Navarre (Id., p. 121): hence unsuspecting the treachery intended by the king and his fiend mother. "About five hundred gentlemen and men of rank perished in this massacre," says Hume, "and near ten thousand of inferior condition" (History of England, vol. III, p. 575) and Monsignor Hunt concedes that the number was "probably over one thousand"! Yet the mistaking of information on such an event may not be a question of errency in a matter of "morals" leading to a solemn use of Te Deum in a cathedral over the fallen heretics!

One cannot help but wish, however, that the pope—this semi-inspired official of the church—could not have been guided in some measure by the very human wisdom of Queen Elizabeth of England, when this same misrepresentation of King Charles' was made to her court by the French ambassador, who at the time was Fenelon, not however, "the Excellent Fenelon", Francois, Archbishop of Cambray, and "one of the most celebrated names in the intellectual and ecclesiastical history of France", but Bertrand Fenelon, a statesman of an earlier day. "That minister", however, "a man of probity, abhorred the treachery and cruelty of his court, and even scrupled not to declare that he was now ashamed to bear the name of Frenchman; yet he was obliged to obey his orders, and make use of the apology which had been prescribed to him. He met with that reception from all the courtiers which he knew the conduct of his master had so well merited. Nothing could be more awful and affecting than the solemnity of his audience. A melancholy sorrow sat on every face [in the court]; silence, as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the royal apartment; the courtiers and ladies, clad in deep mourning, were ranged on each side, and allowed him to pass, without affording him one salute or favorable look, till he was admitted to the queen herself. That princess received him with a more easy, if not a more gracious, countenance, and heard his apology without discovering any visible symptoms of indignation. She then told him that though, on the first rumor of this dreadful intelligence, she had been astonished that so many brave men and loyal subjects, who rested secure on the faith of their sovereign, should have been suddenly butchered in so barbarous a manner, she had hitherto suspended her judgment till farther and more certain information should be brought her; * * * for her part, she should form her judgment of his [the French king's] intentions, by his subsequent conduct, and in the meantime should act as desired by the ambassador, and rather pity than blame his master for the extremities to which he had been carried" (History of England, Hume, vol. III, p. 575-6). Had the pope only had such wisdom to deal with the Bartholomew matter when reported to him, his reign would have escaped much censure, and his church much humiliation.

Motley, of course, is not the only one who makes this charge against the Roman Catholic pontiff for rejoicing over the massacre, and singing Te Deum over the slaughter of the Protestants in France. Others as solemnly affirm it. Dowling in his History of Romanism, a pretentious work, sustains the charges Motley makes. His historical statement is elaborately sustained by references. On this incident alone in his footnotes, on the same page where he makes the statement against the pope, he cites Mezeray, Bossuet, Thuan, De Thou, Ranke and Lorimer.

This Dowling's statement: "The tragedy was not confined to Paris, but extended, in general, through the French nation. Special messengers were, on the preceding day, dispatched in all directions, ordering a general massacre of the Huguenots. The carnage, in consequence, was made through nearly all the provinces, and especially in Meaux, Troyes, Orleans, Nevers, Lyons, Thou-louse, Bordeaux and Rouen. Twenty-five or thirty thousand according to Mezeray, perished in different places. Many were thrown into the rivers, which, floating the corpses on the waves, carried horror and infection to all the country, which they watered with their streams. The populace, tutored by the priesthood, accounted themselves, in shedding heretical blood, 'the agents of Divine justice'; and engaged 'in doing God's service'. The king, accompanied with the queen and princes of the blood, and all the French court, went to the parliament, and acknowledged that all these sanguinary transactions were done by his authority. 'The parliament publicly eulogized the king's wisdom', which had effected the effusion of so much heretical blood. His majesty also went to mass, and returned solemn thanks to God for the glorious victory obtained over heresy [not over thwarted assassination of the king—be it observed]! He ordered medals to be coined to perpetuate its memory. A medal accordingly was struck for the purpose with this inscription, 'PIETY EXCITED JUSTICE' " ( History of Romanism, Dowling, pp. 589-90).

The matter of the king's message to the pope, and the striking off a medal to celebrate the event, already referred to herein by a quotation from Cardinal Gibbons, as not "commemorative * * * of the massacre, of which he [the pope] was 'totally ignorant'; but for the celebration of the preservation of the French king, * * * and of the French nation from the horrors of a civil war" (Faith Of Our Fathers, p. 299)—all this is given in proper order by Dowling in his History of Romanism as follows:

"The king sent a special messenger to the pope to announce to him the joyful intelligence of the extirpation of the Protestants, and to tell him that 'the Seine flowed on more majestically after receiving the dead bodies of the heretics'. Nothing could exceed the joy with which the news was received at Rome. The pope and cardinals went in procession to the church of St. Louis to return solemn thanks to God * * * for the extirpation of the heretics. Te Deum was sung, and the firing of cannon announced the welcome news to the neighborhood around. The pope's legate in France felicitated his most Christian majesty in the pontiff's name, 'and praised the exploit, so long meditated and so happily executed, for the good of religion' [this the pope's legate in France, be it remembered]. The massacre, says Mezeray, 'was extolled before the king as the triumph of the church'.

"The pope was not satisfied with a temporary expression of his joy. He caused a more enduring memorial to be struck in the form of triumphant medals in commemoration and honor of the event. These medals represented on one side an angel carrying a sword in one hand and a crucifix in the other, employed in the slaughter of a group of heretics, with the words Ugonottorum Strages (Slaughter of the Huguenots), 1572; on the other side, the name and title of the reigning pope. [^2]

"Such was the joy of the cardinal of Lorraine, (whom we have already seen closing the council of Trent with anathemas against heretics), upon receiving the news at Rome, that he presented the messenger with one thousand pieces of gold, and unable to restrain the extravagance of his delight, exclaimed aloud that 'he believed the king's heart must have been filled with a sudden inspiration from God when he gave orders for the slaughter of the heretics'. Another cardinal, Santorio, afterwards Pope Clement VIII, in his autobiography, designates the massacre as 'the celebrated day of St. Bartholomew, most cheering to the Catholics'. Thus it was by the joy of the pope and cardinals at the massacre, by the medal struck in its commemoration and honor, and by their solemn thanksgiving for the happy events, without alluding to the proofs (by no means inconsiderable) of a previous correspondence between the pope and the king" (History of Romanism, Dowling, pp. 590-3).

Dowling also publishes a facsimile of the medal struck off by Rome commemoratory of this event in his History of Romanism, (p. 590).

On one side is this inscription: A portrait of the reigning pontiff; and this encircling it: "GREGORIVS. XIII. PONT. MAX. AN. I.—F. P."

On the other side: an angel with a sword in one hand—held threateningly; a cross in the other, held high before a group of fleeing Huguenots, men, women, and children, some prostrate and slain, others fleeing in terror from the angel; a broken sword or two, and one fallen from the hand of a prostrate man; and a battle ax. In semi-circle above the angel and group these words: "UGONOTTORUM STRAGES, 1572". The interpretation of the inscription is "Slaughter of the Huguenots, 1572".

Not a syllable about the deliverance of a king from his would-be assassin enemies; nor a symbol representing such a deliverance—just "Slaughter of the Huguenots"; the date and the figure of the reigning pontiff! And the fact that the event took place in the first year of that pontiff's reign. That is all! Roman Catholics can surely gather no grain of comfort or support for their alibi from the medal designed to commemorate the massacre, viewed as a deliverance of King Charles IX, and from war.

LIKELY CATHOLIC CAMOUFLAGE

It may be said in argument on behalf of the Catholic side respecting this papal medal that speaking from the time of 1845, when Dowling's work was published (see title page of Dowling's History of Romanism), "a new issue of this celebrated medal in honor of the Bartholomew Massacre has recently been struck from the papal mint at Rome, and sold for the profit of the papal government" (Id., Dowling, p. 590); and, of course, it could be contended that the Church of Rome would never dare to thus republish this medal in this manner unless it was clear that it represented some such blameless purpose as claimed by Roman Catholics, namely—it represents the rescue of the French king from assassination, and France from war. And therefore the Church of Rome boldly reproduces the medal which historians unearthed as damning evidence against her in this mass-murder incident. It would be a clever effort indeed; and a bold one; but camouflage merely.

In addition to Motley and Dowling, in making this charge of the procession and rejoicing at Rome—though Te Deum is not specifically mentioned—is the Catholic historian Fleury's account. Referring to the French Catholic party, and dealing first with the king's celebration of the Bartholomew event, he says:

"They presumed to make a procession, at which the people assisted in great numbers, with the king and all his court, to render thanks to God for the happy success of an enterprise which covered France with confusion, and which could not be otherwise than abhorred by heaven and all good men. And they even had medals struck to eternize an action which they were afterwards obliged to regard with the detestation it deserved.

"But there were several of the provinces which were no better treated than Paris. For the king had written to the governors the day before the massacre, ordering them everywhere to lay violent hands upon the Calvinists [Protestants]; the consequence of which was, that during two months there was nothing to be seen but murders in almost all France. The numbers killed in the different provinces amounted to no less than twenty-five thousand persons"! Monsignor Hunt will concede "probably, over one thousand"!

"This execution was regarded with a favorable eye at Rome and in Spain. Gregory XIII, beholding only the good which he persuaded himself would result to the Catholic religion in France, ordered a procession, at which he assigned in person, from the Church of St. Peter to that of St. Louis, to give thanks to God for such happy success. And he caused some medals to be struck, to perpetuate the memory of the transaction, where the pope was represented on one side, and on the obverse an angel, holding a cross in one hand, and a sword in the other, exterminating the heretics, and particularly the admiral, Coligny. In Spain a panegyric of the action was pronounced in presence of King Philip II, and they dared to give it the name of the triumph of the church militant" (End of Controversy Controverted, vol. I, letter xiv, pp. 253-4, quoting Fleury, tom 35, pp. 153-4, 5; also pp. 156-9).

Fleury's period is 1653-1743. He was a French statesman, historian and prelate; and is frequently quoted by both Roman Catholics and Protestants. John Hopkins, Protestant Bishop of Vermont, long a controversialist with Roamn Catholics, author of the two volumes, answering the English Catholic Bishop, John Milner's End of Religious Controversy—finding that Gregory XIII is praised by Fleury for "piety and wisdom", remarks: "When we see a pope so praised for amiable qualities that he carried his easy kindliness to an extreme, rejoicing over the bloody massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day, and zealous, as the author saith elsewhere, for the Inquisition, it only gives us a deeper impression of the quality of that religion, which could outrage every feeling of humanity and every precept of the gospel in the horrid work of persecution and of blood" (Controversy Controverted, vol. I, p. 255).

The Catholic authority (Fleury) quotes the somewhat unusual budding of a "thornbush", planted in the cemetery of the "Holy Innocents", the bush "half dry and leafless"—on the day of the massacre "put out an abundance of flowers". "This circumstance might have been quite in the course of nature, but they [the Catholics] regarded it as a miracle, and pretended to prove by this fact that the murder of the Calvinists was acceptable to God! The drums were beaten, the religious fraternities walked in procession, the king himself came to see the miraculous thornbush, and the massacre continued" (Id., p. 252, Fleury, tom 35, p. 151)!

BOSSUET

Roman Church protagonists must have read their Catholic writer Bossuet to little purpose or not at all if they persist in saying that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve was a political not a religious war. Bossuet, Catholic writer and bishop of Maux (whose period was 1627-1704; and as a writer less than 50 years after the massacre) commenting on the first of the wars engaged in by Protestants under the regency of Catherine de'Medici, takes to task some Protestant writers who at the time sought to make it appear that these wars in which the Protestants had taken up arms against their legitimate civil rulers were not religious, but political wars. This to escape the odium of "taking up arms to promote religion". But throughout his book x (vol. II) Bossuet contends that these wars in France were religious wars, so considered by both parties to them: In a summary following a long review of the wars under the regency of Catherine de'Medici, he says: "This therefore, stands an eternal testimony, that the ministers [i.e. Protestant ministers], approved the war, and were more bent than the princes and the armed soldiers themselves, on pursuing it from the sole motive of religion, which they pretend, at present, was quite out of the question; yet was the fundamental cause of the first wars by the consent of all authors, both Catholic and Protestant" (Bossuet's Variations, vol. II, p. 28).

In another place discussing the same subject Bossuet used the following title line:

"41. VAIN PRETEXT OF CALVINISTS WHO PRETEND THAT THESE WARS DID NOT PROPERLY CONCERN RELIGION" (vol. II, p. 23).

On which our author makes the following remarks: "Here again [i.e. in these later wars] they make fresh efforts to show that these wars were merely political, and nothing appeartaining to religion. These empty pretexts deserve not refutation, nothing more being necessary for discovering the drift of these wars, than to read the treatise of peace and the edicts of pacification—of which liberty of conscience, with some other privileges for the Protestants, was always the main import" (Id., p. 23-4).

At this point the reader should review the quotations made in discourse No. XIII from Bossuet (pp. 169-170 this edition) in order to see additional evidence that "Christianity", both Catholic and Protestant, justified the use of corporal punishment in destroying heresies and heretics.

TESTIMONY OF A MODERN WRITER—REINACH

For a more modern authority on the subject of these French wars of the 16th century between Roman Catholics and Protestants and especially with reference to the terrible Massacre of Bartholomew's Eve—its character—a political war or a religious persecution of Protestants—I cite the work of Solomon Reinach, written in French, but translated into English by Florence Simonds. The title of the work is Orpheus, A General History of Religions, published in London by Wm. Heinemann; and in New York by G. P. Putnam Sons, both in 1909. The author explains that he uses Orpheus, "the first of the world's singers", in the title of A General History of Religions, because "Orpheus" was not merely the "first singer", but also to the ancient the "theologian par excellence, founder of those mysteries which ensured the salvation of mankind, and no less essential to it as the interpreter of the gods". It is a work of 439 pages, of high scholarship, with elaborate bibliography following each chapter, and in addition numerous marginal citations to authorities quoted. It is par excellence a student's volume of high order. In his Preface the author tells us that he has tried "not to wound any conscience; but I have said what I believe to be the truth with the emphasis proper to truth. I do not think that the persecution of the Bacchanals by the Roman senate, and of dawning Christianity by emperors, the furies of the Inquisition of St. Bartholomew's Eve, and of the Dragonnades [^3] ought to be coldly chronicled as insignificant episodes in history. I hate these judicial murders, the accursed fruits of a spirit of aggression and fanaticism, and I have shown this plainly. There are zealots still among us who glorify these crimes, and would wish to see them continued".

At this point the author adds the following footnote at the close of his Preface, in proof of what he avers:

"In the Theologie de Clermont, by the Rev. Father Vincent, republished with episcopal approbation in 1904, I find the following passage: 'The church has received from God the power to reprove those who wander from the truth, not only by spiritual but corporeal penalties, such as imprisonment, flagellation, mutilation, and death'. At various lectures given in Paris after 1900 there were cries of 'Vive la Saint Barthelemy'! and on February 9, 1906, M. V. * * * declared that 'St. Bartholomew's Eve was a splendid night for our church and our country'. Modern civilization need not be alarmed by these survivals, but it must not ignore them" (Orpheus, Preface, p. viii).

Dealing with the "Reformation", and coming to this French religious war period, the author of Orpheus writes:

"As early as March 28, 1569 [about three years preceding the Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Eve], Pope Pius V wrote to Charles IX: 'Pursue and crush all the enemies who remain. Unless you pull up the last root of the evil [the Protestants], they will shoot again as they have already done so often'. This was preaching the policy of extermination. * * * It led directly to the Massacre of St. Bartholomew" (Reinach, Orpheus, A General History of Religion, p. 333).

"Pursue and crush all the enemies who remain". This was said by the predecessor of Gregory XIII concerning those Protestants who survived in the Catholic-Protestant wars preceding the St. Bartholomew's Massacre! This was a vice-regent of God, vicar of Christ! Himself a successor of St. Peter, who recommended this! Nay commanded it to be done! This one of those with whom the Christ is to be with "all days", to the end of the world!

The idea that Pope Gregory XIII had before the event plotted the crime of St. Bartholomew's Eve, is scoffed at by Catholic protagonists. Yet here is a case where a pope urges upon King Charles IX, only some three years previously, a war of extermination of all Protestants, who had survived previous wars—"Pursue and crush all the enemies who remain"! And who earlier, on the occasion of himself sending a small body of troops across the Alps to engage in the religious war against the Protestants, commanded the leader of that papal force "to kill every Huguenot that might fall into his hands, and grant quarters to none". The rest is a quotation from Ranke:

"Catherine de'Medici * * * demanded the dismissal of all their [the Protestants'] magistrates from the cities which were suspected of favoring the new doctrines [i.e. of the Protestants], and assured Philip II in September of the year 1563, that she would tolerate no other religion but the Catholic. The resolution thus announced was one that could not be enforced in France without the intervention of arms, and war instantly burst forth.

"It was entered on with extraordinary zeal by the Catholic party. At the request of the pope, Philip of Spain sent the French an auxiliary force of practiced troops under experienced leaders. Pius V caused collections to be made in the states of the church, and gathered contributions from the Italian princes; nay, the holy father himself dispatched a small body of troops across the Alps; that same army to whose leader he [the pope] gave the ferocious command to kill every Huguenot that might fall into their hands, and grant quarter to none. * * *

"With what exultation did Pius V receive the Huguenot standards that were sent him after the battle; how joyfully did he place them in the churches of St. Peter and St. John Lateran! He conceived the most daring hopes. It was at this moment that he [Pope Pius V], pronounced the sentence of excommunication against Queen Elizabeth. He even flattered himself with the hope of leading an expedition against England in person" (Ranke, History of the Popes, vol. I, pp. 439-40, edition 1853, London).

"So far he was, however, not permitted to proceed", adds our author. Death at this point stopped his career.

Of course I know all this is not the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, and Pope Gregory XIII; but it is the procedure of a pope of Rome, a successor of St. Peter 50ord of the Catholic world, immediate predecessor of Gregory XIII holding the same office, and but some three years before the event of St. Bartholomew's Massacre; and it would suggest the possibility, at least, of another pope of the same period, doing in effect what Pius V had ordered to be done—annihilate the Protestant religious party in France. Also it was the place to fulfil the promise I made a few pages back to prove that a pope, Pius V, at least, had ordered the French rulers to do to the Protestants of their realm, and but three years before (March 28, 1569, ante pp. 227-8) what Pope Gregory XIII was charged with doing—planning the utter destruction of Protestants in France.

CATHERINE DE'MEDICI

Ranke, taking note of the activities of Catherine de'Medici (mother to Charles IX, generally conceded to be deeply concerned in the plot of the massacre)—says of her part in the undoubted conspiracy preceding the plot of the massacre: "Catherine de'Medici while entering with a certain degree of warmth and earnestness into the policy and plans of the dominant party which favored her interests, * * * did her utmost to draw the Huguenots to Paris; numerous as they were, they were there surrounded and held in check by a population far more numerous in a state of military organization, and easily excited to fanaticism. She had previously given a very significant intimation to the pope of her purpose in this proceeding. * * * It cost her but a word to make the people take to arms; that word she spoke. * * * Catherine had declared herself to wish for the death of six men only; the death of these alone would she take upon her conscience. The number massacred was 50,000.

"Thus all that the Spaniards had perpetrated in the Netherlands was exceeded by the French. What the first brought about gradually with deliberate calculation and with a certain observance of legal forms, the latter accomplished in the heat of passion, in defiance of all forms of law, and by the aid of a populace roused to a fury of fanaticism. The result appeared to be the same. Not one leader [i.e. of the Protestants] was left whose name might serve as a point around which the scattered Huguenots could gather. Many fled, a large number surrendered. Place after place returned to attendance on the mass, the preachers were silenced. With pleasure Philip II [of Spain] saw himself imitated and surpassed; he offered Charles IX, who had now for the first time earned a right to be called 'The Most Christian King' to assist the completion of his undertaking by the power of his arms. Pope Gregory XIII celebrated this great event"—To repeat once more for the sake of adding another authority to the collection of those who speak to the same effect—"Pope Gregory XIII celebrated this great event by a solemn procession to the church of San Luigi. The Venetians [who had received report of the massacre, but] who seemed to have no particular interest in the matter, expressed in official dispatches to their ambassador their satisfaction at 'this favor of God' " (Ranke's History of the Popes, vol. I, pp. 441-2).

But to continue with our French author Reinach: "Pius V's successor, Gregory XIII, struck a medal in memory of the St. Bartholomew with the legend Ugonottorum Strages (The Carnage of the Huguenots), and commissioned Vasari to paint those frescoes representing the massacre which still dishonor the walls of a salon in the Vatican. Vain attempts have been made to absolve the pope and his legate of all responsibility for this inexpiable crime. The church found it quite a natural proceeding to get rid of the Huguenots, as it had of the sectaries of the middle ages, by collective murder. We have already quoted the message of Pius V to Charles IX [See paragraph above, p. 240].

"On the fatal 24th of August, while the massacre was going on, the Nuncio Salviati, wrote to Gregory XIII: "With your holiness I rejoice from my heart that the king and the queen mother have been able to exterminate these infected people with so much prudence and at a moment so opportune, when the rebels were all locked up in their cage'. Gregory XIII celebrated 'the most happy tidings of the destruction of the Huguenot sect' with a religious ceremony. He sent to the French court the Legate Orsini, who, on his way through Lyons, publicly distributed indulgences to those who had taken part in the massacres. Finally he presented the 'golden rose', instituted to reward ardent zeal for the church, to Charles IX, the crowned assassin of his own subjects" (Orpheus, A General History of Religions, Reinach, p. 334).

MIDWAY EXPLANATION

It may be thought by the reader that there is overmuch iteration and reiteration of this matter of the item of Gregory XIII's procession and singing of Te Deum, and striking off the medal in commemoration of and in honor of this massacre; but it should be remembered that I am dealing with cumulating evidence by citing historical witnesses to the facts I am dealing with, and this must excuse the redundancies of reiterations, as the establishment of the cause I am presenting is more important than the fineness of literary style.

A CATHOLIC TEXTBOOK

I have before me The History of the Catholic Church for use in seminaries and colleges (2 vols.) by Dr. Heinrich Brueck, with additions from the writings of Cardinal Hergenrother, and all translated by Rev. E. Pruente, Imprimatur, Petrus Ricardus Kenrick, and other indorsements—surely enough to insure its high Roman Catholic standing. And how does it treat the case at issue? To give it as it stands in the work would be sufficient to exhibit its weakness. Summarized it charges an alleged insolence of Coligny, leader of the French Huguenots, and head of the house of Bourbon, at the marriage gathering of Henry of Navarre, his urging a war with Spain, his sowing discord between Catherine and her son, seeking to exclude her from taking part in the affairs of government, which so exasperated the queen mother that she sought to have Coligny assassinated. This failed; but the attempt embittered the Huguenots. "This drove Catherine to do her utmost and together with her son, Henry of Anjou, and others she formed the plan of having all the Huguenots assembled at Paris assassinated. Charles, who had himself been displeased at some bold and daring language used by the admiral—[i.e. Coligny] at length yielded to the representations of his mother and gave a tardy consent. The night from the 23d to the 24th of August (St. Bartholomew's night) was fixed upon for the execution of the plan. Coligny and many distinguished Huguenots lost their lives on this night. The murderous scenes were even repeated in the provinces by royal command. The number of the Huguenots murdered may be set at about two thousand" (vol. II, p. 188).

Such is the representation given of the Bartholomew affair by this Catholic textbook. Lingard (vol. VIII, p. 437) is cited in a marginal note for the number slain "about two thousand"; but whether this is for the number killed in Paris or for the whole number of the slain throughout the nation, is not stated; but either for the number slain in Paris or in the nation at large, it is ridiculously inadequate in the face of the number given by most all the other authorities. It is represented by the textbook, that the massacre "was neither the result of long premeditation nor in any way occasioned by motives of religion"! Then the story of the conspiracy against the king's life, sent out to European courts; "the correctness of which even the English courts did not doubt at the time". How the story of the massacre was received at Elizabeth's court "at the time" we have seen described above by Hume's masterful account of it, and by our own comment thereon. And note the textbook: "Gregory XIII held a feast of thanksgiving for the deliverance of the royal family from danger, and the preservation of the Catholic religion in France [!] notwithstanding that he [Gregory XIII] greatly disapproved of the manner of the royal proceedings, and repeatedly expressed his regret at, and abhorrence of, the massacre of the Huguenots" (Id., vol. II, p. 188-9).

Note in the above, as added to the usually exclusive Catholic claim of a thanksgiving expressed in Te Deum, for deliverance of the royal family from danger—note the added significant phrase—"and the preservation of the Catholic religion in France"! Cardinal Gibbons doesn't mention that in the Faith of Our Fathers or elsewhere; neither does Monsignor Hunt. I wonder why? The first dignitary says that "religion had nothing to do with the massacre" (Faith of Our Fathers, p. 298). This Catholic college textbook says, that in addition to "delivering the royal family from danger", the massacre also "preserved the Catholic religion in France"! How? Undoubtedly by slaying Protestants! Yet the cardinal says "Religion had nothing to do with the massacre"! Monsignor Hunt says: "The pope had nothing whatever to do with it. Even the Catholic princes and governors throughout France were wholly innocent" (Excerpts, ante p. 223).

WHY THE POOR ACCOUNTING OF THE ALLEGED PROTESTANT CONSPIRATORS AGAINST THE KING

But if there was to be a Protestant uprising against this king to prevent which this massacre took place, how came it that the Protestant "plotters" gave so poor an account of themselves that out of the number slain in Paris, whether two or five or ten thousand be the number allowed—how comes it that only fourteen Catholics were slain of the Catholic party? And in all France during the two months the massacre raged, only from one to two hundred of the Catholic party were slain, from the twenty to 100,000 that were estimated as slain in all?

Monsignor Hunt seeks to relieve the Catholic Church from responsibility in the Bartholomew affair by stoutly affirming—"the pope had nothing whatever to do with it"—the massacre; "the bishops of France had nothing whatever to do with it". "Even the Catholic princes and governors were wholly innocent". What! Does not the Monsignor in cogency of statement slip a stitch here? Can it be that this mass murder is believed to be for the suppression of a conspiracy against the king and the royal family's life and the prevention of civil war in France, and yet even the "Catholic princes and governors" of France were wholly innocent in this slaughter? That is in taking part in this "political affair", to rescue the king and royal family from a plot of assassination the Catholic princes and governors of France took no part in warfare which would have been commendable in them if it really was waged to rescue the king and royal family. Does not the Reverend gentleman ask us to believe too much?

But back to the statement about the Catholic bishops and priests of France. "The truth is", says Monsignor Hunt, "that some of the bishops of France, notably the bishop of Lisieux, actually protected as many Protestants as he could, and many priests also sheltered the fugitives until the fury of the mobs abated" (See statement of the Monsignor, p. 223 this edition). Good! Say I, it is refreshing to know that in the midst of those times and scenes of cruelty, of awful terror, and blood, and mass murder, there were some hearts not wholly dead to pity and the cry of huge distress from large masses of terrorized humanity in fear for their lives. Unfortunately, however, they were not the Roman Catholic Church, nor enough of it to stay its cruelty, nor relieve it of this monstrous crime of Bartholomew's Eve.

This incident reminds one of the plea that Gibbon, the historian of the Decline and Fall of Rome makes to mitigate the cruelties of the Diocletian persecution near the close of the third century A.D., and usually called the tenth, and the last of the pagan persecutions against the Christians. It is usually accounted—this Diocletian persecution—the severest that the Christians had to endure. After detailing the cruelty of the laws of Diocletian Gibbon remarks:

"Yet notwithstanding the severity of this law the virtuous courage of many of the Pagans in concealing their friends or relations, affords an honorable proof that the rage of superstition had not extinguished in their minds the sentiments of nature and humanity" (Decline and Fall of Rome, vol. II, ch. xvi, p. 274).

Again I applaud: I cry good to this manifestation of the Pagan virtues of humanity as I did to the virtues of humanity "of some bishops", and "many priests" who afforded protection to terrorized Protestants, seeking protection from pursuing murderers. But the humanity of the virtuous Pagans "many" of whom afforded refuge to the Christians persecuted did not constitute the Pagan world or the administrative part of it; any more than the merciful "some bishops" and "many priests" of the Catholic Church formed the authoritative part of that church. So, as in the Pagan case, history holds the Pagan religion—identified with the state—responsible for the cruelties of the Diocletian persecution of the Christians of that day, likewise history will hold the Roman Catholic Church responsible for the massacre of the Protestants of France, with the pope, the head of the church, applauding the awful deed, thus post facto approving of it.

Again—how did it come to take two months for the pope—even allowing for the slow method of communication in those days—to learn that St. Bartholomew's Massacre was not a wicked conspiracy against the king and royal family's life, but a bloody massacre of one religious party by another—in this case the Protestant by the Catholic? And by which according to the Catholic textbook for seminaries and colleges, there was effected the "preservation of the Catholic religion" in France!

THE ZEAL OF CHARLES IX AND CATHERINE DE'MEDICI FOR THE RELIGION AND CHURCH OF ROME

Then both King Charles IX and his mother Catherine were such indifferent Catholics that they never would have undertaken such a stupendous butchery as the massacre was out of zeal for the Catholic religion is the contention of both Cardinal Gibbons and Monsignor Hunt. The latter quotes Van Dyke as saying in respect of Catherine: "No one who knows anything of her character could suspect for one moment there was in her anything resembling religious fanaticism". Then Monsignor Hunt: "She had no zeal whatever for the Catholic religion; she was a free thinker of the old school of Machiavelli". "Religion", says Cardinal Gibbons, "had nothing to do with the massacre. Coligny, the Protestant, and his fellow Huguenots were slain not on account of their creed, but exclusively on account of their alleged treasonable designs. If they had nothing but their Protestant faith to render them odious to King Charles they never would have been molested; for neither Charles nor his mother ever manifested any zeal for the Catholic Church, nor any special aversion to Protestantism, unless when it threatened the throne" (Faith of Our Fathers, p. 298)!

If that were true, then why were they on this occasion so honored by a special service in the Cathedral by the pope and his priesthood in the singing of Te Deum, for the preservation of their lives?

Why was Charles IX presented with the "golden rose" by the pope's special legate to the court of France, Orsini, which "golden rose" was "instituted to reward ardent zeal for the church" (Reinach, Orpheus, A General History of Religions, p. 334)?

Why did he receive his title proclaimed from Catholic Spain "Most Christian King"?

Relative to Catherine "manifesting any special zeal for the Catholic Church", she was sufficiently zealous that when the treaty of peace of Amboise provided for the toleration of the Protestant religion "in all those places where it was established before the war, * * * Catherine insisted that Paris should be excepted from this" [i.e. this part of the decree]. And when at length his holiness "accompanied his admonitions by the permission to alienate church property by which the treasury [national] gained one and a half million of livres * * * [then] Catherine * * * demanded the dismissal of all their [the Huguenots'] magistrates from the cities which were suspected of favoring the new doctrines (Protestantism), and assured Philip II in September in the year of 1563 that she would tolerate no other religion but the Catholic" (Ranke's History of the Popes, vol. I, p. 439). All which, it seems to me, indicated rather strong zeal for the Roman Church before we come to the Bartholomew Eve affair.

RECEPTION OF THE NEWS OF THE MASSACRE IN SPAIN AS DETERMINING ITS CHARACTER

It is in the reception of the news of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew in Spain by Philip II—that darling son of the church and the hope of Rome for the suppression of the "Protestant evil"—that the true nature of the French massacre which was held at the time can be determined. And this account is found in the letters written by the parties referred to, concerning the triumph of the Catholic party in France. I quote Motley for the correspondence:

"Nothing could exceed the satisfaction which the event [the massacre] occasioned in the mind of Philip II. There was an end now of all assistance from the French government to the Netherland Protestants. 'The news of the events upon St. Bartholomew's day', wrote the French envoy at Madrid, Saint Goard, to Charles IX, 'arrived on the 7th of September. The king, on receiving the intelligence, showed, contrary to his natural custom, so much gayety that he seemed more delighted than with all the good fortune or happy incidents which had ever before occurred to him. He called all his familiars about him in order to assure them that your majesty was his good brother, and that no one else deserved the title of 'Most Christian'. He sent his secretary Cayas to me with his felicitations upon the event, and with the information that he was just going to Saint Jerome to render thanks to God, and to offer his prayers that your majesty might receive divine support in this great affair. I went to see him next morning, and as soon as I came into his presence he began to laugh, and with demonstrations of extreme contentment to praise your majesty as deserving your title of 'Most Christian', telling me there was no king worthy to be your majesty's companion, either for valor or prudence. He praised the steadfast resolution and the long dissimulation of so great an enterprise, which all the world would not be able to 'comprehend'. * * * 'I thanked him', continued the ambassador, and I said that I thanked God for enabling your majesty to prove to his master that his apprentice had learned his trade and deserved his title of 'Most Christian King'! I added that he ought to confess that he owed the preservation of the Netherlands to your majesty' " (Groen v. Prinst., Archives, etc. Supplement, p. 125, quoted by Motley, Rise of the Dutch Republic, vol. II, p. 60-1, footnote).

"Nothing certainly could, in Philip's apprehension, be more delightful than this most unexpected and most opportune intelligence. Charles IX, whose intrigues in the Netherlands he had long known, had now been suddenly converted by this stupendous crime into his most powerful ally, while at the same time the Protestants of Europe would learn that there was still another crowned head in Christendom more deserving of abhorrence than himself. He [Philip] wrote immediately to Alva [the letter is published by Gachard] expressing his satisfaction that the king of France had disembarrassed himself of such pernicious men, because he would now be obliged to cultivate the friendship of Spain, neither the English queen nor the German Protestants being thenceforth capable of trusting him. * * * This is the demoniacal picture painted by the French ambassador, and by Philip's own hand, of the Spanish monarch's joy that his 'most Christian' brother had just murdered twenty-five thousand of his own subjects" (Motley, Rise of the Dutch Republic, vol. II, p. 61-2). And yet no word that these had been murdered to suppress a conspiracy against the French king's life!

THE NUMBER THAT WERE KILLED AT THE ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S SLAUGHTER

One can but wonder why it is that recent Catholic writers, especially seek to place so few a number of victims as falling in this massacre, in comparison with the larger numbers admitted by their earlier writers and Protestant authorities, and you may say the whole trend of historians' opinion. Here is a partial list of these but enough to show the trend in that direction.

CATHOLICS: Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore, first American Roman cardinal, but without venturing to name a definite number, speaks of the number "of its victims", as being "grossly exaggerated by partisan writers", and seeks to belittle the whole affair (see Faith of Our Fathers, pp. 297-300).

Monsignor Hunt says: "During a few days, beginning August 24th, 1572, many French Protestants were massacred. The number is inaccurately fixed at several thousand; very probably the number was over one thousand" (See excerpt quoted in this Appendix, ante p. 223).

History of the Catholic Church, Catholic textbook for seminaries and colleges by Dr. Heinrich Brueck. "The number of the Huguenots murdered may be set at about two thousand" p. 188). From the context this would appear to include both those slaughtered in the provinces and in Paris!

Bossuet, Roman Catholic writer, period 1627-1704, says 6000 in Paris alone (quoted in History of Romanism, Dowling, p. 589 footnote).

Davila—10,000 (Id.).

Fleury, Catholic historian and statesman, says that "the number killed in the different provinces amounted to no less than twenty-five thousand persons" (tome xxxv, pp. 153-4-5; also pp. 156-9, quoted in Controversy Controverted, Hopkins, Vol. I, p. 254).

PROTESTANTS; Students' History of Modern Europe; "Other towns followed the example of the capital. * * * Nearly 20,000 victims fell in this massacre" (Lodge, p. 121).

David Hume, English historian: About five hundred gentlemen and men of rank perished in this massacre, and near ten thousand of inferior condition" (History of England, Vol. III, p. 575). Evidently this alludes to those killed in Paris alone.

Dowling, History of Romanism: "The slaughter went forward during seven days. At the lowest computation 5000 Protestants were murdered in the city of Paris alone". According to Mezeray "25,000 or 30,000 perished in different places throughout the provinces" (p. 589).

Orpheus, A General History of Religions—Reinach, a French writer, 1900: "Ten thousand men were slaughtered in Paris"; and in spite of the resistance of a few governors "the throats of 30,000 of their comrades had been cut at a time of peace" (p. 333)!

Motley, standard authority in history: "Between Sunday and Tuesday, according to one of the most moderate calculations, 5000 Parisians of all ranks were murdered. Within the whole kingdom, the number of victims was variously estimated at from 25,000 to 100,000" (vol. II, ch. xi, p. 60).

Anderson's Manual of General History, an American text book for the use of colleges, high schools, academies, etc., 1878: "The dreadful Massacre of St. Bartholomew's Day followed, in which the Huguenots throughout France were butchered, without distinction of age or sex. * * * The number of those that fell in Paris is estimated at 10,000; the whole number slaughtered in different parts of the kingdom amounting to 30,000" (p. 293).

In the face of this volume of testimony, Catholic as well as Protestant, Monsignor Hunt concedes that "very probably the number [slaughtered] was over one thousand"! He might at least have agreed with the older Roman Catholic authorities. Why did he not?

FINAL GRIPS

Let us now come to final grips with this issue of whether this massacre was a religious or a political war and which did Gregory XIII understand it to be; and in which guise did he celebrate it, for therein lies his responsibility. Was he ex post facto guilty of the crime? Did he sanction it by his public approval of it, as charged by so many historians? In that case he may not escape censure, through Catholic writers try ever so hard to liberate him from responsibility. For it has been held now of a very long time among civilized people, at least, that when persons and especially those in public stations with their responsibilities applaud cruel, illegal and outrageous acts, things that have been done in violation of the laws of humanity, they become by that circumstance responsible with the direct perpetrators of crimes. I shall hold, of course, that the foregoing discussion in this Appendix has firmly established the fact that the St. Bartholomew affair was a religious persecution and a tremendous endeavor to destroy the Protestants or Huguenots of France by the opposing religious party—the Roman Catholics; and that the pope of Rome gave every sanction that a public demonstration of rejoicing and approval could give to the monstrous national crime, and therefore incurred the responsibility of the whole crime—in the plotting of it, and in the execution thereof; and in his so emphatic approval carried with him into the responsibility the Catholic Church, of which he was the head.

The author of Orpheus like so many historians accuses the pope of commissioning Vasari "to paint frescoes representing the massacre which still dishonor the walls of a salon of the Vatican"; also he struck off a papal medal in permanent commemoration of it—"The Slaughter of the Huguenots". Fortunately for the purposes of judgment, a facsimile of this medal is preserved in the elaborate History of Romanism, by Dowling (1845) and here reproduced, except for being slightly larger than the original (see next page).

Facsimile of Papal Medal in Honor of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew

FACSIMILE OF PAPAL MEDAL IN HONOR OF THE MASSACRE OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW

The obverse side of this medal has on it the image of the reigning pope, Gregory XIII; and the date of the event, "1572".

On the reverse side is an angel carrying a sword in one hand and a crucifix, held high, in the other. He is employed in the slaughter of a group of people with the words circling the medal "Ugonnottorum Strages" (Slaughter of the Huguenots.)

One wonders what encouragement can be had from this medal struck off in honor of the massacre, to believe that its object is to commemorate the suppression of a conspiracy against the French king. Here is a pope and the first year of his reign celebrated by the permanent record of this butchery of tens of thousands of an opposite faith; an angel with a cross, the insignia of the Roman Catholic Church, held in one hand, and a drawn sword in the other, in hot pursuit of a group of helpless people—men, women, and children! It is a religious war, beyond question, a victorious persecution! And that is what the medal celebrates; not the deliverance of a king from a political conspiracy. In every way the event carries a churchly not a political atmosphere; and that fits in with all the accumulated information that has gone before herein. It was the persecution of heretics, and a pope rejoicing at the victory of his successful partisans; and when it was discovered how horrified all Europe was at the crime, the pitiful alibi was invented of the slaughter being for the suppression of a political conspiracy against the king and the royal family. This to save the pope from the shame of having given public approval of the horrible crime, thereby becoming a responsible party to the slaughter of the Huguenots of France.

"Vain attempts have been made", says the author of Orpheus, "to absolve the pope and his legate [Orsini] of all responsibility for this inexpiable crime" (p. 334). "Vain" indeed! And "inexpiable" indeed!—behold how vain!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The matter here presented, however, is abbreviated from the paper prepared during the delivery of my radio addresses in anticipation of some Catholic reply as mentioned in discourse XIII, which see
[^2] 2. A printed facsimile of this medal—save that it is slightly larger than the original—will be found on p. 252 this edition
[^3] 3. These last were the Protestants, victims of French persecuting Catholics, following the revocation of the "Edict of Nantes" by Louis XIV, 1685. Then followed the enforcement of those laws "which banished heretics from intercourse with their fellowmen" by denying them participation in trades and other industries; banishing the Protestant ministry from the country on pain of death; but the Protestants laity were forbidden to leave France on pain of the galleys. In order to crush those who stayed the authorities imposed garrisons of troops (1685). These soldiers behaved like drunken savages, hanging, smoking out and flogging men and women, dragging them half dead to the churches, "where their mere enforced presence," writes Pastor Claude in 1686, "was reckoned as a recantation." Houses were destroyed, trees cut down, women and children thrown into convents. "Even the dead were not spared. As in the days of the Inquisition in Languedoc, the corpses of those who had died without confession were tried and dragged off on hurdles to be thrown into the common sewer"—hence "Dragonnades" (Orpheus p. 337)
