Hyrum L. Andrus, Liberalism, Conservatism, Mormonism ( 1965)

II

THE SOCIETY OF ZION AND PLATO'S TOTALITARIAN REPUBLIC

The quest for social justice in Western civilization is at least as old as Plato. This ancient Greek philosopher ranks among the world's greatest intellectual figures. His REPUBLIC is required reading for all serious students of social and political thought. But despite his intellectuality, Plato's REPUBLIC epitomizes the contradictions that confront man-made systems that tackle the job of achieving social justice. In his effort to realize this objective, Plato became the first great totalitarian, because he could not see how justice and union could be achieved within a society that fostered freedom. He therefore repudiated the latter principle and proposed that men be regimented for their own good by a totalitarian system. In the following brief article, the writer contrasts Plato's REPUBLIC with Joseph Smith's concept of the society of Zion, in some of the basic assumptions upon which the two systems rest.

Societies differ in their basic ingredients and in the elements of environment that influence them, making it difficult to compare accurately two systems so widely separated in time and principles as Plato's Republic and Joseph Smith's society of Zion. There are, however, some general similarities in the two concepts. Both systems were theistic and espoused the ideal of justice based upon moral rectitude.

In addition, each made justice a social concept. Plato held that by justice one could achieve the good life, but it required a correct social order to establish justice. Similarly, Joseph Smith held that only by building Zion can the Saints attain true freedom, union, and equality, and thereby be sanctified. Both systems were held by their respective proponents to be a correct organization of society that exalted intelligence and made truth, rather than popular sentiment, the directing principle therein. Furthermore, both Plato and Joseph Smith maintained that there are heavenly patterns of perfection of which earthly things are but rough approximations. But though they possess these and other general similarities, the idealogy and the mechanics of the two systems greatly differ.

In the opinion of the writer, their most vital distinction is found in their approach to truth. The all-important question that Plato and the Prophet answer differently is: How does one learn the truth as the basis of achieving the good life? To Plato, the intellectual man alone could see the truth; and to establish justice and attain the good life required that man come out of the cave of mortal shadows into the light of intellectual reality. Reason and intellect were his methods, and his dialectic system became his basic "coping stone" for acquiring truth.

But while Joseph Smith also stressed intellectual endeavor, he held that man alone cannot build the ideal society, establish justice, or achieve the good life. While man's efforts are necessary, they are not sufficient; for in reality man's "strength is weakness, his wisdom is folly, [and] his glory is his shame." [^1]

In addition to man's efforts, properly directed, the Prophet held that to establish justice and peace requires "the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God." [^2] Thus, while Plato would inquire, "Have you intellectually emerged from the cave?" Joseph Smith would question: "Have you spiritually been born of God?"

Both Plato and Joseph Smith conceded that the natural man, unregenerated by truth, is an enemy to God and to himself. But according to the latter, men are to put off the natural man by acquiring the Holy Spirit, and having become sons of God through the gospel, are to be joint heirs with Christ in the society of Zion, where each man is given a stewardship commensurate with his needs and his ability to manage. Thereafter, each steward is to have an equal right to draw from the storehouse to develop and expand his stewardship. The success of the system depends upon each member's acting freely, maturely, and unitedly with others, under the influence of powers of truth and light coming from God.

By contrast, Plato would encourage the intellectually qualified to come out into the light of intellectual truth. And on this proposition he would put the trusteeship of society in their hands, giving them the right to regiment the lives of others according to the best interests of society.

Plato's Republic was to be a puppet, intellectually manipulated from the top, while the society of Zion was to be a living organism, strictly analogous to the human body, where powers of life from God quickened every cell and organism therein so that all acted in free and open union with each other. The most fundamental issue between Joseph Smith and Plato centers around the utilization of divine power and truth versus human intellect. Those who believe merely in applying intellectual powers and aesthetic values to refine and develop man are more Platonic than saintly. A saint must enjoy union with the Holy Spirit and its powers, and by its divine endowments be filled with truth and love to where he can love his neighbor as himself and thereby achieve justice, and attain the good life.

The crucial issue centering in the Republic versus the society of Zion was aptly summed up by a close acquaintance of the writer who graduated Phi Kappa Phi with a Master's degree in the social sciences. "My idea of the hereafter," said she, "used to be to spend the first few hundred years listening to and being instructed by Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, etc. But in understanding more fully what the gospel offers," she continued, "I now want to teach them about Christ and his gospel, that they might have a proper basis to achieve the ideals for which they sought."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] D&C 104:54-56.
[^2] Ibid., 82:17-18.
