Hyrum L. Andrus, Liberalism, Conservatism, Mormonism ( 1965)

IV

THE CONSTITUTION AND ZION VS. THE WELFARE STATE

In latter-day revelation, the Lord has made important declarations concerning the political philosophy of the United States Constitution. These statements are of twofold significance to Latter-day Saints. First, they reflect the view of the Constitution as given by that same Being who inspired the founding fathers to produce that great document. By studying the views expressed on the Constitution in latter-day revelation, the Saints may better understand the original intent of the founding fathers in giving us this sacred instrument of government. Second, the views on the Constitution expressed through the Prophet Joseph Smith largely reflect the proposed relationship that will one day exist between the society of Zion, as a socio-economic and religious system among the Saints, and the perfected Constitution, as the foundation of the world-wide political program of the future kingdom of God. Here it is plainly evident that the Saints have a vital responsibility to build up the society of Zion as a free, mature, united, and independent system capable of showing others how to care for their own social and economic problems without turning to the state and socializing its institutions, and thereby prepare the way for the establishment of the more perfect political order envisioned within the kingdom of God.

Latter-day Saints are taught that the Constitution of the United States is an inspired document. But in what respect is it inspired? And what ideals were intended to be achieved through its heaven-born genius? While this brief article does not pretend to answer all the questions that have a bearing on this subject, some important concepts can be mentioned.

First, the Constitution is God's proposed system of government for man. Said a revelation: "And as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil." [^1] The old Articles of Confederation sustained a system of government that was "less" than that established by the Constitution, in that it did not contain the power or the machinery to uphold the rights of men and to regulate adequately the affairs of society.

The socialized state, on the other hand, is a governmental system that is "more" than that which was originally provided for by the Constitution. No reputable scholar will argue that government programs that deal with social and economic matters do not curtail freedom. The welfare state must regulate and infringe upon man's agency more than a system founded upon individual freedom. The welfare state is therefore something "more" than the fathers intended. Such a system must regulate where the Constitution would not regulate and must infringe upon personal freedom where the original intent of the Constitution would uphold that freedom.

According to the LDS view the Constitution is a universal document belonging to all mankind. Because he accepted this ideal, Joseph Smith sought in the campaign of 1844 to extend its guarantees and its powers throughout the world. Earlier, the Lord had declared in two revelations that "that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind." [^2] In this light, George Q. Cannon wrote of the Constitution: "It is broad enough, if interpreted in its true spirit, to cover the individual, the continent, and the entire globe and furnish freedom for all." [^3]

Second, the Constitution is primarily concerned with the problem of granting and upholding individual freedom. A revelation declared that the Constitution was established and should be maintained "according to just and holy principles; that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." [^4] In this ideal of political economy where individual freedom is the foundation of society, government is instituted to safeguard human rights and provide proper machinery to reconcile conflicts that arise between contending elements within society, in such a way as to insure that justice will hold the balance between the opposing factions.

This philosophy is set forth in James Madison's famous Federalist No. 10, where the Father of the Constitution espoused the ideal of a pluralistic society under a government founded upon a vertical and horizontal separation of powers. Such a system is legalistic, and as such it is concerned with the maintenance of human rights rather than being responsive to popular opinion. It is designed to check the influence of political parties, large or small, in their effort to use government for private or popular welfare measures, etc.

It follows that governmental measures that foster social programs for the people are basically incompatible with the Constitution. Social measures may require majority approval, but they affect the lives and property of all people within the body politic, regardless of whether or not the individual desires to be so affected. Minority groups are, therefore, very often forced to conform to the majority opinion, either by the pressure of popular sentiment or by the direct influence of government doing the will of the people. Hence the socialized state stands in opposition to the ideal of freedom, and the pluralistic society espoused by the Constitution.

These two opposing concepts of government each find a precedent in the philosophies set forth by John Locke and Jean Jacques Rousseau. In his Two Treatises on Government (1690), Locke developed his concept of the "social contract"—which in many ways helped give birth to the idea of constitutional government—emphasizing that therein individual rights could best be maintained.

Locke's ideal came to America and became firmly entrenched in the thinking of our founding fathers. Rousseau, on the other hand, conceived of a state where sovereignty was to be represented as the will of the organism. In his idea of the "social contract," each individual agreed to abide by "the general will" and to uphold the proposition that the state should be directed thereby. Individual rights were not emphasized and at times might even be abrogated by popular opinion.

The opposing philosophies of Locke and Rousseau are still at variance with each other in the present world conflict over political ideologies, where our inspired Constitution founded upon the ideal of maintaining individual rights, stands in opposition to all who would propose social measures sponsored by governmental authority to which minority groups are induced or required to submit.

While Locke's concept came to America, Rousseau's ideology found root in parts of Europe where it gave support to the development of communist ideology; for instance, let a dictator of the proletariat be established to determine and act in the interest of the "general will" and the result is the totalitarian state with its purges and its blood baths.

For their own part, Latter-day Saints might well ask themselves the questions: What would be the history of our people had we been forced from the beginning to conform to a "general will"? Could we under such circumstances have made any substantial contributions to civilization?

Third, the Latter-day Saints understand that while the Constitution was brought forth under the inspiration of God, it was not in every respect a perfect document. Nor have the qualifying amendments, with the varying interpretations assigned to given sections thereof, necessarily been born of that same inspiration.

Joseph Smith found fault with the Constitution because, while it stated that all men should enjoy religious freedom, it did not provide sufficient guarantees to insure that these rights would be upheld for all people. Said he: "Under its provision, a man or a people who are able to protect themselves can get along well enough; but those who have the misfortune to be weak or unpopular are left to the merciless rage of popular fury." [^5]

This observation grew out of the experiences of the Saints in Missouri and the treatment their case for redress was given thereafter by state and federal officials. The Prophet thus proposed that the Federal Government have power to see that each state maintained a true republican form of government, as the Constitution requires.

He made a brilliant explanation of his point of contention in a letter to Senator John C. Calhoun. But while the Civil War largely settled the issue of the scope of federal power in favor of the Prophet's view, there are other improper interpretations against which we must continually struggle; for instance, the writer was recently informed that a Utah congressman has used Joseph Smith's proposal to give the Federal government power to require the states to maintain a republican form of government as an argument supporting greater grants of power to Federal authority today for welfare purposes. If this is true, here is a flagrant misapplication of the spirit and intent of the Prophet's proposal. While it is one thing to suggest the use of federal power to extend the guarantees of the Bill of Rights to the state level (they check only federal, not state, power), it is quite another thing to advocate the greater socialization of the Federal Government. By contrast, the prophecy is found in Latter-day Saint literature that the Saints must one day play a leading role in restoring the Constitution to its original concept. In his "Views on the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States," Joseph Smith advocated such a return in his day.

Finally, Latter-day Saints hold that the Constitution is, as Orson Pratt expressed it, "a stepping stone to a form of government infinitely greater and more perfect—a government founded upon divine laws, and officers appointed by the God of heaven." [^6] But to establish this higher political ideal and extend a system founded thereon throughout the world, people must be shown how intelligently to care for their own needs without relying upon government programs.

This is a vital and important point in Joseph Smith's concept of the kingdom of God as it will be established one day upon the earth. Within this future kingdom there will be both a church and a state. While the state will be established upon a political system that will perfect the Constitution of the United States as an instrument of government and extend its guarantees of freedom throughout the world, the Church under her divine economic law will become a free and united Christian community sufficient within herself to care for every legitimate need of its members.

Here Zion must become an ensign to the world. Her social and economic programs, wherein mature individuals cooperate freely to care for their own needs in the spirit of Christian living, are vital factors in the achievement of the higher order of political freedom espoused by the kingdom of God. Indeed, a revelation states that Zion's social and economic principles must be developed as a foundation for that future political order. After enunciating certain of these economic principles, the revelation said: "Behold, this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation, . . . that the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world; that you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms." [^7]

Note that Zion must develop to where she stands independent by means of her own social and economic programs above all other systems on earth, including the state and state-sponsored welfare measures. Latter-day Saints cannot get around this responsibility, if they are to prepare Zion for the millennial reign of Christ. They must stand on their own feet, using the Lord's program—not some man-made system with all its inherent deficiencies—to become an ensign to the world, becoming thereby a free, mature, and united people, independent above all other systems beneath the celestial world.

In addition to the economic ideal set forth in the statement above, the point is clearly inferred that only when Zion becomes an ensign of righteousness, freedom, and union can the Latter-day Saints expect freedom-loving people from all over the world to rally around Zion's standard and willingly cooperate in establishing the kingdom of God in its full power upon the earth, where the priesthood, having developed Zion to be an ideal society, will then be conceded the right to establish the political program of the kingdom of God. As Isaiah and Micah predicted, the people of the earth will then say, "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." In that day, these ancient prophets declared: "The law shall go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." (Isa. 2:3. See Mic. 4:2.) Only then can the Constitution of the United States be perfected as a document and its guarantees of freedom and inalienable rights be extended throughout the world. This inspired document will then become the foundation of a universal, millennial government that will restore the Constitution to its original concept, develop it to achieve the fulness of that concept of freedom, and extend its privileges to all men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] DHC V, 61.
[^2] Ibid., 64.
[^3] Original letter in Church Historian's Office, dated May 13, 1844.
[^4] JD V, 23-25.
[^5] DHC, V, 555. (Italics by the writer.)
[^6] JD, XVII, 156.
[^7] DHC, VII, 381-383.
