Hyrum L. Andrus, Liberalism, Conservatism, Mormonism ( 1965)

V

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AND OUR INSPIRED CONSTITUTION

In a masterful editorial on the "Government of God," Joseph Smith wrote: "The Government of the Almighty has always been very dissimilar to the governments of men, whether we refer to his religious government, or to the government of nations." One significant difference, said he, is that "the Government of God has always tended to promote peace, unity, harmony, strength, and happiness; while that of man has been productive of confusion, disorder, weakness, and misery." [^1] In this article, the writer treats the Lord's proposed plan of government under the kingdom of God and its relationship to the United States Constitution.

I

Joseph Smith did not limit his view of the kingdom of God to the religious sphere, but extended it to the social, economic, and political areas of society. Revelations to him gave instructions on such matters as education, health, recreation, and marriage. From this source the Prophet received a divine economic plan in the law of consecration and stewardship. He was also given the basic political principles upon which God's millennial government will rest; and in certain revelations concerning political economy, the Lord had some significant things to say about the Constitution of the United States. The great truths Joseph Smith received in all these areas are built into the religious faith and philosophy of the Latter-day Saints. In a day when ideologies destructive to freedom are making serious inroads into our way of life, every member of the Church should understand what the Lord has revealed concerning true social, economic, and political principles, as they are to be developed within the kingdom of God.

Principles and ideals are important, particularly to Latter-day Saints, because the great concepts for building up the kingdom of God in the last days originated in the revelations of the Lord to men in modern times. But while it will be left to future events to bring many of these ideals to fruition, they are valuable today, for they point the way to the ultimate objective to be achieved; and in developing toward that objective, these great principles and ideals should be used as guideposts to mark the path the Saints should follow. Only by being intelligently aware of the program and the objectives of this dispensation can the members of the Church guard themselves against intrusions and apply their best efforts to the kingdom of God.

To appreciate the Prophet's concept of the kingdom of God, it should be remembered that he was called to lay the foundation of the dispensation of the fulness of times, in which all things in heaven and on earth are to be gathered together in Christ. In gathering all things together on earth in Christ, the work of this dispensation envisions, first, the building up of Christ's true Church on earth, which, when founded upon the social and economic law revealed to the Saints, may also be designated as the Society of Zion—a society of true brotherhood and union sufficient within itself to care for every legitimate human need. Second, the Lord's program anticipates the eventual establishment of a government under the authority of the Holy Priesthood, known as the Government of God, capable of extending freedom and justice to all men. So important is this political organ to the consummation of God's purposes that the Prophet maintained that the establishment of the Government of God "is the only thing that can bring about the 'restitution of all things spoken of by all the holy Prophets since the world was'—'the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God shall gather together all things in one.'" [^2] Joseph Smith expressed his desire to see this divine government established when he wrote to Henry Clay: "I long for a day of righteousness, when 'He whose right it is to reign shall judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth'; and I pray God, who hath given our Fathers [i.e., the ancient prophets—Isaiah, Daniel, John, etc.] a promise of a perfect government in the last days, to purify the hearts of the people and hasten the welcome day." [^3]

It is evident from the above views that the kingdom of God over which Christ will reign on earth will consist, as John Taylor emphasized, of both a church and a state. [^4] Within that divine system, where men who bear the fulness of the Melchizedek priesthood are kings and priests unto God, the priesthood will minister and direct in both the ecclesiastical and the political affairs of society. In this light the Prophet declared:

Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests of the Most High God, holding the keys of power and blessings. In fact, that Priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and stands as God to give laws to the people, administering endless lives to the sons and daughters of Adam. [^5]

Having referred to the various organizations that constitute the Church, Brigham Young also explained that, while "this is what we are in the habit of calling the Kingdom of God," there are "further organizations." With reference to the fuller vision of the kingdom, which included a political organ, he then said:

The Prophet gave a full and complete organization of this kingdom the spring before he was killed. . . . The Kingdom of God will protect every person, every sect and all people upon the face of the whole earth in their legal rights; I shall not tell you the names of the members of this kingdom, neither shall I read to you its constitution, but the constitution was given by revelation. The day will come when it will be organized in strength and power. [^6]

While both the church and the state within the kingdom of God derive their authority from the priesthood, they are two separate organizations; and within the kingdom of God there is to be a separation of church and state. Both Brigham Young and George Q. Cannon stressed that the Government of God "is a separate organization from the Church of God." [^7] "On this point the Prophet Joseph gave particular instruction before his death," reported President Cannon, "and gave an example, which he asked the younger elders who were present to always remember." Continued President Cannon:

It was to the effect that men might be chosen to officiate as members of the Kingdom of God [in its political department] who had no standing in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Kingdom of God when established will not be for the protection of the Church of Jesus Christ alone, but for the protection of all men, whatever their religious views or opinions may be. Under its rule, no one will be permitted to overstep the proper bounds or to interfere with the rights of others. [^8]

II

To see the full vision of the kingdom of God, one must first consider the basic concepts to be developed within the society of Zion. Zion is to be founded upon the covenants of the gospel, where free men enlightened and strengthened by the Holy Spirit apply the law of Christ to every sphere of their lives. The law of consecration and stewardship represents the extension and adaptation of the principles and covenants of the gospel to the economic sphere of society. In baptism, for instance, the Saints should give themselves to Christ. But Zion's economic law requires the further consecration of their possessions to God, making effective as an economic principle the belief that the earth and all things therein belong to God. Again, in baptism men covenant to "bear one another's burdens . . . to mourn with those that mourn, and comfort those that stand in need of comfort." [^9] To fulfil the obligations of this covenant and thereby uplift the poor and promote their temporal well-being, the Saints must obey the Lord's economic law, that all men within this divine order might receive an equal opportunity to acquire and enjoy the good things of the earth. It is to fulfil the righteous requirements of uplifting the poor and of establishing social justice that the Saints are required to consecrate their material possessions to the Lord, as an extension of the covenant obligations they assume in baptism.

It is evident from the above that the law of consecration and stewardship is to be an economic order developed among free and mature individuals who are motivated by the Christian ideal of loving their neighbors as themselves. And being based upon the highest ideals of freedom and brotherly union, this divine order proposes to liberate fully the creative powers of the individual and thereby establish an economy of abundance wherein men are free, united, and independent economically under Christ. In this light the Prophet wrote of his effort to establish the Saints upon this divine economic system: "It was my endeavor to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every incumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship, and mutual love." [^10] A revelation similarly declared that under Zion's economic law the Church must eventually "stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world." [^11]

It should be stressed that to be independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world the Saints must, among other things, be independent above state-sponsored welfare measures. Latter-day Saints cannot consistently advocate the socialization of the state. For them true economic independence must be achieved through the gospel and its socio-economic law. Under this program the individual may be enlightened and regenerated by the Holy Spirit to where he becomes an independent agent under God and is enabled to act freely, intelligently, and in enlightened union with others to establish a program of true security and economic independence. By contrast, man-made systems that attempt to establish social justice lack these enlightening and regenerating spiritual powers. Consequently, to achieve union they must be manipulated like puppets, by various artificial devices. Such regimentation results in a loss of freedom for the individual. The creative powers of man are also stifled and initiative suppressed in such systems; and like lifeless bodies they are subject to forces of deterioration, so that greed, graft, and corruption are perennial problems among them. Finally, the security which men seek through such systems is but a fleeting and evasive substitute for that which may be obtained within the kingdom of God.

To establish fully the kingdom of God, the Church must be organized and developed before the state. This sequence is necessary, as John Taylor observed, first, "because of the impossibility of introducing the law of God among a people who would not be subject to and be guided by the spirit of revelation." [^12] By its very nature, the Government of God requires that men be nurtured in the ways of revelation. Otherwise, the Lord could not direct the political affairs of society without curtailing freedom. Second, as President Taylor also explained, the Government of God is founded upon the principles of eternal peace and union. To establish the Lord's political law, these principles must first be developed in the hearts of men. While various man-made systems have been designed to establish peace and union on earth, "they have failed," President Taylor stressed, "and they will fail, because, . . . it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the Spirit of the living God; and that Spirit can only be imparted through the ordinances of the gospel." For this reason, he continued, "Jesus told His disciples to go and preach the gospel to every creature. . . . It was by this cementing, uniting spirit, that true sympathetic, fraternal relations could be introduced and enjoyed." [^13]

Third, to establish the Government of God requires that the Saints first demonstrate in a practical way that under the law of the priesthood they can become a free, united, and independent people, worthy to be emulated by others. Only in this way can the world have confidence in the priesthood and the new theocratic processes established under its law. Until the Saints become an ensign to the world by utilizing the laws of God and procedures of the priesthood, they cannot hope to convince others that the same inspired principles applied to political affairs can solve the pressing problems required to bring peace to the world. Until then, it cannot be expected that others will say with full meaning, "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." [^14] It was with this end in view that the Lord, having revealed certain measures to be taken in establishing Zion's economic law, said:

Behold, this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation, and the ensample which I give unto you, whereby you may accomplish the commandments which are given you;

That through my providence, not withstanding the tribulation which shall descend upon you, that the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world;

That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over many kingdoms. . . . [^15]

For the Saints to be made rulers over many kingdoms means to give the priesthood its God-ordained right to direct all the affairs of men on earth within the kingdom of God.

III

The Constitution of the United States, perfected in the means by which it will establish freedom and justice by being placed under the direction of the priesthood, will be the instrument of government in the kingdom of God. "As pertaining to law of man," a revelation declared of the form of government established by the Constitution, "whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh of evil." [^16] It may be said that a system of government less than that provided by the Constitution is one where the freedoms upheld by that document are not guaranteed fully or where the necessary machinery to establish and preserve those freedoms is lacking. On the other hand, a government that is more than that established by the Fathers must regiment where the Constitution would not regiment. According to the above revelation, deviations in either direction from the true intent of the Constitution result in evil. The Government of God would preserve the proper balance between these two extremes.

As a theocracy, Brigham Young explained that the Government of God "is a republican government, and differs but little in form from our National, State, and Territorial Government," except that under the divine system men "will recognize the will and dictation of the Almighty." [^17] Otherwise, the two concepts of government are very similar. Of the theocratic processes, John Taylor said:

The proper mode of government is this—God first speaks, and then the people have their action. It is for them to say whether they will have his dictation or not. They are free: they are independent under God. The Government of God is not a species of priestcraft . . . where one man dictates and everybody obeys without having a voice in it. We have our voices and agency, and act with the most perfect freedom; still we believe there is a correct order-some wisdom and knowledge somewhere that is superior to ours: that wisdom and knowledge proceeds from God through the medium of the Holy Priesthood. We believe that no man or set of men, of their own wisdom and by their talents, are capable of governing the human family aright. . . . It needs the same intelligence to govern men and promote their happiness upon the earth that it does to control and keep in order the heavenly bodies; and we believe that that cannot be found with man independently. [^18]

As a theocracy, the Government of God would necessarily eliminate political parties as instruments for installing men in office and as devices for formulating the policies of government. Orson Pratt therefore concluded that in this divine system there would be "no party politicians"; [^19] and on another occasion he spoke of carrying out the principles of the Constitution "according to the order of union and oneness which prevails among the people of God." [^20] But instead of being a departure from the ideal of government sought for by the founding fathers of the United States Constitution, this concept is similar to the ideal they had in mind. They, too, sought for a stable and united government that would exclude political parties from its functions; and they purposely devised the machinery of government to minimize the influence of parties therein. James Madison thus wrote as an argument for the Constitution that "among the numerous advantages promised by a well-constructed Union, none deserve to be more accurately developed than its tendency to break and control" the influence of self-interested factions or parties. [^21]

The founding fathers sought for a stable, impartial, and righteous government that, as Madison wrote, would protect "the diversity in the faculties of man" (that is, protect man's freedom and his right to different opinions and interests) as its first object, regulate the "various and interfering interests arising from freedom and diversity among men by providing for justice . . . to hold the balance between them," and do all this without government itself being controlled or unduly influenced by a given party or group of parties. "To secure the public good and private rights against the danger" of such organizations while preserving at the same time "the spirit and form of popular government," wrote the Father of the Constitution, "is then the great object to which our inquiries are directed." A person, Madison thus concluded, "will not fail . . . to set a due value on any plan which, without violating the principles to which he is attached, provides a proper cure" for party influence. [^22]

That the establishment of individual freedom is the primary concern of government under the Constitution is also attested by the word of the Lord. While one revelation declared that the law of the land under the Constitution "maketh you free," [^23] another stated specifically that that document had been established "that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." [^24] Because it is the design of God that men should be free and uninhibited in planning their own destiny, it follows that governmental programs that coddle the people while curtailing their freedom are basically incompatible with the Constitution, as that document has been interpreted by the Lord.

While establishing a system of government that would secure individual freedom, the founding fathers sought to have qualified men placed in office by the popular consent of the people but do so in such a way as to prevent undue party influence and conflict. This was the intent behind the electoral college, as an instrument for electing the President of the United States. A republican system, Madison argued, would also provide a cure for party influence in government without "destroying the liberty" essential to the existence of such bodies. The "delegation of government" to chosen representatives, he wrote, would "refine and enlarge the public views, by passing them through the medium of a chosen body of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of their country, and whose patriotism and love of justice will be least likely to sacrifice it to temporary or partial consideration." [^25]

Madison maintained that the federal system, where power is divided vertically between the federal, state, and local levels of government, would also aid in controlling undue party influence, by making "it less probable that a majority of the whole will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens" or the ability "to act in unison with each other" in attaining such ambitions. [^26] In addition, the horizontal separation of power between the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of both the federal and state governments provides a means of preserving government against organized party interest. A party might gain control of one branch of government, but seldom of all three branches on both state and federal levels. Thus "in the extent and proper structure of the Union," Madison concluded, "we behold a republican remedy for the disease most incident to republican government." [^27]

Because government under the Constitution was originally devised to establish freedom, while protecting itself against party influence, E. E. Shattschneider wrote that the founding fathers held "a legalistic concept of government incompatible with a satisfactory system of party government." By organizing government as they did, he observed, "it was hoped that the parties would lose and exhaust themselves in futile attempts to fight their way through the labyrinthine framework of the government, much as an attacking army is expected to spend itself against the defensive works of a fortress." [^28] It was expected that this would be true in the case of majority as well as of minority parties and interests. As Lord Acton expressed it, the federal system "is the only method of curbing not only the majority but the power of the whole people." [^29] Thus, instead of devising a government that would be responsible to the majority opinion or to the will of the body politic, as a socialistic system, for instance, must be, the founding fathers were interested primarily in preserving the freedom of the individual.

Not only was the system established by the Constitution designed to preserve government against the power of self-interested groups, but, in turn, it was intended that under this arrangement the people would be safeguarded against any improper encroachments of governmental power. It has been said that all power corrupts and that absolute power corrupts absolutely. This is true of every system where men are gathered together in social or political relationships, except in the kingdom of God, where power may be sanctified by being associated with the Holy Spirit. But even in this divine system, the constitutional principles under which the Government of God will be established will control and restrict the power of government. Since the United States Constitution provides for like restrictions, Latter-day Saints consider this form of government to be the most nearly like that which will exist in the kingdom of God. This is one among other marks of inspiration in the United States Constitution. As it checks the power of the people, so does the Constitution check the power of government; and it directs the power of government toward establishing justice and preserving freedom. Thus, it may truly be said that in the ideal of political economy sought by the founding fathers and by Joseph Smith there is little room either for party politicians or for tyrants.

IV

"The Fathers," Harry Elmer Barnes observed, "are conventionally held . . . to have been above party." [^30] But while some have considered them politically naive for espousing an ideal of government restricted in its powers and uncontrolled by political parties, a deeper insight into their intentions reveals a view of political economy that lesser minds have failed to grasp. The truth, Edward Stanwood declared, is that "later generations have departed from what seems to have been their original intentions." [^31] That such an apostasy had occurred was recognized by Joseph Smith. One cannot read his "Views of the Powers and Policy of the Government of the United States" (the statement of his political views as expressed in the 1844 campaign without being impressed with the similarity of his concept of government to that of the founding fathers and his desire to return to their ideal. On the issue of parties, the Prophet said: "Unity is power; and when I reflect on the importance of it to the stability of governments, I am astounded at the silly moves of persons and parties to foment discord in order to ride into power on the current of popular excitement; nor am I less surprised at the stretches of power or restrictions of right which too often appear as acts of legislators to pave the way to some favorite political scheme as destitute of intrinsic merit as a wolf's heart is of the milk of human kindness." [^32]

It was the opinion of George Q. Cannon that the kingdom of God would restore government under the Constitution "to its primitive conditions, when all the political parties shall have fallen into chaos." [^33] Such a restoration is a vital key in extending the freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution to other peoples throughout the world. Two revelations specifically state that the Constitution, "supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind, and is justifiable" before God. [^34] And while viewing that inspired document in this light, President Cannon declared: "It needs no amendment about it; it is broad enough, if interpreted in its true spirit, to cover the individual, the continent, and the entire globe and furnish freedom for all." [^35]

To best extend constitutional freedom and justice throughout the earth, two things are necessary. First, the society of Zion must be built up as an ensign to the world, pointing the way to a solution of the great social and economic problems of life within the framework of a free society, where brotherhood and economic independence are realities. As such a standard, men may measure deficient systems against the society of Zion and be persuaded by the power of truth to emulate the example of the Saints. In this way, the spiritual powers of the gospel can also better be extended to influence the lives of men on earth, thereby establishing peace. Of the anticipated role of Zion as an ensign to the world, Parley P. Pratt wrote in behalf of the Twelve:

The City of Zion, with its sanctuary and priesthood, and the glorious fullness of the Gospel, will constitute a standard which will put an end to jarring creeds and political wranglings, by uniting the [peoples] . . . of North and South America in one great and common bond of brotherhood; while truth and knowledge shall make them free, and love cement their union. [^36]

Having in some measure built up Zion, the second thing required to extend the blessings of peace and freedom throughout the earth is to place government under the direction of the Holy Priesthood. But while it would be a major concession for the people of the world to give the priesthood the right to nominate men to office (by the consent of the people concerned) and formulate the policies of government, this right is to be conceded only as a result of the demonstrated ability of the priesthood to use its inspired theocratic procedures to build up a society of free, united, and independent people among the Saints. Only on the basis of such a demonstration can it be shown that such a grant of political power would be used to foster freedom among men.

In addition, there are certain other benefits leading to freedom and justice that nonmembers of the Church cannot acquire except under the Government of God, for under this system a peaceful world order can better be developed capable of securing freedom, exalting intelligence, and promoting union instead of conflict among men; for example, highly developed peoples with limited populations would be reluctant to enter a world order founded upon democratic processes and party politics, for in such a system political power would be placed largely in the hands of the uneducated masses of the world. On the other hand, those among the great masses of humanity have demonstrated their unwillingness to be governed by small and powerful nations interested primarily in their own welfare. But if Zion could be established fully upon her social and economic law and her influence extended throughout the world by giving the priesthood the right to nominate men to political office in a government designed to uphold constitutional freedom and justice, certain significant benefits could be achieved. In this way, a true society founded upon the ideal of individual freedom, social union, and economic independence would be held up as an ensign to the struggling peoples of the earth, that they might see how to live as free men in peace and union with each other. The ideals and standards of Zion would also act as a powerful deterrent and counterforce against such destructive ideologies as socialism and its more materialistic cousin, communism. Meanwhile, constitutional freedom and justice under the Government of God could be extended progressively throughout the world with a minimum of conflict, as people desired to enter the system. The federal structure of government would preserve national identities and cultures; the Constitution would guarantee individual freedom for all; and the theocratic procedures of the priesthood for installing man in government office would preserve the element of popular consent without pitting people with varying populations, cultures, and standards against each other, as would be the case under democratic procedures. Here, in particular, the Government of God holds an important key to the establishment of a peaceful world society.

V

Here, then, is Joseph Smith's concept of the kingdom of God wherein the will of God may be done on earth as it is in heaven. To the Prophet heaven consists of a gradation of societies from the celestial down to the telestial, with the celestial order both governing and ministering to those in the lesser kingdoms. [^37] When the kingdom of God is established fully on earth, there will be an extension and an adaptation of the eternal system to the earth. The society of Zion, founded upon celestial truth and power, will be developed fully among the Saints to give them a highly progressive system with freedom, union, and strength to surpass all other societies on earth. Meanwhile, under the direction of the priesthood, the Government of God will uphold freedom and justice for all men, while light and truth from Zion will be extended to those who do not directly embrace her law, according to their willingness and ability to receive.

To establish this order of things on earth, Zion must be built up, for upon this work the issues of freedom and justice for all men will eventually rest. No other society has within it the true principles and powers for developing peace and union among men. In a real and meaningful sense, therefore, the Saints hold the keys to the attainment of these objectives on earth. Here is their challenge; and here also may be their condemnation. To meet this important challenge, they should see clearly the evils of modern materialism, as expressed in socialism, communism, and their kindred ideologies, and exert their influence to foster and uphold a free political society, first, that they might secure the blessings of freedom for themselves, their fellow men, and their posterity; second, that they might maintain a climate of freedom in which to build up the society of Zion; third, because the free and open society is the basis upon which Zion's program of union and economic independence is founded; and, finally, because only in this way and by building up Zion can they point the way to the kingdom of God under which the blessings of freedom and justice will be extended to all men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] DHC, Vol. V, p. 64.
[^2] Idem.
[^3] D&C 38:21-22.
[^4] Ibid., 45:58-59.
[^5] DHC, Vol. V, pp. 256-257.
[^6] Ibid., p. 555.
[^7] Benjamin F. Johnson's Handwritten Journal, p. 94.
[^8] JD, Vol. II, p. 189.
[^9] The Seer, Vol. II, p. 310.
[^10] DHC, Vol. III, pp. 386-387.
[^11] Daniel 7:9-14.
[^12] Ibid., 7:22.
[^13] Ibid., 7:27.
[^14] JD, Vol. XVIII, p. 137.
[^15] Idem.
[^16] Idem.
[^17] DHC, Vol. V, p. 66.
[^18] D&C 78:13-14, (italics by the author.)
[^19] JD, Vol. XX, p. 204.
[^20] D&C 101:77.
[^21] DHC, Vol. VI, p. 208.
[^22] D&C 101:77-78. (Italics by the author.)
[^23] JD, Vol. VI, p. 342.
[^24] Isaiah 2:3.
[^25] 25. Madison, op. cit.
[^26] 26. Idem.
[^27] 27. Idem.
[^28] 28. E.E. Schattschneider, Party Government (New York, 1942), pp. 6-10. On this subject he stated further: "Everyone who has thought about it at all has recognized that the parties and the law are nonassimilable. The extra-legal character of political parties is one of their most notable qualities. In a highly legalistic system of government such as the government of the United States, therefore, the parties seem to be a foreign substance."—Idem.
[^29] 29. Cited in Friedrich A. Hayek, The Road to Serfdom, with a foreword by John Chamberlain (Chicago, 1944), p. 219.
[^30] 30. Harry Elmer Barnes, History and Social Intelligence (New York, 1926), pp. 342-346.
[^31] 31. Edward Standwood, A History of the Presidency (Boston and New York, 1898), p. 10.
[^32] 32. DHC, VI, 198.
[^33] 33. JD, XX, 204.
[^34] 34. D&C 98:5; see also D&C 101:77-78. (Italics by the writer.)
[^35] 35. JD, XX, 204. (Italics by the writer.)
[^36] 36. Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, published at New York City, April 6, 1845.
[^37] 37. See D&C 76:86-88.
