Hyrum L. Andrus, Liberalism, Conservatism, Mormonism ( 1965)

VI

THE TRUE DESIGN AND ORDER OF WORLD GOVERNMENT

The society of Zion was designed to be a standard to the nations to which all people will one day look. A standard is a criterion or a measuring device; and as a standard, the kingdom of God is founded upon truth—truth by which the several systems of men can be measured. In order to see clearly the objective toward which Latter-day Saints must build in order to develop this standard in the earth, it is necessary to understand the over-all program of the kingdom of God as envisioned by ancient and modern prophets. In the following article, the author has endeavored to portray this great ideal of universal peace and justice, as it is interpreted in Latter-day Saint thought. It is this ideal, and not that espoused by modern liberalism and conservatism, that the Saints should be endeavoring to establish in the earth.

At times, we have difficulty seeing through the maze of personal and private opinions; and it is always a challenge to determine where the truth lies in a particular issue. As Latter-day Saints we do not have too much difficulty in the field of religious thought, for there we can go to the proper standard or criterion to measure things. We are not upset, for example, about whether baptism is practised by sprinkling, pouring, or drycleaning. But when we get outside the realm of religious principles, we have some difficulty. The reason for this is that we do not, in these instances, go to a central authority. We seem to have the idea impressed upon our minds that Mormonism is merely a religious system—"four walls and preaching," and that it has nothing to say about the social, economic, or political aspects of life. At least it can be said that we have not analyzed Mormonism to any great extent except in the area of religious thought; and if we do analyze it further, we do not accept what it says as being equally authoritative as its declarations on religious matters.

It is not difficult to measure something if you have a yardstick, or if you have a standard. But if you disregard the standard, then any person's measuring rod is as good as another's. In my opinion, we have largely disregarded what the Lord has said in the social, economic, and political areas of life. Nevertheless, it may be said in truth that there is almost as much in the Doctrine and Covenants concerning these so-called non-religious subjects as there is on some religious subjects. There is more said there, for example, on economics than there is on baptism, and there is much in the Doctrine and Covenants on the subject of politics. With this in mind, let us commence.

To begin, let us consider some of the basic fundamentals the Prophet set forth. In this dispensation, the Lord has designed to gather together all things in one, and those things that are gathered together in one are to be gathered together in Christ. The Apostle Paul indicated that this would be true both of things in heaven and of things on earth. It is through the sealing powers of the priesthood that we gather the righteous beyond the veil together in Christ and organize them in the true patriarchal order of heaven. To gather all things together in Christ on the earth and place them under the law of God, the true order of society must also be established on earth. This true system is based, among other things, upon revealed social, economic, and political principles. Here the Prophet Joseph Smith expressed the ideal to be developed in our day by referring to an ancient precedent. Said he:

When the children of Israel were chosen with Moses as their head, they were to be a peculiar people, among whom God should place His name; their motto was: "The Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our Judge; the Lord is our King; and he shall reign over us." While in this state they might truly say, "Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord." Their government [and here he is speaking of the political system of ancient Israel] was a theocracy; they had God to make their laws, and men chosen by him to administer them; He was their God, and they were His people. Moses received the word of the Lord from God Himself; he was the mouth of God to Aaron, and Aaron taught the people in both civil and ecclesiastical matters; they were both one, there was no distinction, [Then note his application of this ancient ideal to modern times]: so will it be when the purposes of God shall be accomplished: when "the Lord shall be King over the whole earth"; when "Jerusalem shall be his throne." "The law shall then go forth from Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." [^1]

The Prophet then adds this rather interesting conclusion: "This is the only thing that can bring about the 'restitution of all things spoken of by all of the holy Prophets since the world was.'" This is the only thing, he adds, that can bring about "the dispensation of the fulness of times, when God shall gather together all things in one." [^2]

Joseph Smith, as the head of this great dispensation, received revelation necessary (if it were implemented and put into operation) to establish the kingdom of God in all aspects of its program, that all things might be gathered together in Christ: May I therefore suggest that a study of the kingdom of God, as he envisioned it, should give us correct principles pertaining, not just to the religious sphere of life, but to the social, economic, and political spheres of life.

The ultimate ideal to which the Saints look forward, as I suspect is true also of many other Christian people, is the reign of Christ on earth, as King of kings and Lord of lords. We have several statements confirming the belief that this ancient hope has been re-established as a goal to be achieved in our day; for example, the Lord has said:

Verily I say unto you that in time ye shall have no king nor ruler, for I will be your king and watch over you. Wherefore, hear my voice and follow me, and ye shall be a free people, and ye shall have no laws but my laws when I come, for I am your lawgiver, and what can stay my hand? [^3]

In section 45 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord again spoke of the day of his coming, stating:

And the earth shall be given unto them [i.e., the faithful] for an inheritance; and they shall multiply and wax strong, and their children shall grow up without sin unto salvation. For the Lord shall be in their midst, and his glory shall be upon them, and he will be their king and their lawgiver. [^4]

As we consider this millennial program, we need to clarify that the foundation of the kingdom of God is centered in the Holy Priesthood of God. If we were to ask what constitutes the basic nucleus of the kingdom of God, the answer would be the Holy Priesthood. The Prophet made this statement: "Where there is a prophet, a priest, or a righteous man unto whom God gives His oracles, there is the Kingdom of God; and where the oracles of God are not, there the Kingdom of God is not." [^5] Using this definition as a basis, let us say that the foundation of the kingdom of God is the priesthood. But when the kingdom of God is developed and begins to expand from this nucleus, it develops in two different areas, the ecclesiastical and the political. In other words, it expands itself into a church and a state; and both organizations have their center in the Holy Priesthood. The Prophet Joseph Smith said, for example: "Those holding the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood are kings and priests [political and ecclesiastical authorities] of the Most High, holding keys of power and blessings. In fact, that Priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy." [^6] The priesthood is a perfect law of theocracy, and those holding the fulness of the priesthood may serve as both kings and priests unto God.

The Prophet Joseph, then, had a rather full concept of the kingdom, and in turn delivered this concept to other presiding brethren prior to his death.

Under the full plan of the kingdom of God, the Church may more appropriately be referred to as a society—the society of Zion. This new society has a spiritual foundation. And centered therein are the true social aspects of society which the Lord has revealed, which include the educational program and a recreational program. In addition there is a true economic program—the law of consecration and stewardship—which is actually an economic order of the Melchizedek Priesthood. All these are integrated into the spiritual core of the gospel, which is the foundation of the system.

The political program, as an independent organization under the priesthood, is called the Government of God. The Government of God is concerned with administering the political law that will eventually be implemented and established during the millennial reign of Christ. This divine system of government will use the Constitution of the United States as its basic document of government, so that, when the millennial reign is ushered in and Christ is established as King of kings and Lord of lords, the Constitution will be the basic political law of the earth, expanded to a world federation under the law and direction of the Priesthood.

The Prophet organized the political branch of the kingdom of God just prior to his death. Today is March 11, 1965. If you were to go back to March 11, 1844, you would find that on that day the Government of God was organized. The Prophet then called together a group of men whom he designated, initially, as a Special Council. Later he called this group of men the General Council. During the remaining period of his lifetime, there were some 53 men made members of the General, or Special, Council, some of whom were not members of the Church. Daniel H. Wells, for example, was a member of it, though he was not then a member of the Church. Joseph Jackson, who was later involved in the martyrdom of the Prophet, was also a member of this body. There is some evidence that Thomas L. Kane may have been made a member of it in later years. I can get him up to the tent door where they were meeting, at least, but I have not as yet found the actual record that he was a member. But I personally believe that if we had the full record we would find that the reason Thomas L. Kane was such a friend of the Latter-day Saints when Johnston's Army came to Utah was because he felt he had a political obligation to these people—that he was a member of their society, politically.

As I said, the Prophet initially called this interesting body of men the Special Council, and then the General Council. But because there were some 53 men made members of it during his lifetime, it was later nick-named the Council of Fifty. I might add, parenthetically, that it was this council and not the Church that organized and executed the westward movement of the Saints, from Nauvoo to the Rocky Mountain Basin. And it was the council that colonized the Saints in the Rocky Mountain Basin. This political body incorporated itself into and became the old provincial State of Deseret. That provincial state was actually the kingdom of God organized upon the earth, in a practical way. One of its members, Benjamin F. Johnson, was a special friend, if you may use this term, of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was made a member of this council and later wrote of it, stating:

About this time was organized his private Council of Fifty—the embryo kingdom of God upon the earth—an organization distinct from the Church [note this, distinct from the Church], a nucleus of popular government which will exist for all people when the heathen are given for an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth as a possession to him whose right it is to reign, a government formed of representatives from every nation, principality or tribe upon the earth; a government of God, for the people and by the people, in which man will be taught to know his origin and to govern himself, which will continue through the millennial period as the outer wall or government around the inner temple of priesthood, until all are come to the knowledge of God. [^7]

Here was expressed a basic view of the kingdom of God. To see this concept more clearly, let me turn to an analysis of a few of the scriptures that have bearing on the subject. This latter-day political kingdom has been spoken of prophetically by many of the ancient prophets. Daniel, as you know, was a great prophet as well as an important political figure in his day; and the Lord favored Daniel with certain revelations concerning the political program to be established in the earth in the last days. Daniel 2 and Daniel 7, in particular, are statements concerning the latter-day political kingdom. You may recall the story of Nebuchadnezzar's dream of the huge image, that Daniel interpreted as being a prophetic statement about the kingdom of God. This kingdom which Daniel said would be established in the latter days was to be a political kingdom. It is naive and absurd, if you don't mind my being a little blunt in my statement, to assume otherwise. In this great panorama of kingdoms, Nebuchadnezzar was shown one world power after another: the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, the Greco-Macedonian, the Roman Empire (that divided as the body divided downward into two divisions, one at Rome and the other at Constantinople) and, finally, the modern national-state system. The complete termination of the so-called Holy Roman Empire, out of which the modern national-state system developed, came with the French Revolution, that followed shortly after our own American Revolution. The French Revolution destroyed the last vestiges of the Holy Roman Empire; and of this period there came forth the seething sentiments, feelings, forces, and impulses of modern nationalism. While modern nationalism, as a manifestation in our modern times, started earlier and was prominently expressed in the Treaty of Westphalia, it was not until after the French Revolution that the full development of our modern national-state system took place. If you will read the history of the 1830's and 1840's, you will find this was a period of ardent nationalism throughout the Western world.

Now, as Daniel predicted, in the days of these latter-day kings, the God of heaven would establish a kingdom, and this kingdom would eventually roll forth and fill the world. Eventually, during the course of the kingdom's development, he declared that the modern national-state system would be destroyed; and then the kingdom of God would roll forth and take the place of this system, and eventually fill the whole earth. Now does it seem appropriate that a church with only ecclesiastical authority should take the place of a political system and carry on the political function of society? The kingdom of God, as foreseen in Daniel's vision, must of necessity become a political system. To support this view, let me read some comments by certain presiding brethren who have spoken on this subject. Here is President Brigham Young, who said:

The kingdom that Daniel saw will push forth its law, and that law will protect the Methodists, Quakers, Pagans, Jews, and every creed there ever was or ever will be, in their religious rights. . . . The kingdom that Daniel saw will actually make laws to protect every man in his rights, as our government does now, whether the religions of the people are true or false. [^8]

Brigham Young was not talking about a church in this statement, but about a political system that will make laws to govern people and protect them in their inalienable rights. Orson Pratt also spoke of Daniel's prophecy, stating of Nebuchadnezzar's dream: "It was prophetic scenery, reaching to latter times, showing him how man-made governments should be destroyed, and how the divine government should succeed and triumph, and have universal and everlasting dominion on the earth." [^9] Here is the concept the brethren have had on this subject. Certainly, the kingdom that Daniel saw was to be a church. But it wasn't merely to be a church. Instead, it was eventually to become, in addition, a political system, and fill the world.

Now the kingdom, as Daniel saw it, will not be perfected in its political character until the great council at Adam-ondi-Ahman is held. That council will witness the official coronation of Christ as King of kings and Lord of lords. This is the official launching of the kingdom of God. Nevertheless, as we study what has been said on this subject, it seems apparent that the kingdom of God in its political character will be developed in a measure sometime prior to that time; and that at the Council at Adam-ondi-Ahman it will then be perfected and given to Christ. The Prophet Joseph Smith talked about the council at Adam-ondi-Ahman, stating,

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days; he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. [This preparation is an important subject in and of itself. There are certainly preliminary preparations made by Michael previous to the advent of Christ to that august body.] He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. . . . The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. [Now, what do we mean by dominion? We mean political power and authority.] Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ, that which was delivered to him [i.e., Christ] as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. [^10]

In the seventh chapter of Daniel, speaking of his vision of future developments, Daniel makes this statement: "I beheld till thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of Days did sit." In other words, his vision extended into the future until this particular point, when he saw that thrones were cast down and the Ancient of Days did sit. He then spoke about the things that transpired as Adam, the Ancient of Days, appeared first on the scene, and organized things in preparation for the coming of Christ. Then, speaking of Christ's advent, he says:

I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom [Now, what was given to Christ? Dominion and glory, and a kingdom], that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. [^11]

Daniel later notes that the forces of corruption and of iniquity in the earth will successfully oppose the development of the kingdom of God, "Until," he said, "the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom." [^12] Finally, he ends with this declaration, "And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him." [^13] Here, then, is the prophetic picture of the establishment of the kingdom of God in its political power, as it was revealed to Daniel to be an important part of this great program of restoration. As I view the matter, it is part of our obligation as Latter-day Saints to see clearly how we may sustain correct political and economic principles, that we may work in a proper and legitimate way for the building up of the kingdom of God on the earth.

Now, there are certain things that we must do, that are preliminary to the development of the kingdom of God in its political character. First we must preach the gospel and develop the Church. President John Taylor once discussed this subject, stating,

We talk sometimes about the Church of God, and why? We talk also about the Kingdom of God [in its political character], and why? Because, before there could be a kingdom of God [in a political sense, that is], there must be a church of God. [^14]

He then gave two basic reasons why this must be so. First, this order of things must be followed, he declared, "Because of the impossibility of introducing the law of God among a people who would not be subject to and guided by the spirit of revelation." [^15] If we are going to develop the kingdom of God, politically, we must first have a people who are nurtured and cultured in the processes of revelation, must we not? The first thing that we must do, then, to build a foundation for this kingdom is to go out and preach the principles of faith, repentance, baptism, and the Holy Ghost, and teach people of the theocratic principles of the kingdom.

Another reason why the Church must, of necessity, precede the kingdom is that this kingdom, instead of being founded upon dissension and division, is a kingdom of union and of brotherhood. As President Taylor discussed this part of the preliminary program, he first spoke about man-made efforts to establish the great society, if I may use a little modern terminology, stating, "They have started various projects to try and unite and cement the people together without God; but they could not do it." He then mentioned several of these systems of social and economic union that were tried in his day, adding:

We have had peace societies, based upon the same principles. But all these things have failed, and they will fail, because, however philanthropic, humanitarian, benevolent, or cosmopolitan their ideas, it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the Spirit of the living God; and the Spirit can only be imparted through the ordinances of the Gospel. Hence Jesus told his disciples to go and preach the gospel to every creature. . . . It was by this cementing, uniting spirit, that true sympathetic, fraternal relations could be introduced and enjoyed [^16]

Here is the foundation necessary to build up the kingdom of God. If we are going to unite people together and achieve social justice without destroying their freedom, without regimenting them either with the whip or the garrote, we must first preach the gospel of the kingdom and thereby develop that element of spontaneity and brotherhood that springs from within men as a result of the enlightening influences of the Holy Spirit. Here is where Joseph Smith's concept of the kingdom of God goes right to the very root of things and provides the basis of spontaneity necessary to reconcile the two diverging ideals of freedom and union. There is no person in the Church but who knows that one of the greatest ideals the Church preaches is individual freedom, and yet we are also told, without equivocation, that unless we are one we are not Christ's. But that oneness does not come by force. It comes, instead, by a union of truth with truth; and by the influence of the Spirit of Truth men can see eye to eye, and can enjoy true brotherhood, because of the influence that the divine light, truth, and power has within the individual. Here, then, is the foundation of this kingdom; and here is our present responsibility—to teach the gospel and develop the Holy Spirit in our lives.

Another reason the Church must first be developed is that Zion must first become an ensign and a standard to the world—an attractive power and influence to the nations of the earth. Here the Prophet had some important things to say about our responsibility to teach others the true way of life. It was he who first expressed the idea in our day that eventually the nations of the earth will come up to Zion to learn of her ways. Said he, for example,

We are trying to gird up our loins and purge from our midst the workers of iniquity; and we hope that when our brethren arrive from abroad they will assist us in rolling forth this good work, and to accomplish this great design, that Zion may be built up in righteousness, that all nations may flock to her standard, that as God's people under his direction, and obedient to his law, we may grow up in righteousness and truth. And when his purposes shall be accomplished, we may receive an inheritance among those who have been sanctified. [^17]

If the nations are to come to Zion, we must maintain an independent course and not become enmeshed in the program of the welfare state. As a people, we must stand not only for freedom but also for the building of Zion. Here we must go back to the ideal expressed by Brigham Young, John Taylor, and others, who declared, "It is the Kingdom of God or nothing." Our responsibility is not, along with other freedom-loving people, merely to maintain the principles of freedom, but our responsibility is to show the world the way out of the woods. It is our responsibility to build up the correct form of society as the Lord has revealed it to us, on its true social and economic foundations, that other people may see the solution Zion proposes to the problems of life. This, I believe, is our challenge.

With this challenge in mind, let me turn to the Doctrine and Covenants for a third reason why we must build up the Church before the Lord can establish the political department of the kingdom. In section 78, we have the revelation that instructed the Prophet to organize the United Order. The United Order was an administrative organization designed to bring together into a basic union all the economic programs that had been put into operation under the law of consecration and stewardship. That is way it was called the United Order. And as the Lord revealed the need and design of this administrative organization to the Prophet, he spoke of the end purpose and design to be achieved through this divine economic system: "Behold this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation and the ensample which I give unto you, whereby you may accomplish the commandments which are given you; [Now, note the objective the Lord had in mind], That through my providence, notwithstanding the tribulation that shall descend upon you, that the church may stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world." [^18]

May I suggest that the Lord here means that the Church must stand independent above every man-made program, including the political state with its welfare program. Here, then, is our challenge and responsibility, to be an independent people, and to show others the way to solve their social and economic problems by putting into operation the Lord's program.

But this is not all. Note the further objective or goal to be achieved in developing the economic program of Zion, when the Lord states in the next verse, without breaking the sentence, "That you may come up unto the crown prepared for you and be made rulers over many kingdoms." Now what is the ultimate objective? Is it not that the Saints might come up to the crown prepared for them and be made rulers over many kingdoms—that they might come up and establish the political kingdom and develop its program of freedom and of justice in the earth? But to do that, the Saints must first develop the economic program that the Lord has given to them, and become independent as a people, above all other creatures beneath the celestial world. Here, then, is the Lord's desire, that the Saints should develop to be an example, an ensign to the world, not only to show others that we have the true religious faith, but to show others that we have the true pattern of social organization—that we have, to illustrate, a youth program that intelligently takes care of our young people by giving them meaningful expression to their dynamic aspirations and desires; that we have an educational program that is not only solid in its academic foundation but that produces a kind of individual who is a real Christian; and that we have an economic program that actually solves the problem of social justice and realizes the ideal of brotherhood, union, and equality of economic opportunity. When the Saints raise Zion to be such a standard and an ensign, then and only then, I believe, will the people of the world come and say to the Latter-day Saints, "Whether we believe your religion or not, we must admit that you do have a society that solves the problems of living." We might then say, "We also have the plan of a political program that will solve the problems of the world." In this way, we may offer them that which is necessary to establish this ideal political system, with a reasonable expectation that they will consider its meaning and value as a means of establishing world peace and justice.

In the Lord's plan for the kingdom of God, the U.S. Constitution will be utilized, with certain orientations that are necessary to place it under the direction of the priesthood. Let me read a comment by President George Q. Cannon, one of the great political figures in the early church. He is here speaking of the future day when the kingdom of God will be put into operation. Said he:

Suppose their ideas [that is, the ideas of the Latter-day Saints] were fulfilled, that is, that we, as it is destined we shall be, were the people who uphold Constitutional government upon this continent, who restored the government [Note the idea of a restoration, as he here expresses it.] to its primitive condition when all the political parties shall have fallen into chaos; would we feel at liberty to say that none but the Latter-day Saints should be elected to office of trust and responsibility? No. Joseph Smith set the pattern; he taught the brethren who were with him better ideas; you well-informed Latter-day Saints know that there are two powers which God has restored in these the last days. One is the Church of God, and the other is the Kingdom [that is, Government] of God. A man may belong to the Kingdom of God and yet not be a member of the Church of God. In the Kingdom of God, using it in the political sense, there may be heathens and Pagans and Mohammedans and Latter-day Saints and Presbyterians and Episcopalians and Catholics and men of every creed. Will they legislate for the Church of Jesus Christ alone? . . . No. Why? Because God is the Father of the Latter-day Saints as well as of every human being. . . . When he establishes his kingdom it will protect all in their equal rights. . . . Does not this look right? That is the kind of kingdom that we have to contend for; that is the kind of kingdom we have to establish, and it is already provided for in the constitution given unto us by God, and through the glorious labors of the Fathers who laid the foundation of this government, who were inspired and raised up by our Almighty Father for this express purpose. [Now, note the concept he has of the Constitution as a document designed to give freedom to all men throughout the earth.] There is no liberty that a human being can desire, neither is there a right that can be exercised properly, that we do not have under the Constitution of our land. It needs no amendment about it; it is broad enough [and here is the qualifying phrase], if interpreted in its true spirit, to cover the individual, the continent, and the entire globe [in other words, to become a universal document] and furnish freedom for all. [^19]

It is also in this light that the revelations of the Lord view the Constitution, as a universal document intended to be given to all people, that all men might enjoy its benefits; for example, in section 101, the Lord declares of the Constitution that it has been "established, and should be maintained for the rights and protection of all flesh [not just for Americans], according to just and holy principles." [^20] In section 98, the Lord also makes a similar declaration concerning the universality of the Constitution, stating: "And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind." There is our goal, and I believe that it was the goal that Joseph Smith had in mind in the 1844 campaign, when he said, "Come—yea, come, Texas; come Mexico, come Canada; and come, all the world: let us be brethren, let us be one great family, and let there be a universal peace." [^21]

The Prophet Joseph Smith was both a constitutionalist and an internationalist. Both philosophies were combined in his thought. But to unite these ideals he would first build up Zion to become an ensign, to show people by her example the way to solve the problems of life and to be a bulwark against any encroachment on human freedom in a quest for social justice that might bargain away freedom to achieve security. Under this great concept, the kingdom of God would include both a church and state. The church would be a spiritual and social ideal. It would be a system of free, united, economically progressive individuals, who could show the world how the economic and social factors in society could be organized to uplift people and develop them—to aid and abet the true development and expression of personality, so that all the influences in this system would be directed to develop the individual. The political organization of the kingdom might then be confined, as it ought to be, to the goal of maintaining individual rights and freedom.

The Constitution never was designed to be an instrument for the attainment of social justice, in the sense that under the Constitution government should direct the economic and social aspects of life. Instead, as the Lord has defined the purpose of the Constitution, it was given to protect individual rights and privileges; for example, a revelation declared that the Constitution was established "according to just and holy principles; that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment." [^22] In other words, the Constitution was given to uphold man's moral agency and to maintain his individual freedom. It was not given to solve the social and economic problems of life. This men must do by embracing the gospel and the social and economic program that is associated with it.

In this respect, the Constitution, alone, is deficient, because it does not provide sufficiently for the solution of the social and economic problems of life. Along with it, we need to develop the society of Zion. With this ideal religious, social, and economic order as an ensign and a standard to the world, freedom-loving people might then, instead of bartering away freedom in the quest for social justice, say, "Look at the Latter-day Saints. Here is what they are doing within the framework of freedom, without bartering away individual rights and without exerting coercive power, to solve their problems in the social and economic areas of life." In this way, Zion could then show free men how to solve their problems without sacrificing their freedom. Would to God that we had this ideal system established in the world today, in the struggle against communism, where we could really say, "Here is a society that really achieves the good life, that really achieves social justice, and it does it without bartering away individual freedom." I firmly believe that the crying need of the world today is for the Saints to raise the standard of Zion, and show other people how to solve their problems—not alone to offer salvation to them in a religious way, but to show them how to achieve the good life and establish social justice without socializing the state and establishing a paternalistic system that coddles man from the womb to the tomb, and barters away his freedom in the process. I think this is one of the most crucial needs of our world today.

Now, finally, let me say something about the concessions that nonmembers of the Church will need to make, and also some of the advantages they will gain in helping to establish the kingdom of God. In order to implement this system, nonmembers will, of necessity, have to make certain concessions. This may be difficult for some of them. They will have to help establish a theocracy. A theocracy recognizes the right of the priesthood to nominate men to political office and to direct the policy of the government. Said Brigham Young of a true theocracy:

Few, if any, understand what a theocratic government is. In every sense of the word, it is a republican government [that is, it is founded upon republican principles of representation, etc.] and differs but little from our National, State, and Territorial governments; but [and he makes this important qualification] its subjects will recognize the will and dictation of the Almighty. [^23]

Here, then, is the difference between the Government of God and the government of the United States. Citizens of the Government of God will recognize the will and dictation of the Almighty, first, in nominating men to political office, to be accepted by the consent of the people as we do under the theocratic procedures of the Church; and second, by the Lord, through his living priesthood, having the right and prerogative to set the policy of government for the maintenance of freedom. But let me explain. This is to be true only on the basis that Zion is able to show the world that she can solve the problems of society without bartering away man's freedom. And having demonstrated the reality of this ideal, people of the world might then allow the Saints these prerogatives and concede to the leading councils of priesthood the right to nominate men to political office, and the right to set the policy of government for the maintenance of freedom.

Now what are the benefits of this system? To approach this subject, let me suggest that I do not believe that you people, or any other people in their right mind, would consent to establishing a world government with the two-party system as the tool for selecting men for political office. If we could exclude the problem of communism and, if we could establish a world federation on democratic principles with the two party system as the means of getting people into office, we would not vote for it, and I will tell you why. Just ask yourself the question, "Where would be the basis or the center of political power?" It would be among the uneducated masses of the earth. Such a system, subject to men of political aspirations, would become a chaotic system that would level men down rather than upward, with those people who had demonstrated integrity and intelligence to lift themselves by their bootstraps to a high place of cultural and technical development being subject to the will of the unenlightened masses. On the other hand, I think it has pretty well been demonstrated that the so-called colonial peoples, or the unenlightened peoples of the earth, do not want to be dictated to by small minority groups who have achieved economic, political, and military power. The whole issue of colonialism today bears witness to this fact. So neither position would be acceptable as the basis of a true and lasting world order.

But let us take a look at the proposal offered in the kingdom of God. This requires, first that the Saints establish a real, thorough-going ensign or standard to the world. Here, we must build up a people who literally and practically demonstrate how to establish social justice without bartering away their freedom to the cause of social justice. The economic program of Zion must be founded in the Christian spirit of consecration, where wealth is consecrated to the proposition that each individual has an equal right and an equal opportunity to gain and to be blessed by the wealth of the world. Having developed an ideal society where power is controlled and used to uplift the individual, and where power is sanctified by the spirit of the gospel, the kingdom of God concept proposes that this society be placed at the center of the overall system, and that the councils of the priesthood that have developed this ideal system be given the right to nominate men to political office and to direct the policies of government in a world theocratic federation, where each body of people would have the right to their own religious beliefs and their own cultural practices. The kingdom of God does not unduly militate against the cultural practices of a people. Instead, under the Constitution equal rights and privileges are given to all men. Then, with freedom as the foundation of this new system, there may be instituted an intelligent system of teaching men how to better themselves by their own self-effort rather than by means of a dole. Here, I believe, is the only practical solution that can be developed to cope with the dilemma of our times, for here is a system that would preserve freedom and exalt intelligence.

We as Latter-day Saints have the key to world peace. We hold the keys, not just the preservation of freedom, but to peace and progressive attainment in the social and economic spheres of life. The kingdom of God is the only practical solution, as I see it, to modern world problems. But this divine plan requires that, as Latter-day Saints, we not only hold the line against the encroachments upon our freedom by state welfare measures, but that we also build up Zion, that the Lord might, in his own time, establish his righteous rule in the earth. We need to build up Zion to where other people will say, "Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths." [^24] Here is the ideal we should seek to achieve, and I think it is a meaningful one and a practical one, and not merely some big religious romance that Joseph Smith dreamed up. It is an ideal that combines all the great social and economic ideals together in an intelligent way. Thereby these great ideals and aspirations that have been sought for by conscientious men through the ages may be brought together in the gospel to introduce a system of millennial peace and happiness on the earth, for which I pray in Jesus' name. Amen.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Alma 61:15.
[^2] See 1 Nephi 13:12-20; III Nephi 20:27; 21:4.
[^3] D&C 93:30.
[^4] Ibid., 78:14. See also DHC, I, p. 269.
[^5] JD, XXI, p. 31.
[^6] DHC, V, 61-66.
[^7] See D&C 104:14-18.
[^8] Ibid., 101:78.
[^9] The Seer, Vol. II, p. 310.
[^10] DHC, Vol. III, pp. 386-387.
[^11] Daniel 7:9-14.
[^12] Ibid., 7:22.
[^13] Ibid., 7:27.
[^14] JD, Vol. XVIII, p. 137.
[^15] Idem.
[^16] Idem.
[^17] DHC, Vol. V, p. 66.
[^18] D&C 78:13-14, (italics by the author.)
[^19] JD, Vol. XX, p. 204.
[^20] D&C 101:77.
[^21] DHC, Vol. VI, p. 208.
[^22] D&C 101:77-78. (Italics by the author.)
[^23] JD, Vol. VI, p. 342.
[^24] Isaiah 2:3.
