Hyrum L. Andrus, Liberalism, Conservatism, Mormonism ( 1965)

VII

LIBERALISM AND CONSERVATISM IN LIGHT OF THE KINGDOM OF GOD

Latter-day scriptures make it plain that the spirit of freedom is a manifestation of the Spirit of the Lord in the lives of men. America's free institutions were developed as a result of the influence of this divine power in the lives of early Americans. As a step toward the further development of the spirit of freedom and as a means of perfecting the institutions of freedom, the Holy Priesthood was restored with its divine law (which includes the idea of a divine political order), giving men a channel of greater spiritual power by which these purposes can be accomplished. But the world, having largely rejected the Lord's plan of greater freedom and union, is now caught in the mesh of the welfare state without sufficient insight to develop a dynamic society of freedom and social justice. The social and economic problems of modern times have so pressed themselves upon the world's free institutions, aided by zealous idealists who are seeking primarily for social and economic justice, that freedom is being sacrificed to the cause of social and economic well-being. Being Americans, the Latter-day Saints are also caught in the midst of this dilemma, and many ardent intellectuals among them are endeavoring to justify the socialization of the state. The Saints, however, have been given their own program for coping with the temporal problems of life; and since they are charged with the responsibility of building up Zion, they should give primary allegiance to this objective. Only in this way can they achieve the ideals of spiritual, social, and economic well-being, and lead the world out of the dilemma in which it now finds itself.

The American tradition of freedom is essentially spiritual in its origin and its orientation. The Spirit of God, the Book of Mormon declares, is the spirit of freedom. [^1] The tradition of freedom in America commenced when the Spirit of God "wrought upon" the early colonizers so that they prospered and established free institutions in this land. Christ declared to the Nephites that the Holy Spirit that would be poured out upon modern Americans would cause them to be "mighty above all"; and that they would "be set up as a free people by the power of the Father." [^2] When men are responsive to the Spirit of God, this divine agent acts to strengthen the elements of character within them and to mature them toward a position of true independence under God. This is the spirit of strength and of freedom that is responsible for the greatness of America.

The cause of freedom is correlated with deeper issues that pertain to the very nature and existence of life. A revelation to Joseph Smith declared that, "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." [^3] From this declaration we learn that the existence of organized life is impossible except on the basis of true independence, which includes the need for freedom; for instance, the war in heaven was fought primarily over the issue of whether man in mortality would have his free agency and be required to rely upon the strength of the Spirit to meet the challenges and attain the achievements of life, or whether he was to be coddled and coerced back into celestial glory. Lucifer and his hosts, who championed the latter position, so destroyed the principles of life within themselves that they were denied the right of further progression in a physical state. Should men pervert these basic principles while in mortality, similar results must follow. Consequently, programs that seek to promote progress and achieve security without retaining individual freedom inviolate are doomed eventually to fail.

The kingdom of God as revealed to Joseph Smith, with its ideal program of economic well-being and justice, is based upon the mature independence of men under God. Within this divine system, eventually, there will be both a church and a state, the latter of which will be based upon a perfected version of the United States Constitution, and will include individuals not identified with the Church.

To establish this system of greater freedom and union, the Holy Priesthood was restored, giving men access to more potent and enlightening spiritual powers than those that produced America's free society and promoted her development to a position of greatness above all other nations on earth. By utilizing these superior spiritual powers, the Saints are expected to build up Zion as a society founded upon greater freedom and economic well-being, and prepare the way for the full development of the kingdom of God upon the earth.

Among the Saints, where the spiritual powers of the gospel promote true freedom and union, a socio-economic order must eventually be developed by which the members of this ideal society can "stand independent above all other creatures beneath the celestial world." [^4] This includes being independent above the state and above state-sponsored programs of economic welfare. As an ideal system of free, united, and progressive individuals, the society of Zion will then be an ensign or a standard to the world, capable of showing men how to achieve social justice within the framework of a free political system, by building upon the proper spiritual foundation. Meanwhile, the political law of the kingdom of God will eventually be extended throughout the world to uphold freedom and justice for all men.

Here in brief is the ideal of the kingdom of God—a system designed to perfect the free institutions that have arisen in American society. Economically, for instance, the free enterprise system stands as the most appropriate genesis from which Zion's economic law can be developed; and politically, John Taylor considered the United States Constitution to be "one of those steppingstones to a future development in the progress of man to the intelligence and light, the power and union that God alone can impart to the human family." [^5] But to achieve these ideals, Joseph Smith stressed, requires "the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God." [^6]

When the conservative position in modern America is viewed in light of the kingdom of God, its strengths become apparent. Conservatives maintain that the Founding Fathers devised a system of government dedicated primarily to the maintenance of freedom and justice for men. To this end they sought to restrict and control the powers of government, and they provided for its functions to be kept as close to the people as was administratively feasible. Under this form of government, the creative powers of man can be liberated and an economy of abundance established, as a result of individual initiative and the profit motive. But while government is not directly concerned with the task of achieving social justice and progress, the conservative position maintains that, by cooperative effort, free men are better able to meet these issues without relying to a significant degree upon state-sponsored welfare measures.

By revelation the Lord has sanctioned, in general, these economic and political principles. This does not mean, however, that he has placed his approval upon the abuses that existed under the 19th century capitalism, for it is the expressed intent of the law of consecration and stewardship to eradicate fully such abuses while retaining the basic philosophy of freedom in economic matters. Here the Lord has said the ideal economy must be achieved in his "own way," [^7] not through the development of the welfare state. Meanwhile, it is evident from latter-day revelation that the primary purpose of government under the Constitution is to maintain individual freedom. This is fully apparent from the Lord's declaration that he suffered the Constitution to be established "that every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him." [^8] One needs only to consider the ideals upon which Zion is to be established to conclude that the Lord expects free men to solve their own social and economic problems within the framework of a free political system. Here Latter-day Saints, in particular, have a responsibility, that Zion might arise and be an ensign, showing others how to solve their social and economic principles without relying upon state-sponsored welfare measures.

A similar comparison with the kingdom of God reveals the weaknesses and inconsistencies within the liberal and the middle-of-the road positions. Under the banner of social justice and progress, liberals seek to achieve their objectives through the instrumentality of the state, but such an approach necessarily requires an interpretation of the role of government under the Constitution different from that which has been sanctioned by the Lord. Furthermore, the state is not by nature a spiritual organ. But to promote the kind of union among free men that is necessary to achieve social justice, without restricting individual freedom, requires a socio-economic program rooted firmly in dynamic spiritual concepts, where men are motivated by powerful, enlightening spiritual forces. Because the state lacks these enlightening and regenerating spiritual powers, to achieve such union it must be manipulated like a puppet by various artificial devices. Such regimentation results in the loss of freedom for the individual. The creative powers of man are also stifled and initiative is suppressed; and like a lifeless body this man-made system is subject to forces of deterioration, so that greed, graft, and corruption are perennial problems. Finally, the security which men seek through such a system is but a fleeting and evasive substitute for that which may be obtained within the kingdom of God. In short, liberalism, like the plan proposed by Lucifer and his hosts in the war in heaven, is deficient and perverse.

To conclude, we should keep in mind as a cardinal fact that America's great contributions to the modern world have been born of the Spirit and nurtured in an atmosphere of freedom. To perfect society and achieve social justice we must build upon the foundation of freedom by strengthening its underlying spiritual powers in the lives of men. Only in this way—not through the measures proposed by modern liberals—can we attain the peaceful world for which men seek.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, p. 37.
[^2] DHC, IV, pp. 445-446.
[^3] Ibid., VI, p. 365.
[^4] Ibid., V, pp. 62-64.
[^5] 2 Nephi 9:28-29.
[^6] DHC, V, p. 424.
[^7] Ibid., 529, 554.
[^8] Millennial Star, April 5, 1862.
