Hyrum L. Andrus, Liberalism, Conservatism, Mormonism ( 1965)

VIII

THE PLACE OF THE RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL LIBERAL IN THE MORMON CHURCH

Since the time the Church was organized, certain of its members have espoused the ideals of liberalism as a movement of an earlier date in Western civilization. Many times these individuals have found themselves opposing the Church, either openly or in secret, because they could not reconcile their manmade philosophy with the greater ideals and objectives of the gospel, and its program for the spiritual and temporal well-being of man. Over the years, liberalism therefore has been a dissenting movement within the Church. But in more recent times it has gained in popularity among certain intellectual elements of the Church and has become more widespread and subtle in its influence than in former years. In the following work, the writer defines the true liberal and shows wherein those who espouse the position of contemporary "Liberalism" are at odds with the program of Zion in the latter days.

In certain respects, modern liberalism is a misnomer—a name wrongly applied, that does not mean in practice what it purports to mean in ideal. A true liberal is one who possesses a free and generous heart, and an enlightened mind. In the Latter-day Saint view, he is one who is open to both spiritual and secular truth and is not willing that either should be denied its place in the lives of men, or rationalized away. A true liberal is free from narrow and bigoted views. He is progressive in his thinking and is opposed to all forms of tyranny and oppression—religious, social, political, etc. Elder John A. Widtsoe, formerly a prominent member of the Council of the Twelve, once penned these words of description of a true liberal:

The true Liberal hates slavery of every kind. He battles for human freedom. He wants liberty in thought and action. He is tolerant, free from bigotry, and generous in all his deeds. He places truth above all else and hungers for full truth. He welcomes all new improvements and calls for more. . . .

Such a Liberal, to accomplish his purpose, holds fast, without the least concession, to the convictions of his soul. He is anchored to the rock of truth. . . .

His Liberalism lies in his constant attempt to make the underlying unchanging principles of the cause he represents serve the changing conditions of the day. [^1]

Joseph Smith was a true liberal. The work of this great dispensation commenced with his search for truth. Of his experience as a youth of fourteen, he therefore wrote: "In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I often said to myself: What is to be done? Who of all these parties are right?" Thus came his great first vision. He was later to declare in the true spirit of liberalism: "I do many things to break down superstition, and I will break it down." [^2] The foundation upon which he built was truth. And for this reason he said: "I intend to lay a foundation that will revolutionize the whole world. It will not be by sword or gun that this kingdom will roll on; the power of truth is such that all nations will be under the necessity of obeying the gospel." [^3]

But while the Church is founded upon a truly liberal spirit and approach to the problems of life, there are those among its members who claim the appellation of liberal but do not live up to the standards of true liberalism nor seek to achieve the great ideals for the spiritual and temporal well-being of man as revealed in the gospel of Jesus Christ.

In many instances, such individuals are deficient in their understanding of the gospel and its program. With these deficiencies, they enter upon careers of higher learning where they seek answers to the questions and problems of life in the philosophies and systems of men. And having accepted the basic premises of their particular discipline or field of study, they endeavor to measure the doctrines and teachings of the gospel by that which they have learned. If the revealed statements of the Lord do not fit into their man-made systems and frameworks of thought, they disregard or repudiate them. Consequently, many who have espoused the cause of traditional liberalism have consistently refused to accept the basic premise of divine truth upon which Joseph Smith and his successors have sought to build the kingdom of God. Some have disregarded this basic premise. Some have openly denied it. And still others, while giving tacit recognition thereto, have failed to commit themselves to the full implications of that which they seemingly accept.

The foundation upon which Joseph Smith proposed to build was the principle of divine revelation to man from the Supreme Intelligence in the universe. Without the truth and power of God, he claimed that man could not solve the problems of life. For this reason he declared:

Where is there a man that can step forth and alter the destiny of nations or promote the happiness of the world? Or where is there a kingdom or nation that can promote the universal happiness of its own subjects, or even their general well-being? . . . . Attempts to promote universal peace and happiness in the human family have proved abortive; every effort has failed; every plan and design has fallen to the ground; it needs the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God to accomplish this. . . It is for want of this governing principle, that all this confusion has existed; for it is not in man that walketh, to direct his steps; this we have fully shown. [^4]

Here is the crux of the issue. Does the Mormon liberal really accept in all of its implications the principle of revelation and the place it should occupy in the lives of men? Since there are various forms and degrees of liberalism in the Church, there will be different answers to this question. Historically, however, it can safely be said that many in the past who have styled themselves as liberals have placed emphasis upon the role of man's intellect over that of revelation. Others have stressed the role of man's intellect as a means of understanding revelation, but because they give primary credence to the views and opinions of men they have often arrived at conclusions that are unwarranted in the scriptures; and in the final analysis, they repudiate that which is revealed from God.

Traditional liberalism within the Church has thus often expressed itself as an "intellectual dissent" (to use a key word coined by the liberals themselves) from revelation. In the final analysis, this class of liberals has insisted upon the absolute necessity and right of man to be the measure of all things. The manifesto and platform of Mormon liberalism, published in the Utah Magazine for November, 1869, thus declared: "We have faith in the doctrine of present revelation, but we believe in placing it at the feet of our judgment." This brand of liberalism comes approximately under the indictment of Jacob, a Book of Mormon prophet, who said:

. . . oh the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish.

But to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God. [^5]

Having had some bitter experiences with this class of men in the Church, Joseph Smith had the following to say about them:

There are a great many wise men and women too in our midst who are too wise to be taught; therefore, they must die in their ignorance, and in the resurrection they will find their mistake. Many seal up the door of heaven by saying, "So far God may reveal and I will believe." [^6]

Again, the prophet declared:

It is the constitutional disposition of mankind to set up stakes and set bounds to the works and ways of the Almighty. . . .

I say to all those who are disposed to set up stakes for the Almighty, You will come short of the glory of God. [^7]

May we consider some of the positions taken by those who claim to be Liberals, but deny the full meaning of modern revelation from God. First, they very often stress moral and ethical principles while failing to give proper attention to the spiritual regeneration of human life, without which men cannot permanently live the moral and ethical standards that Christ enunciated. Amasa M. Lyman was a case in point. As a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, he became an Apostle of Mormon liberalism. In March, 1862, Elder Lyman delivered two discourses to the Saints in Dundee, Scotland, in which he denied that Christ's death was necessary to the salvation of men. In his second address, he declared:

The life and glory we seek is not in the ordinances [of the gospel] any more than in the blood shed on Calvary. . . . God bless you my friends, in becoming intellectually and rationally devoted to the truth, that you may be freed from every error and folly, and rise in the light of truth. [^8]

When Elder Lyman was called into question for teaching these and other doctrines, he confessed publicly that he had "sinned a grievous sin." But his repentance was not genuine, and he was finally severed from the Church. T. B. H. Stenhouse, his good friend and fellow liberal of the traditional school, informs us of the fallen elder's subsequent activities when he wrote in 1873: "Amasa believed in intellectual Christianity, and is labouring throughout Utah now, appealing to the higher and better instincts of the people." [^9]

Closely correlated with this superficial stress upon moral and ethical principles is the assumption, without proper qualification, that man is good and that he alone is capable of governing himself aright and of solving the problems of life. To this class of liberals, man merely needs to be taught the ideas, morals, and ethics that pertain to the good life, and he will save himself by the power of his own intellect.

But let us consider for a moment what latter-day scriptures say about the goodness of man in mortality and his ability alone to meet the problems, of life. A revelation through Joseph Smith declared: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God." [^10] From this statement we learn that men are innocent as they enter mortality. But is man inherently innocent at mortal birth? or is he made innocent by the power of the atonement? It is because God redeemed man from the fall that men are again innocent in their infant state. Were men to be disassociated from the power of the atonement they would not be innocent at birth. Infants are alive in Christ. They are not inherently alive and innocent in themselves, only in Christ. The baptism of little children is not a sin against their inherent innocence but a denial of the atonement of Christ. This is the point that is made so emphatically in the Book of Mormon.

To begin with, then, man's innocence and goodness must be qualified and made to depend upon the atonement of Christ. And that initial condition of innocence can continue to prevail after man reaches the age of accountability only if he takes positive steps to unite himself in a covenant relationship with Christ and if he lives thereafter under the influence of the Holy Spirit.

Man is a dual being, composed of an organized spirit tabernacled in a body of flesh and bones. To understand his nature in mortality, we must therefore view him in light of his dual composition.

To begin, let us consider the nature of man's spirit. Here we can say four things. First, his spirit is innocent as it comes to mortality. Second, the spirits of men are not equal in that inner something they possess, which we may term as their innate endowments, as they enter mortality. Third, the basic desire of the spirit is to do good, for all spirits who kept their first estate overcame Satan in the pre-mortal world. Fourth, by voluntary action the spirit of man becomes a fallen being as it enters mortality; that is, it leaves the presence of God and commences an existence in a fallen mortal state.

Now what about the nature of man's flesh in mortality? We can start by saying that the physical endowments are good. They constitute that which is "added upon" those who kept their first estate; and these physical endowments are designed to enhance man's life and add to his power in eternity. But certain corrupt elements have been introduced into the flesh through the fall that eventually gain the ascendency over life and bring about death. (See 2 Nephi 2:29: Romans 7:18.) As yet, man is powerless to do anything about this situation.

Without the intercession of divine power through Christ, the corrupt elements in man's flesh would also gain the ascendency over his power to do good. Here again man alone is not capable of coping with the situation. The brother of Jared therefore apologized: ". . . because of the fall our natures have become evil continually." [^11] The Apostle Paul expressed man's mortal dilemma when he wrote: "For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do." [^12]

Let me make myself clear. I am not arguing for the depravity of man, for the fundamental principle of life within him—his organized spirit—is good, and is basically desirous of doing that which is right. I am endeavoring, instead, to show the scriptural view of his dependence upon Christ and his inability, alone to handle his problems. Achieving the good life against the opposition that exists in the flesh and the world is not merely a matter of exerting human intellect and espousing high ideals. To cope with his mortal situation, man must acquire and utilize divine power. Thus, the real alternatives of life are to get the Holy Spirit and yield obedience to its dictates in every action of life or to cope with the corruption in the flesh without adequate means of controlling its power. While ethics and ideals and human intellect are important, the Christian standard of life cannot permanently be achieved without the aid of the Holy Spirit. Here is how Lehi explained the basic alternatives of life to members of his family:

. . . now, my sons, I would that ye should look to the great Mediator, and hearken unto his great commandments; . . . and choose eternal life, according to the will of his Holy Spirit;

And not choose eternal death, according to the will of the flesh and the evil which is therein, which giveth the spirit of the devil power to captivate, to bring you down to hell, . . . [^13]

Note the alternatives. Either man must obtain and follow the Holy Spirit or he must do the will of the flesh, by reason of the corruption which is therein. The Book of Mormon makes it plain that except men, by faith in Christ, obtain the Holy Spirit they cannot cope with the dilemma of mortal life. In reporting the words of an angel, King Benjamin therefore declared: ". . . men drink damnation to their own souls except they humble themselves and become as little children, and believe that salvation was, and is, and is to come, in and through the atoning blood of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent." [^14] To stress this fact, King Benjamin then declared:

. . . the natural man is an enemy to God, and has been from the fall of Adam, and will be, forever and ever, unless he yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and putteth off the natural man and becometh a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and becometh as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him, even as a child doth submit to his father. [^15]

Now what is a natural man? The word "natural" is derived from the word "nature." A natural man is one who has become conditioned to the nature of this fallen world. He is acclimated to the conditions of life under the fall. He has yielded to the corruption in the flesh or to the sophistry of the world and is therefore estranged from God.

The way to put off the natural man is not for man merely to espouse the highest intellectual ideals and standards of which he can conceive. It requires, instead, a spiritual transition that is made possible only by yielding to the enticings of the Holy Spirit. It is a spiritual process in which man may be regenerated spiritually and taught to submit intelligently to all things to which the Lord subjects him. This is the exact opposite of making man's intellect the standard of what he will or will not accept from God.

This transition from the realm of the natural to the spiritual is required of all men, if they are to obtain the good life here and salvation in the world to come. To Alma, the Lord therefore said:

Marvel not that all mankind, yea, men and women, all nations, kindreds, tongues and people, must be born again; yea, born of God, changed from their carnal and fallen state, to a state of righteousness, being redeemed of God, becoming his sons and daughters;

And thus they become new creatures; and unless they do this, they can in nowise inherit the kingdom of God. [^16]

Alma, in turn, inquired of those who were members of the Church in his day:

And now behold, I ask you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? [^17]

We may thus conclude that attaining the good life is not primarily an intellectual, but a spiritual, process. To set this fact in contrast with the position taken by some who falsely call themselves liberals, may I refer to Plato's illustration of the cave, which he likened to the ignorance and darkness of the world, out of which man must emerge by the power of his intellect into the light of reason and truth. Following Plato's emphasis on the supremacy of human intellect, this class of liberals inquires, "Have you intellectually emerged from the cave?" But a true Latter-day Saint liberal would ask, "Have ye spiritually been born of God?"

To support their position that man merely needs to be taught the ideals and ethical standards of the good life and he will save himself by the power of his own intellect, those who falsely call themselves liberals make use of certain statements in latter-day revelation, interpreting them in a superficial light to suit their needs. Among these statements are the following:

"It is impossible for man to be saved in ignorance." [^18]

"The glory of God is intelligence." [^19]

But instead of placing primary emphasis upon the role of man's intellect as a means of attaining knowledge and intelligence, the gospel teaches us that salvation comes primarily as an act of faith by which man may acquire truth by revelation in the new sphere of spiritual life into which man must be born by baptism and by receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost. From two great discourses where Joseph Smith declared that knowledge is the power of salvation may be found the following:

. . . knowledge through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is the grand key that unlocks the glories and mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. [^20]

What is the secret—the starting point? . . . The knowledge of him who hath called him. There could not anything be given, pertaining to life and godliness, without knowledge. . . .

Salvation is for a man to be saved from all his enemies . . . A knowledge of the Priesthood alone will do this. [^21]

Finally, the Prophet declared:

Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. . . .

I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God in the way of his ordinances, and in answer to prayer. [^22]

It is apparent from these statements that the knowledge we must possess to attain solution to our problems in this world and salvation in the world to come must come by revelation from God; and that knowledge is endowed upon man or developed within him as he exerts his mind and soul in faith and study of the things of God.

Now let us look at what the Lord meant when he said, "The glory of God is intelligence." First, what does the word "glory" mean? To get the answer, we must understand that while God is a tangible corporeal Being, He is also a divine Being of glory; for example, in reporting his first vision, Joseph Smith said:

. . . . I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell upon me. . . .

When the light rested upon me I saw two Personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me by name and said, pointing to the other—This is my Beloved Son. Hear him! [^23]

Because God is a Being of exquisite glory, the Prophet explained:

God Almighty himself dwells in eternal fire; flesh and blood cannot go there, for all corruption is devoured by the fire. "Our God is a consuming fire." When our flesh is quickened by the Spirit, there will be no blood in this tabernacle. Some dwell in higher glory than others. . . .

Immortality dwells in everlasting burnings. [^24]

This brilliant element that we call God's glory is intelligence. That is what the statement means, "The glory of God is intelligence, or in other words, light and truth." God is a tangible Being in whom there is centered such intelligence that its radiance outshines the sun at noonday. Can man comprehend such a Being? Can he measure his mind and intellect with God? Or, can man really comprehend God? Yet we are told that it is the destiny of man to acquire such intelligence, or glory. But how may man acquire the intelligence or glory of God? Jesus set the example. Here is John's testimony of our Lord:

. . . I, John saw that he received not of the fulness at first, but received grace for grace;

And he received not of the fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace, until he received a fulness. . . .

And I, John, bear record that he received a fulness of the glory of the Father; and he received all power, both in heaven and on earth, and the glory of the Father was with him, for he dwelt in him. [^25]

The word "grace" may here be defined as an unearned (not necessarily an unmerited) divine endowment. Thus, the intelligence Christ received was given as an endowment from the Father. It was not merely an intellectual process on his part. Where, for example, would one start to learn of and acquire such divine intelligence? Where would he begin? Who knows the first thing about it? Yet it is the destiny of man, by the exercise of faith, to arise to eternal glory or intelligence. Said the Lord:

I give unto you these sayings that you may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, [Note that to understand how and what we worship we must understand these points.] that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness.

For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace. [^26]

Thus, man, like Christ, must receive grace for grace, and grace upon grace. In the words of Joseph Smith: "Here, then, is eternal life—to know the only wise and true God, . . . namely, by going from one small degree to another, and from a small capacity to a great one, from grace to grace, from exaltation to exaltation, until you attain to the resurrection of the dead, and are able to dwell in everlasting burnings, and to sit in glory, as do those who sit enthroned in everlasting power." [^27]

It is the purpose of the gospel to make men participants in the intelligence and power of God by endowing them with divine powers of truth and light, not merely to give them a few truths upon which to ponder and use to solve their problems. The latter position is essentially that which is espoused by traditional liberals. Their position is therefore not in harmony with scripture. A proper and lasting society cannot be built upon such a foundation as they propose. Yet this group of liberals has often militated against the Lord's program of building up Zion as a new social and economic order founded upon the spiritual powers of the gospel. This was true in Missouri. There certain of this class of liberals challenged the Prophet's right to receive revelation in other than religious matters. Among them was Reed Peck, who expressed his opposition in the following words:

It seems that Joseph wished the Church to believe that not only all things pertaining to the society should be subject to his dictation, but in eternity salvation should be dependent on his ascendant power with God. . . . Under this rule the Church generally was passive, if not pleased, believing it to be the order of God. [^28]

Peck's kindred spirit, John Corrill, was a counselor to Bishop Edward Partridge. He, too, finally repudiated the revelations the Lord had given to the Church for the building up of Zion. When Joseph Smith confronted him about the matter, he again denied that the Prophet had a right to direct the people as he was doing for the building up of Zion. At this, Joseph replied that if Corrill continued his opposition, he (the Prophet) would see that he did not get into the celestial kingdom, even if he had to stand at the gate and keep him out. Corrill's disbelieving reply was, "What if I get there first?"

Such opposition was also expressed by this class of liberals in Brigham Young's day, when he sought to establish the Saints upon an economic foundation. Having been cut off from the Church for coming out in open opposition to this program, Edward W. Tullidge wrote to President Young, October 27, 1869, stating: "For years I have tried to shun the issue of the day, for theoretically I have not been a believer . . . in a temporal theocracy."

The tendency today is not so much to repudiate that which the Saints are obligated by covenant to accept and develop in the way of social and economic principles as it is to disregard these things and stress some other program for achieving social justice. Since this is one of the issues of this debate, let us look first at what the Lord has revealed concerning the society of Zion.

It is a basic premise within LDS thought that the Saints must build up the society of Zion, that they might thereby receive the glory of the Lord and be prepared for the second coming of Christ. This was the message of Moroni to Joseph Smith; and it was enunciated in later revelations to the Prophet. The new socio-economic system to be developed was to be founded upon the spiritual powers of the gospel. Zion was to be a true brotherhood sufficient within itself to care for every legitimate human need—spiritual, social, and economic. Within the society of Zion, powers of truth and of life coming from God were to quicken and enlighten every individual and organization therein, to where each person and each organized unit could act freely, intelligently, and in enlightened union with each other. It was expected that by responding to the manifestations of the Holy Spirit the Saints would willingly and eagerly sustain the authority that ministered truth and light to the system. Only in such a society can individual freedom be combined properly with social authority. Here, also, true union and economic equality can be established without stifling freedom and initiative, for this system levels up rather than levels down.

By contrast, man-made systems of social and economic welfare lack these enlightening and regenerating spiritual powers. To carry out their social and economic programs, they must be manipulated by various artificial measures. This is the plight of the welfare state that certain liberals now propose.

It is the aim of this class of liberals to socialize the state, in a deficient and self-defeating effort to achieve equality and justice. By contrast, Mormonism proposes that we Christianize the social order of the Saints and by utilizing the uplifting powers of God raise the society of Zion to be an ensign and a standard to the world, showing others how to solve their own social and economic problems within the framework of a free political system. In laying the foundation of the economic program of Zion, Joseph Smith therefore declared: "It was my endeavor to so organize the Church, that the brethren might eventually be independent of every encumbrance beneath the celestial kingdom, by bonds and covenants of mutual friendship and mutual love." [^29]

To be independent above all other systems beneath the celestial world the Saints must, among other things, be independent above state-sponsored welfare measures. One cannot escape this conclusion.

The society of Zion, as Joseph Smith declared, is a covenant society. It is not a socialized state. Instead, it is founded upon the principle of individual covenant. One enters the system by the covenant of baptism, and receives the priesthood with an oath and a covenant. In entering the ideal economic program known as the law of consecration and stewardship, the Saints were required to consecrate their property to the Lord with a deed and a covenant. The act of sustaining officers within the Church was considered to be a covenant that the members would support them in their righteous efforts. Finally, the home, as the basic unit of the society, was to be founded upon the new and everlasting covenant of marriage.

This covenant concept has its basis in the fundamental assumption that the Lord expressed when he said: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself, as all intelligence also; otherwise there is no existence." [^30] All truth and all intelligence must be independent in their respective spheres, otherwise there can be no existence. And this has reference to man as an organized intelligence. There are, therefore, five prerequisites to man's existence as an independent being. First, the true law of life as it pertains to his sphere must be revealed. Second, that law must be known. Third, to use Lehi's philosophy, there must be an opposition in all things—an enticement to violate the laws of life. Fourth, man must have his agency to obey or to disobey these laws. And, finally, man must choose intelligently to obey. Only then can he be an independent being within his sphere of life.

If we disrupt this formula in any way or deny any of the elements therein their proper expression, we destroy the principle of life within man. To destroy freedom is to destroy the condition upon which existence is predicated. But the law of life in the gospel is not just a law of freedom. In addition, it requires responsibility to our fellowmen—to their welfare and happiness. The commandment is to love our neighbor as ourselves.

But to achieve the maturity of character to sustain a covenant society the Saints must respond to the enlightening and enlivening spiritual powers that come from God, that they might be matured in all the attributes of Christian character. The social union that is thereby achieved is ideal in individualism. It is based upon the individual and his maturity in Christ, not upon some state program. This is the foundation upon which we must build to solve the social and economic problems of life. Listen to the word of John Taylor:

The world have generally made great mistakes upon these points. They have started various projects to try to unite and cement the people together without God; but they could not do it. Fourierism, communism. . . . . and many other principles of the same kind have been introduced to try and cement the human family together. And then we have had peace societies, based upon the same principles. But all these things have failed, and they will fail, because, however philanthropic, humanitarian, benevolent, or cosmopolitan our ideas, it is impossible to produce a true and correct union without the Spirit of the living God and the Spirit can only be imparted through the ordinances of the gospel. Hence Jesus told his disciples to go and preach the gospel to every creature . . . It was by this cementing, uniting spirit, that true, sympathetic, fraternal relations could be introduced and enjoyed. [^31]

Man cannot achieve true happiness either here or in eternity without making his primary objective the regeneration of the human soul. Zion's program of social and economic justice is designed to do this. It is designed to achieve two objectives. First, it is designed to intensify the influence of enlightening and unifying spiritual powers in the lives of men. Second, it is designed to establish Zion as an ideal of social justice and progression. When Enoch applied this program anciently, it was said that his people "were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." [^32] Their society was based upon the actuality of divine spiritual powers in their midst. Said a revelation to Joseph Smith: "The fear of the Lord was upon all nations, so great was the glory of the Lord, which was upon his people." [^33]

Here also is the destiny of the Latter-day Zion. A revelation therefore promised: "And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion." [^34] To be more specific, Isaiah wrote in prophetic declaration: "And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense." [^35]

Here, then, are the issues. The true Latter-day Saint liberal recognizes his dependency upon Christ. In Christ, man is initially innocent. In Christ, he can be transformed from his natural state to a state of spiritual union and power with God. Through Christ, he can partake of the wisdom of God, the intelligence of God, and the power of God, to establish peace and social union and justice upon earth. By contrast, those who falsely call themselves liberals believe essentially that man himself can bring about the millennium. It is primarily an intellectual matter with them, even when they concede to work within the framework of what God has revealed.

True Latter-day Saint liberals still espouse the ideal of human freedom, an ideal from which false liberalism has departed in its effort to socialize the state.

True Latter-day Saint liberals seek for the union of free men through the enlightening powers of the Holy Spirit. But those who falsely call themselves liberals propose that society become a puppet, to be manipulated under a stifling program of forced union by various artificial devices.

True Latter-day Saint liberals seek for the cause of Zion and work for that ideal against the ignorance of the world and the sophistication of those who falsely call themselves liberals.

True Latter-day Saint liberals believe that Zion must achieve economic independence above all other systems beneath the celestial kingdom. Other liberals would have the Saints swallowed up in a leviathan state, where they would lose their identity and distinctiveness as a people and fail to meet their God-given responsibility of pointing out the way of temporal salvation for men. In short, those who would do the latter are not liberals. They are circumventors. They endeavor to circumvent or get around the way of truth by emphasizing the role of man's intellect at the expense of the principle of divine revelation from God. They seek to circumvent the plan of salvation by stressing ethics and ideals without emphasizing that man must be regenerated by the powers of the Holy Spirit to achieve the Christlike life. They attempt to circumvent the building of Zion by seeking social justice through deficient and self-defeating manmade devices, rather than through the enlightening and enlivening program that God has revealed.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] History of the Church, Vol. IV, pp. 536, 537.
[^2] Ibid., V, pp. 61-66.
[^3] Ibid., I, pp. 312-316.
[^4] Ibid., I, p. 315; D&C 133:10-13.
[^5] D&C 133:26-34; Ether 13:11.
[^6] Deuteronomy 4:29-31; Isaiah 2:1-4; Jeremiah 16:14-16; Ezekiel 20:33-38; Micah 4:1-4.
[^7] D&C 45:24-33, 43; Luke 21:24; DHC I, p. 313.
[^8] Deuteronomy 33:17; Romans 11:25-27; D&C 133:34.
[^9] 3 Nephi 21:22-26.
[^10] D&C 133:21-33.
[^11] Ibid., 105:5, 34; D&C 45:9; Isaiah 11:11, 12; 18:3.
[^12] 3 Nephi 20:22; 21:25; D&C 45:67; 97:15, 16.
[^13] D&C 45:66-71; Isaiah 35:10; DHC III, pp. 390, 391.
[^14] "Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," published at New York, Apr. 6, 1845, quoted in Writings of Parley Parker Pratt, 1952; Parker Pratt Robinson, Salt Lake City, Utah; p. 10.
[^15] Daniel 7; DHC III, p. 389; JD XVIII; p. 344.
[^16] Joel 3:1-17.
[^17] "Proclamation of the Twelve," p. 7.
[^18] Ibid., pp. 7, 8.
[^19] Daniel 7:11, 12; JD, XVIII, p. 339; DHC V, p. 212.
[^20] This idea was expressed by the Prophet and reported by Heber C. Kimball. See JD IX, p. 27.
[^21] For a discussion of this world order, see Hyrum L. Andrus, Joseph Smith and World Government, 1958, Deseret Book Company, Salt Lake City, Utah, Chapter 1.
[^22] See Isaiah 11:4, 9.
[^23] D&C 133:41, 49; See also 29:11, 12.
[^24] Ibid., 101:23-25; Tenth Article of Faith.
[^25] Ibid., 101:25-31; Isaiah 11:6-9; 65:22.
[^26] Ibid., 101:32-35; 121:28-32.
[^27] DHC V, p. 212.
[^28] Lu B. Cake, Peepstone Joe and the Peck Manuscript, p. 100.
[^29] DHC, I, p. 269.
[^30] Ibid., 93:30.
[^31] JD, XVIII, p. 137.
[^32] Moses 7:18.
[^33] Moses 7:18. Ibid., 7:17.
[^34] D&C 45:67.
[^35] Isaiah 4:5.
