What a happy day for the Mqadi family. After the doors of the temple had been closed for the better part of 14 months due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Nala M. (age 11) finally had her opportunity to visit the temple for the first time in June 2021.

Looking back on the experience afterwards, Nala named some of the highlights of the experience. She loved the peace and cleanliness of the building. And she loved that she could be baptized by her older brother, Ntando.

Ntando (15) was able to perform this sacred ordinance because he holds the Aaronic priesthood. He had recently been ordained to the office of priest.

The priesthood is God’s power and authority given to worthy males ages 11 and older. The Aaronic Priesthood is the initial or preparatory priesthood. Men and boys ordained to the Aaronic Priesthood have the authority to pass, prepare and bless the sacrament and baptise others.

The Aaronic Priesthood was given to Joseph Smith in 1829 by John the Baptist—that same John the Baptist who baptised Jesus. Holding and exercising the Aaronic Priesthood prepares men to receive the higher or Melchizedek Priesthood.

“It was spectacular having the opportunity to baptise my sister for her first time,” he remarked. “I also baptised my mom for my first time being able to baptise in the temple. I have the key to access the temple and I have the ability to do sacred ordinances. I have been truly blessed from it and I have received the blessing of serving the Lord in His temple.”

As is evident by the experience of the Mqadi family, although the priesthood is borne by men, it is used to bless all of God’s children.

President Dallin H. Oaks has said, “Priesthood power blesses all of us. Priesthood keys direct women as well as men, and priesthood ordinances and priesthood authority pertain to women as well as men.”

“I felt blessed when I went into the temple,” Nala commented afterwards. “It was cool to be baptized by my brother.”

For Nala’s older brother, Ntando, it was also a day of firsts. It was his first time performing proxy baptisms in the temple. Being able to do this for his family members was meaningful for him.

The siblings’ mother, Tshepiso, said, “Being in the temple for the first time with Nala, and watching Ntando exercise the Aaronic Priesthood also for the first time at the baptistry was very special for me.

“I am grateful for the Spirit that testified to them of the divinity of the temple and the service performed therein. It touched my heart when they both excitedly requested to attend temple baptisms again. It is my prayer that this experience has ignited a desire within them to do more to participate and be part of the Lord’s work as they grow.”

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="148659646" id="aside1_p1">Learn more about the priesthood by reading “What does it mean to be ordained to the priesthood?” in the Families and Temples booklet.</p> <p data-aid="148659648" id="aside1_p2">Read “The Restoration of the Gospel of Jesus Christ” booklet.</p> <p data-aid="148659651" id="aside1_p3">If you are male and 11 years or older, speak to the executive secretary in your ward or branch to set up an interview to receive the Aaronic Priesthood.</p> [/SIDEBAR]
