The earth was created by Jesus Christ under Heavenly Father’s direction so that we could have a place to live, learn, and use our agency to make good choices (see Abraham 3:24–26).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that to “create … does not mean to create out of nothing; it means to organize, the same as a man would organize materials and build a ship.” The Hebrew word for “create” means to shape, fashion, organize, and form (see Genesis 1:1; Abraham 3:24).

President Russell M. Nelson explained that “the physical Creation itself was staged through ordered periods of time,” not calendar days. “Whether termed a day, a time, or an age, each phase [of the Creation] was a period between two identifiable events—a division of eternity.”

“God said, Let there be light,” and He “divided the light from the darkness,” creating day and night (see Genesis 1:3–5).

God separated the waters and the heavens. “God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters. … And God called the firmament Heaven.” (See Genesis 1:6–8.)

“God called the dry land Earth; and … the waters called he Seas” (Genesis 1:10). The earth was then ready for plant life (see Genesis 1:11–12).

God made the sun, the moon, and the stars “to divide the day from the night” and “be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years” (see Genesis 1:14–16).

God created “every living creature” (Genesis 1:21). These creatures were commanded to multiply and fill the earth and the sea (see Genesis 1:22).

God’s creation of life continued with “beasts of the earth,” “cattle,” and “creeping things” (Abraham 4:24–25). Then He created Adam and Eve “in the image of his own body” (Moses 6:9) and commanded them to “be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, … and have dominion … over every living thing” (Genesis 1:28).

After finishing His work, God rested on the seventh day. “And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made” (Genesis 2:3).

God later commanded that we also “remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy” (Exodus 20:8).

We can make the Sabbath day holy by taking time to attend church, partake of the sacrament, and remember the Savior. The Lord taught, “For verily this is a day appointed unto you to rest from your labors, and to pay thy devotions unto the Most High” (Doctrine and Covenants 59:10).

On the Sabbath day, “our thoughts, actions, and demeanor are signs we give to God and an indicator of our love for Him.”
