THE PRISONER.

The summer's sun was just struggling through the mists that overhung the eastern horizon, and faintly gilding the towers and housetops of Zarahemla, as a party of seven horsemen, evidently weary with the night's travel, were seen slowly moving along the foot of the hill Manti, in the direction of the above named city.

The manner in which the party traveled was evidently by pre-arrangement, and for a purpose. Two rode in advance and two in the rear, while the other three rode abreast, the one in the middle being closely guarded by those who rode beside him. A second look showed that his arms were securely bound behind him, and the guard on each side held the powerful horse he rode by means of a strap of raw-hide fastened to the bridle. The prisoner was the most, in fact the only person of striking appearance in the little cavalcade, the others being rather heavy, dull men of serious countenance; the prisoner, however, had an air of boldness and cool defiance which contrasted sharply with the humble aspect of his guards. He sat his horse with an easy grace which gave less evidence of fatigue from the long ride through the sultry night than that exhibited by his guards; the man, indeed, seemed especially adapted for endurance. The head, too, was massive and the countenance striking; the brilliancy of the bold black eyes challenged contest or flashed back defiance, while the peculiar expression about the mouth, half scornful smile, half sneer, seemed to breathe contempt for all things on which he looked.

The party now came in full view of the city. "At last," with mocked solemnity, exclaimed he that was bound, "the soldiers of Christ and their prisoner behold the holy city, where dwells the great prophet--even God's High Priest, who smites with the words of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips slays the wicked!" and the speaker laughed scornfully, but his guards made no reply.

"Methinks ye soldiers of the king that is to be, give scant homage to a shrine so holy as this--why, think men, this is the abode of God's vicegerent, the headquarters of heaven on earth so to speak! And yet ye move on in full view of this holy shrine unbowed! Down slaves, and worship the place of my sanctuary--so run the words of holy prophets, is it not so?"

Still no answer.

"Yet uncovered and unbowed? Ah, I forgot, you are from the land of Gideon, where dwells another of these holy prophets--and, it may be, that to worship at this shrine would be treason to your own High Priest! O, thou bright-eyed goddess of liberty, what distraction, what fears must disturb the breasts of the poor, craven wretches who worship aught but thee!"

Further remarks of the scoffer were cut short by the guards in advance urging their horses into a brisk gallop, an example followed by the rest of the party. The good broad road, down which they dashed, sloped gently from the western base of the hill Manti to the gate in the east wall of the city. The road had been cut through a primeval forest, and the strips of woodland on either side of it, still untouched by the woodman's ax, made of it a grand avenue. Here and there to the right and left were lanes leading off to the fields beyond, toward which agricultural laborers were slowly moving to begin the toil of the day. These turned to look with unconcealed wonder upon the strange party as it dashed past them, and some few turned back to the city, bent on finding out who the prisoner was and what was afoot.

As the party drew rein near the gate, two guards armed with heavy swords and long spears, challenged their entrance, and demanded their business.

"Great God!" exclaimed the prisoner, "and this is the people who boast of their freedom! This is the free city of Zarahemla! and yet here stands the minions of the High Priest and the Chief Judge to question whence ye come and why!"

"We come from the city of Gideon," said one of the guards of the prisoner, in answer to the questions, "we have in charge Korihor, the anti-Christ, who seeks to destroy religion and subvert all government; we"--

"Thou liest, almost as well as a high priest," broke in the prisoner; "I seek but to root out of men's minds the false traditions of the fathers concerning God and Christ, and to make them free! I only"--

"You will do well," quietly replied he whom he had interrupted, "to make your defense before the High Priest and Chief Judge of the city, and not before your own and the city guards." Then turning to the guards of the gate he continued: "We have brought Korihor from the city of Gideon where he was tried"--

"For his virtues," broke in the prisoner.--

--"for his offenses," continued the guard, not heeding the interruption, "but the Chief Judge at Gideon hath sent him to the Chief Judge of the whole land in this city, to hear his case, and he"--

"And God's High Priest," spoke up the prisoner, "I charge thee, guard, leave not out the holy prophet, I long to meet in sharp contest the vicegerent on earth of your Christ that is to be--'according to the holy prophets.'"

"Well, then, we seek the High Priest and Chief Judge before whom this man is to be tried," said the guard, evidently vexed with the mocking tone of the scoffer.

"Pass on," said the guard at the gate: "Com," said he to his companion, "conduct these men to the Judgment Hall, give their prisoner to the keeper of the prison, then direct them to the house of the chief judge; I shall wait until you return; and I pray God that this bold man may be silenced, for before now he hath disturbed the quiet of our city not a little."

As the party passed through the massive gateway, Korihor turned to look back at the guard, and raising his voice, said to the crowd which had gathered there rather than to the one whom he addressed, "Guard, tell your good people as they pass in and out of the city, that Korihor, their friend, who would see them free, is in bonds for liberty's sake, and is soon to be tried before an imperious High Priest and a tyrant judge, for honest disbelief in the foolish traditions of their fathers--tell them this, and ask them if the time has came when all men must be slaves to superstition!" There was an instant buzz of excitement in the crowd, for Korihor was not unknown in Zarahemla. A few months before he had been through that city and had spoken boldly against the prophets and the traditions respecting the coming and Atonement of Christ. Since then he had been traveling through the land of Jershon among the people of Ammon, there he met with little success; for that people bound him and banished him from their lands. From thence he went into the land of Gideon where he sought, as in other places, to stir up sedition. He was brought before the High Priest and Chief Judge of that city, and they being in doubt as to what they ought to do with him, bound him and sent him to the High Priest over the whole church, and to the Chief Judge of the whole land, both of whom resided in the city of Zarahemla.
