ZARAHEMLA.

The city of Zarahemla which our party of horsemen and their prisoner had entered, was the capital and metropolis of the Nephite Republic. Its exact location cannot be definitely fixed. According to the Book of Mormon it was situated on the west bank of tho river Sidon, a noble stream, supposed to be identical with the river Magdalena. It rises in the great mountain chain of western South America, and flows directly north through an immense valley to the sea. The city Zarahemla was originally founded by the descendants of a colony of Jews that escaped from Jerusalem, after the destruction of that city by King Nebuchadnezzar, early in the sixth century B. C. With the colony of Jews that escaped was Mulek, the son of King Zedekiah, and the colony took its name from him. They landed in the northern continent of the western world and afterwards drifted southward into the valley of Sidon, and there founded a city, but what name they gave it is not known. Having brought no records with them from Jerusalem, and being in possession of none of those incentives to the preservation of civilization, it is not surprising that they deteriorated to semi-civilized and irreligious conditions. Serious wars broke out among them at times, but they preserved themselves a people, and by the year 200 B. C., had become very numerous. It was about this time that their chief city was discovered by a migrating host of Nephites from the South, led by Mosiah I, whom God had commanded to gather together the more righteous part of the people of Nephi and take them into the land northward. A double purpose was served in this movement: first, the righteous Nephites were relieved from the oppressions practiced upon them by their more vicious brethren; second, they carried enlightenment, and especially the knowledge of God, to a numerous people. At the time of the arrival of the Nephites in the valley of the Sidon, one Zarahemla was the recognized leader of the descendants of the people of Mulek. It was a Nephite custom to name their cities after the men who founded them, and the surrounding country after the name of the chief city therein. In this instance the Nephites doubtless named the city after the chief man they found there, "Zarahemla," and the surrounding country "the land of Zarahemla." But as suggested, this may not have been the name of the city previous to the advent of the Nephites. The two peoples readily united under the form of government known at that time among the Nephites, viz., a limited and at times elective monarchy. Mosiah, the Nephite leader, became king of the united people. He caused that the people of Zarahemla should be taught in the knowledge of their forefathers; and in reverence for the God of Israel. Both peoples were greatly benefited by this union. The people of Zarahemla so strengthened the Nephites in numbers as to make them strong enough to resist any attempted invasion of Lamanites; while to the people of Zarahemla the Nephites brought their civilization, their ideas of government, and enlightenment through means of education.

At the time of the opening of our story, 75 B. C., something of a republican form of government or reign of Judges had supplanted the before mentioned monarchy. King Mosiah I. was succeeded by his son Benjamin, and he by his son, under the title of Mosiah II. It was the reign of the last mentioned king that the remarkable revolution took place which resulted in the establishment of the Nephite Republic in place of the kingly form of government which under various modifications had existed from the first Nephi, until about 91 B. C., or some sixteen years previous to the events recorded in the preceding chapter. The revolution seems to have occurred at that time in consequence of the sons of the second Mosiah refusing to accept the kingly dignity. They had consecrated their lives to the service of the Church, and had departed on missionary expeditions among the Lamanites. The good King Mosiah II was fearful that if the people elected a king, as was their light under certain contingencies, his sons might subsequently seek to take possession of the throne they had abdicated, and thus bring on civil war. In his anxiety to avoid the possibility of so great a calamity he proposed a change in the constitution by which the kingly form of government should be abolished, and a species of republic established in its place. The principal feature of the new constitution was the provision for the election of a Chief Judge and subordinate Judges, graded most likely according to the importance of the city or district of country over which their administration extended. All the judges were endowed with executive as well as judicial power; from the subordinate judges appeals could be taken to the superior judges; while an easy means of impeachment was provided as a corrective of corrupt administration. The revolution proposed was carried out peacefully under the wise supervision of Mosiah II, who stipulated, when proposing the constitutional change, that he would continue as king until his death, at which event the new government was to go into force. The first election was held within the lifetime of Mosiah II. Alma, the presiding High Priest of the Church, was elected Chief Judge, so that he united in his person both priestly and civil power. Alma was a remarkable character. He was the son of the Nephite High Priest of the same name. In his youthful days he had been exceedingly wayward, and had united with the sons of King Mosiah II, in their efforts to overthrow what they called the superstition of their fathers. Being young men of marked abilities and pleasing address, the mischief they did was appalling. The very pillars of the Church seem to be shaken by their audacious boldness of declamation against it. And it was only through the visitation of an angel who appeared before them in all the glorious brightness, of that heaven from which he had descended, and the administration of sharp reproofs, that they were turned from their sinful ways, and stopped from persecuting the Church of Christ. As is frequently the case with characters of this description, from being violent scoffers of religion and bitter enemies of the Church, they became ardent supporters of both, and, as already stated, the sons of Mosiah II, abdicated their right to the Nephite throne and consecrated their lives to the service of the Church, of which Alma became the High Priest upon the death of his father, Alma; and, as we have seen, was made Chief Judge also of the republic. He did not hold the double office long, however; for finding that the office of Chief Judge so occupied his time that it forced neglect upon his duties as High Priest, he resigned his civil position after eight years of service, that he might devote himself exclusively to his ministerial calling. Nephihah was elected to the office of Chief Judge, and held that position at the opening of our story. By this action of Alma's the office of High Priest was separated from that of Chief Judge, still there appears to have been some participation in the affairs of government by the High Priest.  Not that there was a union of church and state as that term is usually understood, for the Church was recognized as being separated from the state; but while they were distinct societies, they were close neighbors, and nearly interested in one another; they lived separate, but not estranged; and each helped the other at need. And hence it happened that the High Priest at times sat with the Chief Judge in cases involving the interests of the Church.
