THE NEW CONVERT.

For a moment father and son faced each other, but neither spoke. The proud head of Corianton was bowed, his lips quivered with emotion. The father held out his hand, and the young man grasped it. "Father," he said, in humbled tone, "I have sinned against God, and against thee; I pray you pardon me, and ask thy God to pardon me, too."

"Corianton, thy rebellion against God is in truth a grievous sin. But youth is thoughtless and wayward, impatient of restraint, easily misled, and often, too, by generous impulses. The high sounding phrase, the reckless plea for unbridled license, miscalled liberty, of which men of Korihor's type well know the influence, the mocking jests at sober, righteous lives, the boldness which dares mock at sacred things, and bid defiance even to God, hath in it a false daring which captures inconsiderate youth, and works its ruin. I do remember my own youth, Corianton, and how in my mad folly I threw away restraint, consorted with the wicked, mocked the righteous, and impiously blasphemed the name of God, and afflicted my noble father's soul as thou hast mine--but I forgive thee," hastily added the Priest, as a great sob escaped his son, "as he did me; and so far as my earnest prayer can pluck down God's forgiveness on thy head, be assured, my son, my most dear son, God shall forgive thee, too." With these words ho fondly embraced Corianton, and a few moments later they left the Hall of Justice together.

At the house of the High Priest they found Ammon, Aaron, Omner and Himni, and also Helaman and Shiblon, the two elder sons of Alma. The first four persons named were the sons of Mosiah, the last king of the Nephites, at whose death the reign of the judges began. These men had been the companions of Alma from his boyhood, and together in their youthful days they had been recklessly wicked and sought the destruction of the Church, as already detailed in chapter two. After their conversion they had traveled to and fro through all the land of the Nephites, seeking to undo the mischief they had done; and then performed glorious missions among the Lamanites where the power of God had been wondrously manifested to the converting of many of that people to the truth. Often separated in their labors, cast into prisons, surrounded by dangers, threatened by mobs, weary, foot-sore, hungry--now received into palaces and hailed almost as Gods, now outcasts, without a place to lay their heads--they experienced all the changes, the successes, and the vicissitudes of missionary life, but through all of it they were faithful to God, and held each other in fondest remembrance.

The present occasion of their meeting together was to determine what steps should be taken in relation to the Zoramites, a people who had dissented from the Nephites and had established themselves at Antionum, south of the land Gershon, and bordering on the lands occupied by the Lamanites; and it was feared they would become confederate with the Lamanites and create trouble. The meeting held on the subject the day before had been interrupted by the Chief Judge sending for Alma to consult over the case of Korihor. Now they had met to conclude the business thus interrupted.

Alma was warmly greeted by his brethren, who had witnessed the scene in the Hall of Justice; and all expressed their gratitude to God for the great manifestation of his power, and the vindication of his cause.

"The most happy fruit of this issue," said Alma, "is that it gives back to us my son Corianton; who, at first, stood with the unbeliever, but now has seen a demonstration of God's power, to the conversion of his soul." At this announcement the brethren gathered about Corianton and warmly embraced him, thanking God for his deliverance from darkness.

It was finally arranged that Alma, Ammon, Aaron, Omner together with Shiblon and Corianton, should go on a mission to the Zoramites; that Himni should remain to preside over the church at Zarahemla, assisted by Helaman.

As the council was breaking up, Alma suggested that he would like to take with him on this mission Amulek and Zeezrom, but they were in the city of Melek, west of Zarahemla. Corianton volunteered to go after them, and Shiblon expressed a willingness to accompany him. That afternoon they started.

En route they passed through several villages, and on such occasions were everywhere questioned in relation to the curse which had fallen upon Korihor, of which they had heard conflicting rumors. The young men gave to those inquiring correct information, though Corianton in testifying to the existence of God, and to the truth, was not always as humble or merciful to those who were not yet converted as was conformable to the spirit of the gospel, or consistent with the position which he himself had so lately occupied. It is ever thus with your new convert; by his actions and by his words you would be led to think, if you did not know better, that he was the last sinner God was waiting to bring into his fold before he damned the rest. Shiblon observed these faults in his brother, but knowing his haughty spirit, which could ill brook restraint, he resolved to remain silent, and let those older correct him.

Finding Amulek and Zeezrom, they delivered their message from the council of the priesthood in Zarahemla, and both these worthy men returned with them to that city, and from thence the party took its journey to Antionum, the chief city of the Zoramites.

Of that journey it is necessary to say but little. It occupied eight days, the party going on foot, driving with them but two asses, on which were packed the tents, food and other necessary articles for the comfort of the party. For the sons of Mosiah and Alma, who were all experienced missionaries, and had passed through many trying scenes together, as also, indeed, had Amulek and Zeezroni, it was a glorious reunion; and many and various were the adventures and special manifestations of the power of God related. To the younger men, Shiblon and Corianton, it was a feast of spiritual food--the conversation of these servants of God.
