A BROTHER'S LOVE.

Left more dead than alive by his hard journey and merciless beating, Corianton lay in a stupor for some time. Regaining consciousness he wandered, he knew not whither, but at last came to one of the chief towns of the people of Ammon; where a large number of the outcast Zoramites had been given a resting place. In passing through the streets he was recognized by some of them, and the news of his return soon spread throughout the city.

The people came running together to see him. Some looked on him with pity, others looked upon him as the author of all their distress and began clamoring for vengeance. The latter class was by far the more numerous, and the excitement was growing uncontrolable. "Stone him, stone him!" was the cry. Corianton, hard pressed, threw back his tattered robe, and addressing the crowd said--

"Yes, good people, I am the cause of the affliction that has befallen you--let my life pay the penalty of my follies--I refuse not to die--to die would be relief."

Those who heard these words, and saw the majesty of the speaker, fallen though he was, were awed into silence; but those on the outskirts of the ever-increasing crowd still clamored for his life, and even began to cast stones at him. These volleys soon caused those near him to draw back, and he stood alone. Shrouding his face in his mantle he sank to the ground prepared to meet the worst.

At that moment a clear, strong voice rose above the tumult of the mob: "In the name of God, hold! Stay your hands, men! Let him be accursed that casts another stone!"

Shiblon, all breathless, pushed his way through that angry crowd to where his brother lay, half stunned and bleeding. He threw aside the mantle and bent over the poor, bruised form. "Alas! my brother, cast down and well nigh destroyed!" and the tears flowed down his cheeks and dropped upon the half unconscious face of Corianton. Then the murmurs of the crowd, awed but for the moment by Shiblon's appearance, rose into cries for vengeance. Quickly rising to his feet, Shiblon waved his hand for silence and thus addressed them:

"You people from Antionum, listen to me. My father and the sons of Mosiah, together with this my brother and myself, came into your midst to teach you the truth. Out of love for you my father, though bowed with age and unremitting toil in the behalf of others, left the pleasures and comforts of his home, risked his life, and endured the scoffs of the proud Zoramites, that you might live, and live in the truth, and be free, and for this you would reward him by slaying his dearest son, who fell by the practice of a cunning harlot. I grant you the sin was great; such as he are great, even in their sins; and they are likewise great in their sufferings.

"If his crime is worthy of death, has he not already suffered more than death? The burden of his great sin he must carry through life--and could his worst enemy be gratified by casting one more stone at this poor, bleeding body, or be pleased by adding one more pang to his tortured mind? Oh, men! has pity, mercy, gratitude left your breasts; and does your mad frenzy make you brutish beasts? My brother's sin is more against himself and God than you, and it is for you to leave him to the justice and mercy of his God who hath said, 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay."

The crowd slunk away, except those who remained to assist Shiblon in removing his brother to the home of Ammon, who lived in the city. Here his wounds were dressed; and he was attended upon by Shiblon with all the devotion of a loving brother.

His father forgave him, and took no small pains in teaching him, instilling into his soul faith in the great fundamental truths of the Gospel. And Corianton's proud, haughty spirit now humbled to the dust, listened with prayerful attention to the instruction of his father, and found the faith of the Gospel the stay and hope of his soul, and no longer questioned, but lovingly trusted in the justice and mercy of God.

May it not be that even this great sin was necessary to humble his pride, and prepare him to receive and sense the gospel, that by and through it he might be prepared to receive the highest degree of glory to which his nature could attain, and which he never could have attained with his pride unbroken?

"I give unto men weakness," saith the Lord, "that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me."
