Jesus came to John the Baptist,

In Judea long ago,

And was baptized by immersion

In the River Jordan’s flow.

“To fulfill the law,” said Jesus,

When the Baptist questioned why,

“And to enter with my Father

In the kingdom up on high.”

Now we know that we must also

Witness faith in Jesus’ word,

Be baptized to show obedience,

As was Jesus Christ, our Lord.

(“Baptism,” Children’s Songbook, 100–101)

McKenzie, age eight, has recently been baptized and confirmed. She said, “The best part of being baptized was when I went into the water. I felt pure, comfortable, excited, and happy.” Matthew, age seven, is looking forward to his baptism and confirmation. He said, “Men with the priesthood will put their hands on top of my head.”

Matthew and McKenzie understand that being baptized and confirmed is a commandment. They know that they need to follow Jesus’s example so they can enter “the kingdom up on high” to live with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ someday (see 2 Nephi 31:17–18).

Complete the circle puzzle described on page F4 to remind you that being baptized by immersion, being confirmed a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost are some of the most important things you will ever do.

1.  Prepare the materials for the question-and-answer game found in Primary 3, lesson 11, p. 53. Provide the questions and an item to toss for each class. Teach the children that it is a commandment to be baptized and confirmed (see D&C 68:27). Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 208 (John the Baptist Baptizing Jesus), and review the story of Jesus’s baptism. Invite the children to share what they know about baptism and confirmation. Review the covenants made at baptism. Pass out the game to each class, and allow enough time for them to complete it. Share the story about a young girl who wanted to be baptized (see Primary 3, p. 53). Bear testimony of the importance of baptism and confirmation, and sing a song about baptism or the gift of the Holy Ghost.

2.  Write the word Remember on the chalkboard. Invite the children to share things they think are important to remember. Add the words Jesus Christ so that the chalkboard reads, Remember Jesus Christ. Invite the children to share why they think it is important to remember Jesus Christ. Explain that you are thinking of an important way to remember Jesus Christ. Share three or four simple clues to help the children guess that you are thinking of the sacrament. Display Gospel Art Picture Kit 603 (Blessing the Sacrament) and 604 (Passing the Sacrament). Invite the children to share what they know about the sacrament. Read the sacrament prayers (see D&C 20:77, 79), and ask the children to listen for the word remember. Discuss what occurs in sacrament meeting to prepare for the sacrament and why it is important to be reverent. Review the covenants made at baptism, and help the children understand that during the sacrament we have the opportunity to renew the covenants we have made. Conclude by role-playing situations where understanding baptismal covenants can help the children make good choices.

Cut out the blank circle and the two halves of the divided circle. Glue each piece of the divided circle to the blank circle to complete the puzzle. Read the scripture, and think about how baptism and confirmation go together.

[SIDEBAR] <p data-aid="127045196" id="aside1_p1"><strong>Note:</strong> If you do not wish to remove pages from the magazine, this activity may be copied or printed from the Internet at <a href="https://www.lds.org">www.lds.org</a>. For English, click on “Gospel Library.” For other languages, click on “Languages.”</p> [/SIDEBAR]
