Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

ixForeword

ix The Church was little more than three years old when Wilford Woodruff, destined to become its fourth president, entered the waters of baptism. Under the voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith he grew in gospel knowledge. When called to the apostleship six years after his baptism, he became intimately acquainted with the stirring events and powerful personalities that made up the early history of the Church. Moreover, he kept careful notes of the utterances of the Prophet and of the teachings that he received in those early days. All this, with his experience in the mission field, was excellent training for the important part he was to play in the restoration of the gospel.

ix From the beginning he sought to proclaim the new-found truth to others. That was a gospel obligation. Successfully, he filled mission after mission. The large and remarkable results of his proselyting, especially in England, have become a Mormon classic. He is unsurpassed by no missionary of these latter days.

ix When the Church was driven westward, he was one of the pioneer party. It was from his wagon that Brigham Young, viewing the Salt Lake Valley for the first time, declared, "This Is the Place." Resolutely, he set about with the others to wrest an empire from the desert. Irrigation was perfected, towns and cities were built; and a civilized commonwealth arose upon desert sands. In this achievement Wilford Woodruff took a prominent part.

ix Ever, however he gave time and devotion to the spiritual necessities of the Church. As a Church historian, he reviewed the progress of the Church and kept a record of the present. When the first temple in the West was dedicated, he was called to be its president. There he laid the foundations for our family genealogies, and systematized temple work. The visions of heaven guided him in his labors. His own day-by-day diary, perhaps the most complete in the Church, is replete with detailed historical and doctrinal accounts.

x Withal he was a modest man, who, despite positions and honors, could cultivate his garden and live the simple life. He had a rich spiritual nature. His faith was profound and certain. He walked with the Lord all the days of his life. They who did not understand the power that accompanies true humility stood perplexed before him. The faithful, however, felt the living fire that made his career possible.

x In the midst of these activities he preached without let or hindrance the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. He loved to speak of Joseph Smith and bore powerful testimony of his prophetic power. He admonished the Saints to remember that in the Church of Christ revelation is continuous, the very essence of the gospel of Jesus Christ. The authority of the priesthood was to him the rock upon which the Church rests. He explained the mission of the Saints to prepare for the second coming of the Lord. He reminded the Saints that they must not hesitate to carry the gospel to all the people of the earth, at any cost or sacrifice. Often he looked, as it were, through the veil, and eloquently urged upon the people temple work for the dead as well as for the living. Practical matters also commanded his attention, as he pointed out how the people might win temporal and spiritual salvation. Questions which stir us even today were clearly answered by him. He pointed his discourses with his own remarkable life experiences. They conveyed truth and touched the heart.

x Tempestuous times faced the Church when in his old age he was called to the presidency. The nation was arrayed against the Latter-day Saints. His burden was great. But, under the Lord's inspiration, he met every issue fearlessly. He promulgated the manifesto to cease the practice of plural marriage. The confiscated properties of the Church were restored. Utah became a state of the Union. The growth of the Church increased. In the midst of these labors he dedicated the completed Salt Lake Temple amidst the hosanna shouts of the assembled multitude of Saints.

x When, at the age of ninety-one years, he passed into the other world, he had seen the desert blossom as a rose under the industry of his people now grown to a multitude, respected in the world. His was a great and rare career.

xi All this and more are made evident in this volume. The Spirit and teachings of Wilford Woodruff, prophet of God, are found on every page. His life philosophy, which was always the philosophy of the gospel, is there found, and the foundations upon which it rested. The compiler has done an excellent piece of word. President George Albert Smith and members of the Woodruff family have been pleased to commend the effort to bring the essence of President Woodruff's teachings before the people. The book, a worthy and notable addition to our Church literature, comes as a precious gift to the Latter-day Saints.

xi And now a word about the series of books of which this volume is one.

xi Continuous revelation, a basic doctrine of the Church, is necessary because all who accept the gospel are engaged in endless development, or progress. The fundamentals of gospel life have been revealed, but their applications to problems raised by men of free agency often require added help from our Heavenly Father. Thus, from time to time, the Church needs and receives new revelation.

xi Revelation for the guidance of the Church must come through the president of the Church, and through none other. He alone is the prophet, seer, and revelator to the Church. Revelations given to others are for the benefit of the individuals concerned, but have no bearing on the government of the Church. And, unless in spirit they conform to the teachings of the living prophet, they are from an evil source and dangerous to use by the individual.

xi That gives special significance to the utterances of the men who have stood, or the man who stands at the head of the Church. When they speak under the influence of this prophetic power, they amplify or add to the body of revelation possessed by the Church. They guide us in the maze of contending forces. Each one used or uses past revelation and the new, to meet the needs of the people of his day. The discourses of these men before and after their call to the presidency, should he read and observed as inspired messages for our guidance toward joy on earth and hereafter.

xii It is in this spirit that the essential doctrine taught by the presidents of the Church has been presented by several authors.[^1] It is remarkable to note how each one, by the help of past and present revelation, cleared up the difficulties of their respective times. It is equally remarkable to note that, though each one was obliged to meet different problems, their discourses taught the same fundamental principles of belief and conduct.

xii This series of books form, with the standard works of the Church, the safest foundation for the faith and practice of the Latter-day Saints. They supply up-to-date answers to the questions that agitate the times in which we live.

xii It is not claimed for them that they have been accepted by the people, as have the standard Church works; but the presidents of the Church have been sustained by the people of the Church as the presiding prophets, seers, and revelators to the Church. That gives an authority to their utterances to be found nowhere else. This series of compilations should be within reach of all Latter-day Saints.

John A. Widtsoe

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
