Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

xxiIntroduction

xxi "I believe that no other man who ever walked the face of the earth was a greater converter of souls to the gospel of Jesus Christ." This was President Heber J. Grant's tribute to Wilford Woodruff, miller, pioneer leader, farmer, missionary extraordinary, frontier historian, who, on April 7, 1889, became the fourth president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. [^1] President Woodruff was baptized a member of the Church on December 31, 1833, near Rushland, Oswego County, New York, in his twenty-sixth year. For the remaining sixty-five years of his life he was identified with the great religious movement called "Mormonism" as an active leader, in New England, the middle south, the Missouri and Illinois frontiers, the American west, and in Europe. He was one of the pioneer band who entered the desert valley of the Great Salt Lake with Brigham Young on July 24, 1847. He lived to build and supervise settlements under the leadership of that great colonizer, and in time to succeed to his position. A great pioneer, he inspired confidence in the field, whether in the canyons felling trees and making housing timbers, or in the legislative assemblies of the Territory of Utah. Equally in the spiritual services and ordinances of the sacred temples of his people, his unusual career marks him for respect as a leader and inspirer of men. That his life mission was crowned with service as President of the Church adds permanent historic significance for his messages.

xxi As a Church historian and prodigious journal-keeper, President Woodruff has left an already well-known published record. Some day, the publication of his entire journal can well be expected to throw needed and unusual light on the events of the nineteenth century. Such, however, has not been the purpose of this work, notwithstanding the historic significance of many pronouncements, as Apostle and as President, which find space herein. Moreover, effort has been made to avoid duplication of the materials in Leaves From My Journal, his biography, and other works heretofore published.

xxii The Discourses of Wilford Woodruff aims to present in codified form exactly what is indicated in the title, excerpts from his extemporaneous discourse, supplemented by extracts from some of the outstanding documents issuing from his hand as President of the Church, notably the manifesto on Church-State relationships of 1889, and the related one of 1896. The well-known "Manifesto" of September, 1890, (on plural marriage) is not printed here for the reason that it has found official place in the Doctrine and Covenants of the Church, is widely known, and is readily accessible to all. The material in the present volume has been selected largely, from the published record of sermons printed in the Journal of Discourses (JD), 1851-1886. Sermons for the period 1886-1898 are represented by selections made from the Deseret Weekly (DW) and the Millennial Star (MS), with some extracts from the Journal History (JH) maintained in the L.D.S. Historian's Office, and the annual Conference Reports (CR), publication of which commenced under President Woodruff's direction in 1897.

xxii As researcher and compiler I have not felt justified in taking liberties with the original printed texts. For example, on page five the pronoun "it" appears several times in a discussion relating to the Holy Ghost. This might easily have been changed to "he" but the present editor has too much respect for history to begin tampering with words and phrases that stand, and have stood, in widely circulated records. No one need "fear" that Wilford Woodruff did not understand the personal nature of the Holy Ghost! He did! And in the texts referred to he is developing a practical interpretation of the mission and influence of that remarkable Being, deemed worthy of inclusion in this book. This example illustrates some of the problems of compilation. But the great message of these discourses will stand every test if, in reading, one will only make the effort to understand the times and circumstances under which they were given. There are living oracles in the Church for today and tomorrow.

xxii — G. Homer Durham

See Gospel Standards, (1941), page 20.

"The day has . . . dawned when the light of heaven is to fill the earth; . . . the day in which everything that has been kept from the knowledge of man ever since the foundation of the earth, must be revealed."

—(JD) 24:51, January 27, 1883

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
