Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

Book One

Foundations of Mormonism

"Was Joseph Smith a deceiver? There is a way to test this, and we have tested it to our satisfaction. The great promise made to us when we first heard the preaching of the elders of this Church was, that if we obeyed certain requirements of the gospel, we should receive the Holy Ghost; and this same promise is extended to the world of mankind. If that promise had fallen Utah would doubtless be as barren today as it was when we found it in 1847."

—WILFORD WOODRUFF,

JD 23:79-80,

March 26, 1882

3Chapter 1

3The Godhead and Man's Free Agency

God, Body ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP3THE NATURE OF THE GODHEAD

God, Body ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP3MAN—THE IMAGE OF GOD. We know that we are created in the image of God, both male and female; and whoever goes back into the presence of God our Eternal Father, will find that he is a noble man, a noble God, tabernacled in a form similar to ours, for we are created after his own image; they will also learn that he has placed us here that we may pass through a state of probation and experience, the same as he himself did in his day of mortality.—JD 18:32, June 24, 1875.

3GOD, THE ETERNAL FATHER. God . . . is our Eternal Father, and the creator of this earth: and He will give it to his children to inherit.—JD 24:53, January 27, 1883.

3GOD IS INCREASING IN KNOWLEDGE. If there was a point where man in his progression could not proceed any further, the very idea would throw a gloom over every intelligent and reflecting mind. God Himself is increasing and progressing in knowledge, power, and dominion, and will do so, worlds without end. It is just so with us. We are in a probation, which is a school of experience.—JD 6:120, December 6, 1857.

Jesus Christ, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP3THE MISSION OF CHRIST. The Savior came and tabernacled in the flesh, and entered upon the duties of the priesthood at thirty years of age. After laboring three and a half years he was crucified and put to death in fulfilment of certain predictions concerning him. He laid down his life as a sacrifice for sin, to redeem the world. When men are called upon to repent of their sins, the call has reference to their own individual sins, not to Adam's transgressions. What is called the original sin was atoned for through the death of Christ irrespective of any action on the part of man; also man's individual sin was atoned for by the same sacrifice, but on condition of his obedience to the gospel plan of salvation when proclaimed in his hearing.—MS 51:658-659 (1889).

Jesus Christ, Condescension ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP4THE SAVIOR. I have always looked upon the life of our Savior—who descended beneath all things that He might rise above all things—as an example for His followers. And yet it has always, in one sense of the word, seemed strange to me that the Son of God, the First Begotten in the eternal worlds of the Father, and the Only Begotten in the flesh, should have to descend to the earth and pass through what He did—born in a stable, cradled in a manger, persecuted, afflicted, scorned, a hiss and byword to almost all the world, and especially to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judea. There was apparently nothing that the Savior could do that was acceptable in the eyes of the world; anything and almost everything he did was imputed to an unholy influence. When He cast out devils the people said he did it through the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils; when he opened the eyes of the blind, the Pharisees and priests of the day told the man to "give God the glory; we know this man is a sinner." And so all his life through, to the day of his death upon the cross! There is something about all this that appears sorrowful; but it seemed necessary for the Savior to descend below all things that he might ascend above all things. So it has been with other men.—JD 23:327, December 10, 1882.

Godheada-Woodruff, WilfordTP4THE GODHEAD: RELATIONSHIPS. The God of heaven, whom we worship, is represented as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The Father and Son have tabernacles, and they created man after their own image. But the Holy Ghost is a spirit and a witness and a testimony of the Father and the Son. This Holy Ghost and witness are promised unto all men who will obey the law of the gospel, which God has revealed to the human family. This Holy Ghost rested upon Adam when he blessed his posterity in Adam-ondi-Ahman, three years previous to his death.—MS 48:802, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

Holy Ghosta-Woodruff, WilfordTP5THE HOLY GHOST. We are all dependent upon the Holy Ghost. And what is the Holy Ghost? The testimony of the Father and the Son. It is one of the Godhead—God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Will the Holy Ghost deceive any man? It will not. When a man speaks as he is moved upon by the Holy Ghost, it is the spirit of inspiration; it is the word of God; it is the will of God. It cannot lie; it cannot deceive. It leads into all truth and reveals to man the will of his Maker.—MS 51:786 (1889).

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP5THE GREATEST GIFT. You may have the administration of angels, you may see many miracles; you may see many wonders in the earth; but I claim that the gift of the Holy Ghost is the greatest gift that can be bestowed upon man.—DW 38:451, March 5, 1889.

Holy Ghost, Gift ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP5You may surround any man or woman with all the wealth and glory that the imagination of man can grasp, and are they satisfied? No. There is still an aching void. On the other hand, show me a beggar upon the streets, who has the Holy Ghost, whose mind is filled with that spirit and power, and I will show you a person who has peace of mind, who possesses true riches, and those enjoyments that no man can obtain from any other source. The servants of God, in every age of the world, have been sustained and nerved up to do their duty by this power; and I will say to the Latter-day Saints, if they will be faithful, and do what they should do, and listen to the counsel given to them, they need not have any fears about anything, for the whole work is in the hands of God, the destinies of nations lie there. It is better for a people to be wise, to get righteousness, to be the friends of God, than to occupy any other positions in life.—JD 2:199, February 25, 1855.

Holy Ghosta-Woodruff, WilfordTP6THE HOLY GHOST DOES NOT DECEIVE. When a man receives the Holy Ghost he has a testimony that cannot deceive him or anybody else. In the days of Moses and Pharaoh the magicians could work as many miracles as Moses, almost; and you may go into our theater here, or any other, and you may see and hear that which will deceive your eyes and ears, and all the senses you have; but get the Holy Ghost and you have a testimony that cannot deceive you. It never deceived any man, and it never will.—JD 16:38, April 7, 1873.

Holy Ghost, Gift ofHoly Ghosta-Woodruff, WilfordTP6DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GIFTS OF THE HOLY GHOST AND THE HOLY GHOST ITSELF. It is a very common saying with us, as elders, in our remarks concerning the gifts of the gospel, to speak of confirming the gifts of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. There is no difference with regard to our faith, opinions or views, as a Church, pertaining to this principle; it is only in the manner in which we use our language. There is a difference between the gifts of the Holy Ghost and the Holy Ghost itself. As Brother Penrose said this morning, we repent of our sins, are baptized for the remission of them, and we receive the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost; but the elders, when speaking on this principle, instead of saying so, not infrequently say—"for the reception of the gifts of the Holy Ghost." Now we have no right, power nor authority to seal the gifts of the Holy Ghost upon anybody, they are the property of the Holy Ghost itself. To explain this I will say, for instance, President Young may go and preach in every ward in this city; yet it is President Young in each ward. When in the Fourteenth Ward he may give a man an apple; in the Thirteenth Ward he may give another person a loaf of bread; in the Tenth Ward he may give a man a dollar in money; in the First Ward he may give a man a horse and carriage. Now they are all different gifts, but he is one and the same man who bestows them. I merely bring up this figure by way of illustration.

Holy Ghost, Gift ofHoly Ghosta-Woodruff, WilfordTP7We lay hands upon the heads of those who embrace the gospel and we say unto them, "In the name of the lord Jesus Christ receive ye the Holy Ghost." We seal this blessing upon the heads of the children of men, just as Jesus and his apostles and the servants of God have done in every age when preaching the gospel of Christ. But the gifts of the Holy Ghost are his property to bestow as he sees fit. To one is given the spirit of prophecy, to another a tongue, to another the interpretation of tongues, and to another the gift of healing. All these gifts are by the same Spirit, but all are the gifts of the Holy Ghost, to bestow as he sees fit, as the messenger of the Father and the Son to the children of men.

Holy Ghost, Gift ofHoly Ghosta-Woodruff, WilfordTP7The Holy Ghost, as was justly presented this morning, is different from the common Spirit of God, which we are told lighteth every man that cometh into the world. The Holy Ghost is only given to men through their obedience to the gospel of Christ; and every man who receives that Spirit has a comforter within-a leader to dictate and guide him. This Spirit reveals, day by day, to every man who has faith, those things which are for his benefit. As Job says, "There is a spirit in man and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." It is this inspiration of God to his children in every age of the world that is one of the necessary gifts to sustain man and enable him to walk by faith, and to go forth and obey all the dictations and commandments and revelations which God has given to His children to guide and direct them in life.—JD 13:156-157, December 12, 1869.

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP8THE FREE AGENCY OF MAN

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP8THE LORD'S MOTIVE. The Lord Almighty never created a world like this and peopled it for six thousand years, as He has done, without having some motive in view. That motive was, that we might come here and exercise our agency. The probation we are called upon to pass through is intended to elevate us so that we can dwell in the presence of God our Father. And that eternal variety of character which existed in the heavens among the spirits—from God upon his throne down to Lucifer the son of the morning—exists here upon the earth. That variety will remain upon the earth in the creations of God, and for what I know, throughout the endless ages of eternity. Men will occupy different glories and positions according to their lives—according to the law they keep the flesh.—JD 25:9, January 6, 1884.

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP8FREE AGENCY MEANS RESPONSIBILITY. With regard to the rights of the human family, I wish to say that God has given unto all of his children of this dispensation, as he gave unto all of his children of previous dispensations, individual agency. This agency has always been the heritage of man under the rule and government of God. He possessed it in the heaven of heavens before the world was, and the Lord maintained and defended it there against the aggression of Lucifer and those that took sides with him, to the overthrow of Lucifer and one-third part of the heavenly hosts. By virtue of this agency you and I and all mankind are made responsible beings, responsible for the course we pursue, the lives we live, the deeds we do in the body.—MS 51:642 (1889).

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP9MAN'S FREE AGENCY: FUNDAMENTAL FEATURE OF THE DIVINE ECONOMY. There is one thing I wish to say to the congregation, and I would say the same to the whole world if I had the power-it is this: I have heard the Prophet Joseph Smith say on several occasions when speaking on the agency of man, and the liberty and rights of men, that if he were emperor of the earth, having control of the whole human family, he would give every man, woman and child the right to worship God according to the dictates of their own conscience, leaving them to be responsible alone to their Creator for their individual acts. These are my sentiments, and they are the sentiments of this people today, and have been from the beginning of the organization of this Church and I trust will be to the end of time. And this we believe to be a principle emanating from heaven; and while we accord this right to our fellow men, and while we declare it to be a heaven-born right guaranteed unto all American citizens through the Constitution of our country, we claim the exercise of the same right ourselves; and we claim it by the laws of God to man. And whenever any people rise up and attempt to make war upon the rights of men because of their religion, they go beyond their right, they transcend their own powers, whether their power be derived-either from God or man.

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP9THE MIND MUST BE FREE. You may wish to know why I make these remarks. I will tell you. Because God himself grants this right to every human being upon the earth irrespective of race or color; it is part of the divine economy not to force any man to heaven, not to coerce the mind, but to leave it free to act for itself. He lays before his creature man the everlasting gospel, the principles of life and salvation, and then leaves him to choose for himself or to reject for himself, with the definite understanding that he becomes responsible to him for the results of his acts.

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP10It is upon this principle that we as Latter-day Saints assert our rights and endeavor to enjoy our privileges,—JD 23:76, March 26, 1883

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP10FREE AGENCY AND THE LAW. The God of heaven, who created this earth and placed his children upon it, gave unto them a law whereby they might be exalted and saved in a kingdom of glory. For there is a law given unto all kingdoms, and all things are governed by law throughout the whole universe, Whatever law anyone keeps, he is preserved by that law, and he receives whatever reward that law guarantee unto him. It is the will of God that all his children should obey the highest law, that they may receive the highest glory that is ordained for all immortal beings. But God has given all his children an agency, to choose what law they will keep.—MS 48:801, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP10CAUSE AND EFFECT. No man or woman in the kingdom of God that does wrong can escape sorrow, It is so in the world; the Lord rewards all men according as their works have been in the body. One reason why the Lord will pour out His judgments upon the nations is the blasphemous spirit of wickedness and corruption that reigns among men.—JD 2:200, February 25, 1855.

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP10MAN'S UNITY WITH GOD. We are in a great school; and it is a profitable one, in which we are receiving very important lessons from day to day. We are taught to cultivate our minds, to control our thoughts to thoroughly bring our whole being into subjection to the spirit and law of God, that we may learn to be one and act as the heart of one man, that we may carry out the purposes of God upon the earth.—JD 6:115, December 6, 1857.

1946 Bookcraft
