Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

12Chapter 2

12The Gospel: Its Nature and Effects

12THE GREAT PURPOSE

12The Lord has been working, and this people have been working, and the object of their labor has been and is to establish the gospel of Jesus Christ and to spread truth and righteousness.—JD 16:36, April 7, 1873.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP12RESTORATION

12The same organization and gospel that Christ died for, and the apostles spilled their blood to vindicate, is again established in this generation. How did it come? By the ministering of an holy angel from God, out of heaven, who conversed with man, and revealed unto him the darkness that enveloped the world, and unfolded unto him the gross darkness that surrounded the nations, those scenes that should take place in this generation, and would follow each other in quick succession, even unto the coming of the Messiah.—JD 2: 196, February 25, 1855.

Angelsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP12WHY AN ANGEL. Why does it require an angel to bring the gospel from heaven in these last days, when the earth is deluged with gospel, with religion, with different systems and plans of salvation? Because none of them are according to the order or organization that the human family requires if they would be controlled by him. If there had been a true organization of the kingdom of God upon the earth in these last days, there would have been no need of an angel to visit the earth to teach men the first principles of the gospel of Christ, and administer its ordinances to them.

Angelsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP13When the apostles of old dwelt upon the earth, the angel that appeared to Saul of Tarsus, and the angel that appeared to Cornelius, did not administer the gospel to them, but instructed them to apply to those men whom Christ had ordained to that authority, and who held the keys, the gifts and graces, and priesthood of the kingdom of God. So it would have been in the last days, if there had been authority, and the true priesthood of God on the earth; there would, in that case, have been no necessity for angel to come with the gospel.

Angelsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP13Angels are sent as ministering spirits to minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation.—JD 2: 195, February 25, 1855.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP13THE CASE FOR MORMONISM. Do we teach anything that is contrary to the gospel as taught in the days of the apostles? We do not. "But," says one, "how do you come by this gospel?" We came by it through the administration of an angel from God. John the Revelator, in speaking of the last days—the opening of the seals—the blowing of the trumpet—and all that should transpire before the second coming of the Son of Man—said he saw (among other things) "another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come."

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP13When the angel of God delivered this message to Joseph Smith he told him the heavens were full of judgments; that the Lord Almighty had set his hand to establish the kingdom that Daniel saw and prophesied about as recorded in the second chapter of Daniel; and that the gospel had to be preached to all nations under heaven as a witness to them before the end should come, and that, too, in fulfilment of the revelation of God, as given here in the Old and New Testaments. Joseph Smith never attempted to organize this Church until he received a commandment so to do from God. He never attempted to baptize a man until he received the Aaronic priesthood under the hands of John the Baptist (who was beheaded for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus). He never attempted to officiate in any of the ordinances of the gospel until he received the apostleship under the hands of Peter, James, and John. These men appeared to him. They laid their hands upon his head and sealed the apostleship upon him with all the power thereof. And these angels told Joseph Smith to go forth himself and to call upon other men to go forth unto the world and preach the gospel as taught by Jesus Christ and the apostles, and the Lord would back up their testimony; that when they laid hands upon those who had been baptized for the remission of sins, and who had received their testimony, they should receive the Holy Ghost. This was the proclamation to Joseph Smith.—JD 24:241, July 20, 1883.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP14GOSPEL LOGIC. Before I ever heard of "Mormonism," when reading the scriptures, I often wondered why it was that we had no prophets, no apostles, no gifts of graces, no healings by the power of God, no visions, no angels, no revelations, no voice of God. I often wondered why these things were not continued among the children of men, why they were not enjoyed by the different churches and denominations of the day, and in my conversation with theologians and divines, I often referred to these things, but they, all told me that such supernatural manifestations were unnecessary in our day and age of the world, that such power was only necessary in a day of darkness, among an ignorant generation of people; they needed prophets to lead them; but we who live in the blaze of gospel light need no such thing; we need no revelation, only that which is in the Bible; we need no visitation of angels now, those things were given to establish the doctrine of Christ, and when it was once established they were no longer needed.

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP15This logic always appeared strange to me. I said then, and I say now, may the Lord give me such periods of darkness as were enjoyed by the apostles and saints of old, in preference to the gospel blaze of modern Christianity. The ancient doctrine and power will unlock the mysteries of heaven and pour forth that gospel light, knowledge, and truth, of which the heavens are full, and which has been poured out in every generation when prophets appeared among the children of men. But the gospel of modern Christendom shuts up the Lord, and stops all communications with Him. I want nothing to do with such a gospel, I would rather prefer the gospel of the dark ages, so called.

Apostasy of Early Christian ChurchGospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP15I do not wish it to be understood that we are now living in the dark age of the world, but for the last fourteen hundred years, the world has been developed in darkness, in which wickedness has ruled, and the powers of darkness have prevailed among the children of men, and the nations have been bound down by false traditions, and incorrect principles, but the day has now dawned, the dark clouds have now broken up and soon will pass away, and the sun of righteousness will arise in its glory, and show forth the light of heaven; and for that I am thankful, and rejoice, and so do thousands and tens of thousands in this dispensation, who have been touched with the light of the glorious gospel of Jesus Christ which has been revealed in our day, by the administering of holy angels, in all its fulness, beauty, power, and glory. This gospel has caused prophets, elders, and Saints to rejoice. It has nerved up their spirits with fortitude and strength, and borne them against every opposing influence. This has been the case in every dispensation when this light and power have been enjoyed by the children of men.—JD 2:195-6, February 25, 1855.

Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP16THE LORD'S MESSAGE DESPISED. The Lord has never sent a message to the inhabitants of the earth but what it has been despised, in a great measure, by most of them. As it was in the days of Noah and Lot, so shall it be in the days of the coming of the Son of Man.—JD 13-161, December 12, 1869.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP16ONE GOSPEL

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP16ONE GOSPEL: THE GOSPEL OF TRUTH. Anyone acquainted with the scriptures can clearly understand that there is but one true gospel. There never was but one gospel. Whenever that gospel has been upon the earth it has been the same in every dispensation. The ordinances of the gospel have never been changed from the days of Adam to the present time, and never will be to the end of time. While there were many sects and parties in existence in the early times, Jesus gave his disciples to understand that there was but one gospel. He told them what it was. He declared unto them its ordinances. He commissioned them to preach the gospel to every creature.—JD 24:239-240, July 20, 1883.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP16ADAM RECEIVED THE GOSPEL. Adam, our first great progenitor and father, after the fall, received this gospel, and he received the holy priesthood in all its power, and its keys and ordinances. He sealed these blessings upon his son Seth, Enos, Jared, Cainan, Mahaleel, Enoch, and Methusaleh. All these men received this high and holy priesthood. They all professed to give revelation. They all had inspiration and left their record on the earth; and not one of them but what saw and prophesied about the great Zion of God in the latter days. And when we say this of them we say it of every apostle and prophet who ever lived upon the earth.—JD 16:263-264, October 8, 1873.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP17It is, in fact, the same gospel that has been taught to man in every age and dispensation, as there is but one gospel, and that gospel is adapted to the wants and conditions of all men. It is the gospel of truth, and truth alone can make us free, free from sin and from the power of the adversary. And this is the gospel which we have received and which we take the liberty of preaching to our fellow men.—JD 23:77, March 26, 1882.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP17TRUTH AND THE DESTINIES OF MANKIND. The principles to which I allude—the principles of the gospel—are worthy the attention and comprehension of at least the Latter-day Saints, and it would be well for the Christian world to take them into consideration also; for if truth is going to prevail in the earth it certainly will involve the destiny of this whole generation, Jew and Gentile, high and low, rich and poor, Zion and Babylon. It will involve the destiny of the whole world.—JD 25:6, January 6, 1884.

Trutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP17LET US HAVE TRUTH. If any man has a truth that we have not, we say, "Let us have it." I am willing to exchange all the errors and false notions I have for one truth, and should consider that I had made a good bargain. We are not afraid of light and truth. Our religion embraces every truth in heaven, earth or hell; it embraces all truth, the whole gospel and plan of salvation, and the fulfilment of the whole volume of revelation that God has ever given.—JD 18:117, September 12, 1875.

Trutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP17We are after light and truth. We are not afraid of the doctrines of the inhabitants of the earth being presented before us or our children. We have truth, we have been called to present it to the world. We have done it. If they have truths that we have not we would like to obtain them.—JD 16:39, April 6, 1873.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP18FREEDOM. This gospel makes us free. Was there ever a more free people than the Latter-day Saints are? No, there never was in any age of the world. There is not anything that will give a man joy or consolation, or any blessing temporal or spiritual, but what is within our reach as far as man in a mortal state has a right to receive.—JD 12:276, July 19, 1868.

18WHAT IS THE GOSPEL?

First Principles and Ordinances of the GospelGospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP18BASIC PRINCIPLES. What is the gospel as taught by Jesus himself? The very first principle was faith in the Messiah; this was the first principle ever taught to man. When Adam, after being driven from the garden of Eden, went to Adam-ondi-Ahman to offer sacrifice, the angel of the Lord asked him why he did so. Adam replied that he did not know, but the Lord had commanded him to do it. He was then told that the blood of bulls and goats, of rams and lambs should be spilt upon the altar as a type of the great and last sacrifice which should be offered up for the sins of the world. The first principle, then, ever taught to Father Adam was faith in the Messiah, who was to come in the meridian of time to lay down his life for the redemption of man. The second principle was repentance. And what is repentance? The forsaking of sin. The man who repents, if he be a swearer, swears no more; or a thief, steals no more; he turns away from all former sins and commits them no more. It is not repentance to say, I repent today, and then steal tomorrow; that is the repentance of the world, which is displeasing in the sight of God. Repentance is the second principle.

First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP19BASIC ORDINANCES. I have heard many men say no ordinances are necessary, that belief only in the Lord Jesus Christ is necessary to be saved. I have not learned that myself from any revelation of God to man, either ancient or modern. But on the contrary, faith in Christ, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins were taught by patriarchs and prophets and by Jesus Christ and His apostles. Baptism for the remission of sins is an ordinance of the gospel. Says one, baptism is not essential to salvation. Jesus not only taught it, but rendered obedience himself to that requirement, not that he was baptized for the remission of sins—but, as he said, "to fulfil all righteousness," thus in this, as in all other respects giving the example for all who follow. When these principles of the gospel are complied with a man is then a fit subject to receive the Holy Ghost; and this holy gift is bestowed today as it was anciently, by the laying on of hands by men possessing the authority to administer in the ordinances of the gospel. These are the first principles of the gospel which we Latter-day Saints believe in and teach to our fellow men.—JD 23:127, May 14, 1882.

First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP19THE BASIC PRINCIPLES THAT DO NOT CHANGE. One of the peculiar features in the faith of the Latter-day Saints is that we believe there is but one gospel . . . and that it consists of the simple principles taught by the Savior and contained in the New Testament, which principles never deviate one from another. The first was faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; the second was baptism in water by immersion for the remission of sins, and then the laying on of hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost; and this was the kind of doctrine taught by Christ and his apostles, and this was the doctrine that Joseph Smith preached.—JD 19:225, September 16, 1877.

First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP19Without complying with these requirements, you nor I can never go where God and Christ dwell, worlds without end, for these things have been made known to us by ancient and modern prophets.—JD 19:362, June 30, 1878.

First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP20IMPORTANCE OF THE FIRST PRINCIPLES. The revelations of Jesus Christ teach us that the Savior was born in the flesh; and the Father said that he did not give him a fulness at first, but continued from grace to grace until he had received a fulness, and was called the Son of God because he did not receive a fulness at first. We in like manner should seek with all our souls to grow in grace, light, and truth, that in due time we may receive a fulness. The Lord has a great many principles in store for us; and the greatest principles which he has for us are the most simple and plain. The first principles of the gospel which lead us unto eternal life are the simplest, and yet none are more glorious or important to us. Men may labor to make a great display of talent, learning, and knowledge, either in printing or preaching. They may try to preach the mysteries and to present something strange, great, and wonderful, and they may labor for this with all their might, in the spirit and strength of man without the aid of the Holy Spirit of God, and yet the people are not edified, and their preaching will not give much satisfaction. It is the plainest and the most simple things that edify us the most, if taught by the Spirit of God; and there is nothing more important or beneficial unto us.—JD 5:50, March 22, 1857.

First Principles and Ordinances of the Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP20BAPTISM ONLY THE BEGINNING. Being baptized into this Church is only like learning the alphabet of our mother tongue—it is the very first step. But having received the first principles of the gospel of Christ, let us go on to perfection.—JD 12:280-281, July 19, 1868.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP20NO NONESSENTIALS IN THE GOSPEL. The religious world talk about nonessentials. There are no such things existing in the gospel of the Lord Jesus. He requires us to obey the same laws that he himself obeyed, and which he taught in his day. Why did he go to Jordan to be baptized of John? To fulfill all righteousness. It was a righteous law, it belonged to him, and his example is in force to all the world. No man can enter into the kingdom of God except he is born of the water and of the Spirit. Men may be judged and their bodies lie in the grave until the last resurrection, to come forth and receive of a celestial glory. But no man will receive of the celestial glory except it be through the ordinances of the House of God.—JD 19:361, June 30, 1878.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP21THE LAW OF SALVATION

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP21The gospel of Jesus Christ is the law of salvation. No man can be saved without it. The gospel is the power of God unto salvation to everyone that believeth to Jew or Greek, Catholic, Methodist, Baptist, or any other sect or party on the face of the earth.—JD 258, January 6, 1884.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP21SALVATION COMES THROUGH GOSPEL ORDINANCES. No man ever did or ever will obtain salvation only through the ordinances of the gospel and through the name of Jesus. There can be no change in the gospel; all men that are saved from Adam to infinitum are saved by the one system of salvation. The Lord may give many laws and many commandments to suit the varied circumstances and conditions of his children throughout the world, such as giving a law of carnal commandment to Israel, but the laws and principles of the gospel do not change.—JD 10:217, June 12, 1863.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP21SAVING PRINCIPLES. Virtuous and godly principles the principles of the gospel will, in the end, come off triumphant; and they will sustain and preserve any people who practice them, whether they are popular or not in the estimation of the world. All who embrace the principles of the gospel of Christ will be saved by them. He that abides a law will be preserved by it. Any man who abides the law of the gospel will be saved and receive exaltation and glory by it.—JD 14:5, January 1, 1871.

Salvation, Plan ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP22SALVATION COMES THROUGH ADHERENCE TO THE GOSPEL. Another subject I wish to say a few words upon: "In Christ all are made alive." Since the day that sin entered into the world men have been held accountable for their own acts, and it has been known upon this earth from the day, at least, that Cain slew his brother Abel. And sin has presented itself in different grades; there are murder, blasphemy, lying, stealing, whoredom, and abominations of many different forms, which have followed man from generation to generation. For there was a power that dwelt upon the earth in the form of thousands and millions of fallen spirits, one third of the hosts of heaven, which had been cast out of heaven with the devil in the great rebellion, who remain in that condition and who do not possess tabernacles, and they make war upon the Saints of God, wherever or whenever they are found upon the earth, and upon all men; they seek to destroy the whole human family, and have done so from the beginning until the present day, and they have not ceased their labors, nor do they intend to while Satan remains unbound. All the children of men who arrive at the years of accountability are guilty of sin, all being inclined to do evil as the sparks are to fly upwards.

Salvation, Plan ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP22"What shall we do to be saved" was the cry of the people who heard the preaching of Peter on the day of Pentecost, and the same may be said to be applicable to all men in every generation. The answer would be, obey the law of the gospel. This is the safe means given for the salvation of the human family.—JD 23:126, 127, May 14, 1882.

Salvation, Plan ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP23All men are saved by and through the blood of Jesus Christ, through obedience to the gospel.—JD 23:130, May 14, 1882.

Salvation, Plan ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP23HOW TO OBTAIN FULL SALVATION. If I ever obtain a full salvation it will be by my keeping the laws of God.—JD 19:362, June 30, 1878.

False Doctrinea-Woodruff, WilfordTP23NO SALVATION IN FALSE DOCTRINE. Now, my friends, it does not pay any man to preach false doctrine or to practice false principles, because there is no salvation in it. It is for salvation that we labor.—MS 56:659, October 15, 1894.

Trutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP23WE MUST LOVE TRUTH. We would not be worthy of salvation, we would not be worthy of eternal lives in the kingdom of our God, if anything could turn us away from the truth or from the love of it.—JD 22:233, June 26, 1881.

Faithfulnessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP23LET US BE FAITHFUL. Let us be faithful and adorn ourselves with the graces of the gospel. There is nothing gained by doing wrong. Lying, stealing, blaspheming, drunkenness, backbiting, and denying the Lord Jesus Christ bring sorrow and remorse; they debase man who is organized in the image of God; but to do right, to obey the commandments of God, to be charitable and kind, brings joy and peace and the Holy Ghost, and an eventual exaltation in our Father's kingdom.—JD 8:267, April 22, 1860.

Salvationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP23THE UPPERMOST THING. Salvation should be the uppermost thing with us, and you will find if ever we seek to do something else besides carrying out the dictates of the Holy Spirit, we will get into the fog and into darkness and trouble, and we shall be ignorant of the way we are pursuing.—JD 4:229, February 22, 1857.

Teaching, Gospela-Woodruff, WilfordTP23WHAT HAPPENS TO ALL OF IT? We have a great variety of teaching and preaching, and I have sometimes thought that we have more preaching and teaching than any other people on the earth. I expect it is all right. I think we need it The world needs teaching, we ourselves need teaching; but I have thought that the Latter-day Saints have had more of the gospel of Christ proclaimed to them than any other generation that ever lived.—JD 22:331, October 8, 1881.

Obediencea-Woodruff, WilfordTP24SALVATION MEANS PERFORMANCE. I realize that the salvation of this people does not depend upon the great amount of teaching, instruction, or revelation that is given unto them, but their salvation depends more upon their obeying the commandments of God which are given unto them, their becoming a doer of the word, and following the counsel of those who are set to lead them.—JD 4:190, January 25, 1857.

Salvation, Plan ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP24THE GOSPEL IS FOR THE SALVATION OF THE HUMAN FAMILY. I will say as Paul did, "Woe be unto me if I preach not the gospel." I will say the same for the apostles, the high priests, the seventies, and the elders, so far as they are called to declare the words of life and salvation to this generation; the judgments of God will rest upon us if we do not do it. You may ask why. I answer, because a dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ has never been given to man in ancient days or in this age, for any other purpose than for the salvation of the human family.—JD 22:204, January 8, 1881.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP24ETERNITY OF THE GOSPEL. If you were to meet with father Adam, with Seth, Moses, Aaron, Christ, or the apostles, they would all teach the same principles that we have been taught; they would not vary one particle. This gospel is everlasting in its nature and unchangeable in its character. It might be urged that the house of Israel had the law of carnal commandments; but that law only acted as a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ because they would not receive a celestial law. They had the priesthood of Aaron for a series of years amongst them; but the old apostles, prophets, and Saints were saved by the gospel, and not by the law of carnal commandments.—JD 8:265, April 22, 1860.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP25THE GOSPEL IS INDESTRUCTIBLE. Now, here is one principle that I wish to impress upon the minds of every Saint of God who dwells upon the earth—and I want our reporters to write it down—I want to impress it upon the rulers of our nation and upon all the inhabitants of this nation and every other nation, namely, that the love of God, faith, hope, and charity, and the gospel of Jesus Christ, with all the ordinances thereof, with the Holy Priesthood, which has power both in heaven and on the earth, and the principles which have been revealed for the salvation and exaltation of the children of men are principles you cannot annihilate. They are principles that no combination of men can destroy. They are principles that can never die. Prisons cannot confine them; fire cannot burn them; the sea cannot drown them; no storm can wreck them; no gulf can swallow them up; no grave can entomb them, because they are eternal and will endure forever. They are beyond the reach of men to handle or to destroy. You may put men in prison and abuse them; you may burn men at the stake; you may drive men from their homes who advocate these principles; but it is not in the power of the whole world put together to destroy those principles, they are as firm and independent, as far as the agency of man is concerned, as the pillars of heaven or the throne of God. I want the inhabitants of the earth to hear these things and remember them. The inhabitants of the earth have tried for generations to destroy these principles. Yet it matters not what may take place on the earth. Republics may be destroyed, kingdoms overthrown, empires broken up, thrones cast down, the sun may be turned to darkness, the moon to blood, the stars may fall from heaven, and heaven and earth itself may pass away, but not one jot or tittle of these principles will ever be destroyed. I would to God the world could understand this.—JD 22:342-343, October 23, 1881.

Gospel of Jesus Christa-Woodruff, WilfordTP26ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF GOSPEL TRUTH. When Jesus Christ came to the Jews he brought the everlasting gospel. He was one of the tribe of Judah himself. He came to his own father's house; he offered them life and salvation; yet he was the most unpopular man in all Judah. The high priests, the Sadducees, the sectarians of the day, were the strongest enemies he had on earth. No matter what he did, it was imputed to an evil source. When he cast out devils it was imputed to the power of Beelzebub, the prince of devils. When he opened the eyes of the blind they said: "Give God the praise: we know that this man is a sinner." This unpopularity followed the Lord Jesus Christ to the cross where he gave up the ghost. Now, the inhabitants of Judah had an idea that if they could only put to death the Messiah, that that would end his mission and work on the earth. Vain hope of that generation as well as this! When they led Jesus to the cross, the very moment that spirit departed from that sorrowful tabernacle, it held the keys of the kingdom of God in all of its strength and power and glory the same as he had done while in the body. And while the body lay in the tomb, Jesus of Nazareth went and preached to the spirits in prison, and when his mission was ended there, his spirit returned again to his tabernacle. Did the Jews kill the principles he taught? No. He burst the bonds of death, he conquered the tomb, and came forth with an immortal body filled with glory and eternal life, holding all the powers and keys he held while in the flesh. Having appeared to some of the holy women and the apostles, he then went and administered to the Nephites upon this continent, and from here he went to the ten tribes of Israel, and delivered to them the gospel, and when they return they will bring the history of the dealings of Jesus of Nazareth with them, while in his immortal body. The same unpopularity followed the twelve apostles. Some of them were sawn asunder, others were beheaded, crucified, etc. But did the Jews destroy the principles they taught? Did they destroy the keys of the kingdom of God? No, verily no. They had no power over these things any more than they had power over the throne of God, or God Himself.—JD 22:343, October 23, 1881.

1946 Bookcraft
