Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

28Chapter 3

28The Mission of Joseph Smith

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP28JOSEPH SMITH AND THIS DISPENSATION

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP28APPOINTED TO LAY THE FOUNDATION. The Lord raised up Joseph Smith specially to do the work that he performed. He was ordained and appointed before he was born to come upon the stage of action in this age of God's mercy to man, through the loins of ancient Joseph, who was a descendant of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to lay the foundation of this great and glorious dispensation—a dispensation that will be marked and distinguished in the annals of human history for its grand and mighty, and also its serious and awful events.—JD 24:51, January 27, 1883.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP28WAS JOSEPH SMITH A DECEIVER? The question that arises in the minds of persons who pass through our country and see the labors of this people is, are we the dupes of impostors? Was Joseph Smith a deceiver? There is a way to test this, and we have tested it to our satisfaction. The great promise made to us when we first heard the preaching of the elders of this church was, that if we obeyed certain requirements of the gospel, we should receive the Holy Ghost; and this same promise is extended to the world of mankind by our elders who are still proclaiming these glad tidings of great joy. If that promise had fallen, we would not have been here today; and Utah would doubtless be as barren as it was when we found it in 1847. There is no question in our mind, as to the divinity of the work in which we are engaged. The Christian world questions it. This, of course, we cannot help.—JD 23:79-80, March 26, 1882.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP29"WE BELIEVE THIS WITH EVERY SENTIMENT OF OUR HEARTS." The Lord has sent forth angels out of heaven. He has delivered the fulness of the gospel to Joseph Smith. He was raised up as a prophet of God, by the power of God, to lay the foundation of this Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints on the earth, and to lay the foundation of that kingdom which the prophet Daniel and the other prophets spoke of, and to build up that Zion which Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel said should be built up in the latter days. We believe this with every sentiment of our hearts.—JD 22:342, October 23, 1881.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP29THE PROPHET'S LIFE AND EXPERIENCES

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP29FIRST MEETING WITH JOSEPH SMITH. Before I saw Joseph I said I did not care how old he was, or how young he was; I did not care how he looked—whether his hair was long or short; the man that advanced that revelation was a prophet of God. I knew it for myself. I first met Joseph Smith in the streets of Kirtland. He had on an old hat, and a pistol in his hand. Said he, "Brother Woodruff, I've been out shooting at a mark, and I wanted to see if I could hit anything." And, said he, "Have you any objection to it?"

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP29"Not at all," said I. "There is no law against a man shooting at a mark, that I know of."

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP29He invited me to his house. He had a wolf skin, which he wanted me to help him to tan; he wanted it to sit on while driving his wagon team. Now, many might have said, "You are a pretty prophet; shooting a pistol and tanning a wolf skin." Well, we tanned it, and used it while making a journey of a thousand miles. This was my first acquaintance with the Prophet Joseph. And from that day until the present, with all the apostasies that we have had, and with all the difficulties and afflictions we have been called to pass through, I never saw a moment when I had any doubt with regard to this work. I have had no trial about this. While the people were apostatizing on the right hand and on the left, and while apostles were urging me to turn against the prophet Joseph, it was no temptation to me to doubt this work or to doubt that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.—MS 53:627-628. (1891).

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP30ON FIRST HEARING JOSEPH SMITH PREACH. The first time I ever saw Joseph Smith was in April, 1834. I met him in the streets of Kirtland. He invited me to his house. I stopped with him while preparing to go up to Zion in Zion's camp. On Sunday he called a priesthood meeting. They all gathered in a little cabin. There I first heard Joseph Smith speak publicly; also Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Parley and Orson Pratt and William E. McLellin. The Prophet called upon the elders to bear testimony of the gospel of Christ and they arose one after another and bore a short testimony. Then Brother Joseph arose and said: "Brethren, I am very much edified and interested in listening to your testimony. But I want to tell you that you know no more concerning the result of this work and what lies before you as the elders of Israel, and before this people, than a parcel of little children."

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP30I expect they were all a little startled by it. He told them this work would fill the whole earth, and that all nations would have to hear the proclamation of the gospel. He further said: "This work will fill the Rocky Mountains with tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints, and there will be joined with them the Lamanites who dwell in those mountains who will receive the gospel of Christ at the mouth of elders of Israel, and they will be united with the Church and the kingdom of God, and bring forth much good."

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP31"I little thought, when I listened to those words, that I should ever live to see the fulfilment of these words of the Prophet.

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP31I little thought that I should ever visit the Rocky Mountains, or ever see the Lamanites of whom he then was speaking.—MS 54:605 (1892).

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP31PERSONAL TESTIMONY CONCERNING JOSEPH SMITH. I traveled thousands of miles with Joseph Smith. I knew his spirit. Many of the revelations given through him has been fulfilled. I myself wrote the revelation that was given through him concerning the war that would take place in this country between the north and south. That revelation was published to the world for twenty years before the war. It broke out just as predicted, and I refer to it because it is one of the revelations that is fulfilled.—JD 24:242, July 20, 1883.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP31A LIFE OF STRUGGLE. When Joseph presented to the Christian world the principles that God had communicated to him, he at once aroused their prejudices; he had to struggle against traditions which they had inherited from their fathers who knew not God nor his ways, traditions which had come down to them through the ages, which were antagonistic to the saving truths of heaven. And hence his life was one continual struggle, meeting with opposition on every hand, especially from the priests of the day; but he lived through it and rejoiced greatly in his labors until he finished his testimony in the flesh, after laboring some fourteen years to that end. He had to wade through deep waters; but he never was discouraged or disheartened notwithstanding he had to contend against foes without and foes within; he never lost sight of the majesty of his calling, nor the divinity of this work; but spake and acted in the midst of the people under all circumstances the man that he was-the prophet of God, the seer and revelator of the last dispensation. He left us under painful circumstances, sealing his testimony with his blood; but his works follow him. The gospel of the kingdom which he preached flourished under the wise administration of God's servants who followed him.—JD 24:52, January 27, 1883.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP32Joseph Smith had to walk in deep water, he had to row uphill or upstream all the days of his life in order to try and plant the gospel in the midst of the sons of men. A few here and there heard and were disposed to receive that gospel, and the Spirit of God bore record unto them of its truth, and they went before the Lord and asked him if it was true, and the Lord revealed it unto them and they embraced it. From that day until the present this message has gone to the world. I have preached it to millions of my fellow men, so has President Young, and I may say the same of hundreds of the elders of this Church; and I do not believe that ever a man, with his ears open, stopped a moment to listen to the testimony of the servants of God about the truth of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith being a prophet of God, and the restoration of the fulness of the gospel, but what a measure of the Spirit of God has backed up that testimony to him. When men have rejected these testimonies they have done so against light and truth, and herein is where condemnation rests upon this generation—Light has come into the world and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.—JD 16:37, April 7, 1873.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP32HIS TRIALS AND TROUBLES. When I look at the history of Joseph Smith, I sometimes think that he came as near following the footsteps of the Savior—(although no more so than His disciples)—as anyone possibly could. Joseph Smith was called to lay down his life; he sealed his testimony with his blood, and passed through some serious trials and afflictions. In section 122 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants—the word of the Lord given to the Prophet while in Liberty jail—the Lord showed him his condition and position. He refers there to the trials and troubles he was called to pass through, and then compares them with what he himself (the Savior) had to endure. He says: "And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers; and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape, open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my Son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good. The Son of man hath descended below them all; art thou greater than he? Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee, for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you for ever and ever." The Lord showed him in this revelation that these afflictions were necessary.—JD 23:327-328, December 10, 1882.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP33THE LORD PROVED JOSEPH. The Lord told Joseph that he would prove him, whether he would abide in his covenant or not, even unto death. He did prove him; and, although he had the whole world to contend against, and the treachery of false friends to withstand, although his whole life was a scene of trouble and anxiety and care, yet, in all his afflictions, his imprisonments, the mobbings and ill-treatment he passed through, he was ever true to his God, and true to his friends.—JD 22:233, June 26, 1881.

PrayerJoseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP33JOSEPH SMITH AND THE POWER OF PRAYER. I have heard the prophet Joseph pray when the power of God rested upon him, and all who heard him felt it; and I have seen his prayers answered in a marvelous manner almost immediately. Governor Reynolds on one occasion employed men to try and kidnap Joseph, and they almost accomplished their designs, but Joseph and some Gentile friends, as well as his brethren, through whom he was rescued, and was taken to Nauvoo and released under a writ of habeas corpus. But the governor continued to harass him with writs, and was determined to destroy Joseph. Joseph and the Twelve went before God in prayer, Joseph kneeling before the Lord, offered up prayer, and asked God to deliver him from the power of that man. Among other things he told the Lord that he was innocent before Him, and that his heart was heavy under the persecutions he endured. In about forty-eight hours from that time word reached Joseph that Reynolds had blown his brains out. Before perpetrating the deed he left a note on his desk stating, that as his services were not appreciated by the people of the state, he took that course to end his days.—JD 24:55, January 27, 1883.

Prayera-Woodruff, WilfordTP34OTHER INSTANCES. There is another instance that occurs to my mind. A certain man took a stand against Joseph, and endeavored to bring persecution on him. Joseph went to his God and laid the matter before Him, asking to be delivered out of the hands and power of that wicked man. Joseph was a prophet, a seer, a revelator. He was acquainted with God; he knew the voice of the Spirit when it spoke to him. After offering up his prayer, the whispering of the still small voice came to him saying, "Wait with patience." The next day that man was taken sick with cholera, and died in a few hours.

Prayera-Woodruff, WilfordTP34See how quickly the Lord answered his prayer offered up while a prisoner in Liberty jail. At that time, Presidents Young and Taylor, and several of the twelve were on their way through Clay County to lay the cornerstones of the temple, in fulfilment of the revelation given in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 118. Joseph had no sooner called upon God than he was liberated; and his prayer answered to the very letter. The voice of the Spirit again spoke to him, speaking peace to his soul, and telling him that his troubles should be of short duration. It was but a few days when he had the pleasure of shaking hands with his brethren, and enjoying the society of his family and friends.—JD 24:55-6, January 27, 1883.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP35JOSEPH'S LAST DAYS. Joseph Smith was what he professed to be, a prophet of God, a seer and revelator. He laid the foundation of this church and kingdom, and lived long enough to deliver the keys of the kingdom to the elders of Israel, unto the twelve apostles. He spent the last winter of his life, some three or four months, with the quorum of the twelve, teaching them. It was not merely a few hours ministering to them the ordinances of the gospel; but he spent day after day, week after week and month after month, teaching them and a few others the things of the kingdom of God.—JD 13:164, December 12, 1869.

Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smitha-Woodruff, WilfordTP35THE PROPHET'S DEATH. I used to have peculiar feelings about his death and the way in which his life was taken. I felt that if, with the consent and good feelings of the brethren that waited on him after he crossed the river to leave Nauvoo, Joseph could have had his desire, he would have pioneered the way to the Rocky Mountains. But since then I have been fully reconciled to the fact that it was according to the program, that it was required of him, as the head of this dispensation, that he should seal his testimony with his blood, and go hence to the spirit world, holding the keys of this dispensation, to open up the mission that is now being performed by way of preaching the gospel to the "spirits in prison."—JD 24:54, January 27, 1883.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP36THE MAINTENANCE OF TRUTH. Those who have been acquainted with the Prophet Joseph, who laid the foundation of this church and kingdom, who was an instrument in the hand of God in bringing to light the gospel in this last dispensation, know well that every feeling of his soul, every sentiment of his mind, and every act of his life, proved that he was determined to maintain the principle of truth, even to the sacrificing of his life. His soul swelled wide as eternity for the welfare of the human family. He began entirely alone, as far as the influences of the children of men were concerned upon the earth, to endeavor to establish a religion and order of things diverse from anything then existing among men, a religion that was unpopular and contrary to the feelings, and views, and traditions of the whole human family.—JD 2:192, February 25, 1855.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP36Joseph lived to accomplish the work that was required of him, notwithstanding the persistent and determined opposition that he had to contend against.—JD 24:56, January 27, 1883.

Spirits in PrisonJoseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP36When Joseph Smith's body was laid in the grave, his spirit, like unto the Son of God, went into the spirit world with the keys of this dispensation to unlock the prison doors. There were fifty thousand millions [^1] of spirits that never saw the face of a prophet, or heard a gospel sermon in their lives, until Joseph Smith preached to them the message of salvation. Those people in the spirit world have got to have equal rights in the gospel dispensation with those on the earth. That is the reason why Jesus went to preach to the spirits in prison. Joseph Smith will hold the keys of this dispensation throughout the countless ages of eternity, as Peter, James, and John will hold theirs. He (Joseph Smith) will come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, and will rise up in judgment against this generation. He sealed his testimony with his blood. That testimony is in force upon all the world from the hour of his death. These are eternal truths.—JD 22:346, October 23, 1881.

37TEACHINGS OF THE PROPHET

37SUSTAIN THE CHURCH. When we went upon our first foreign mission Joseph said to us, "No matter what may come upon you, round up your shoulders and bear it, and always sustain and defend the interests of the church and kingdom of God."

37When we took our departure his demeanor in parting was something that I had never noticed or experienced before. After crossing the Mississippi River I crawled to the side of a house and lay down upon a side of sole leather, while suffering from the chills and fever. While resting there the Prophet Joseph came along and saw me. He gave me some parting advice in answer to some remarks made, and then told me to get up and go on, and all would be well with me. That is the way I parted with him upon that occasion. From that day to this I have noticed the steady growth and increase of this people.—JD 24:53, January 27, 1883.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP37WHY MEN FALL. We all have some responsibility, more or less, resting upon us, whether as regards going on missions or anything else. I remember Brother Joseph Smith visited myself, Brother Taylor, Brother Brigham Young and several other missionaries, when we were about to take our mission to England. We were sick and afflicted, many of us. At the same time we felt to go. The Prophet blessed us, as also our wives and families; and I was reading a day or two ago his instructions from my journal. He taught us some very important principles, some of which I here name. Brother Taylor, myself, George A. Smith, John E. Page, and others had been called to fill the place of those who had fallen away. Brother Joseph laid before us the cause of those men's turning away from the commandments of God. He hoped we would learn wisdom by what we saw with the eye and heard with the ear, and that we would be able to discern the spirits of other men without being compelled to learn by sad experience. He then remarked that any man, any elder in this Church and kingdoms who pursued a course whereby he would ignore or in other words refuse to obey any known law or commandment or duty—whenever a man did this, neglected any duty God required at his hand in attending meetings, filling missions, or obeying counsel, he laid a foundation to lead him to apostasy and this was the reason those men had fallen.—JD 21:190, July 3, 1880.

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP38CONCERNING THE DESTINY OF THE CHURCH. When we got together [at Zion's Camp] the Prophet called upon the elders of Israel with him to bear testimony of this work. Those that I have named (Oliver Cowdery, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, the two Pratts, Orson Hyde, and others) spoke, and a good many that I have not named bore their testimonies. When they got through the Prophet said:

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP38"Brethren, I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it."

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP38I was rather surprised.

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP38He continued:

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP38"It is only a handful of priesthood you see here tonight, but this church will fill North and South America it will fill the world."

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP39Among other things, he said:

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP39"It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered to the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains."

Joseph Smith, Prophecies ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP39I name these things because I want to bear testimony before God, angels, and men that mine eyes behold the day, and have beheld for the last fifty years of my life, the fulfilment of that prophecy. I never expected to see the Rocky Mountains when I listened to that man's voice, but I have, and do today. I will say here that I shall not live to see it, you may not live to see it; but these thousands of Latter-day Saint children that belong to the Sabbath schools, I believe many of them will stand in the flesh when the Lord Jesus Christ visits the Zion of God here in the mountains of Israel.—CR :57, April, 1898.

Mormon Pioneersa-Woodruff, WilfordTP39JOSEPH UNDERSTOOD THE INTENTION TO MOVE WEST. In the pioneer journey, coming here, we had to come by faith; we knew nothing about this country, but we intended to come to the mountains. Joseph had organized a company to come here, before his death. He had these things before him, and understood them perfectly.—JD 13:160, December 12, 1869.

39THE PROPHET'S KNOWLEDGE. The Prophet Joseph knew what he was doing; in fact, he knew much more than he dared to tell on account of the prejudice, traditions, and unbelief of the people.—JD 24:54, January 27, 1883.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP39THE RESTORATION OF THE GOSPEL TO JOSEPH SMITH

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP39Joseph Smith received the ministration of angels, and he by revelation organized the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and he was taught by those who ministered unto him what to teach to the people, which was the everlasting gospel.—JD 23:127, May 14, 1882.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP40THE ANGEL'S MESSAGE. The angel taught Joseph Smith those principles which are necessary for the salvation of the world; and the Lord gave him commandments, and sealed upon him the priesthood, and gave him power to administer the ordinances of the house of the Lord. He told him the gospel was not among men, and that there was not a true organization of his kingdom in the world, that the people had turned away from his true order, changed the ordinances, and broken the everlasting covenant, and inherited lies and things wherein there was no profit. He told him the time had come to lay the foundation for the establishment of the kingdom of God among men for the last time, preparatory to the winding-up scene. Joseph was strengthened by the spirit and power of God and enabled to listen to the teachings of the angel. He told him he should be made an instrument in the hands of the Lord, if he kept his commandments, in doing a good work upon the earth, that his name should be held in honor by the honest in heart, and in dishonor throughout the nations by the wicked. He told him he should be an instrument in laying the foundation of a work that should gather tens of thousands of children of men, in the generation in which he lived, from every nation under heaven, who should hear the sound of it through his instrumentality. He told him the nations were wrapped in wickedness and abomination, and the judgments [of God were about to come] upon them in their fulness; that the angels were holding the vials of his wrath in readiness; but the decree is, that they shall not be poured out until the nations are warned, that they may be left without an excuse.—JD 2: 196-7, February 25, 1855.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP41JOSEPH SMITH'S RESPONSE. This man to whom the angel appeared obeyed the gospel, received it in meekness and humility and bowed down before the Lord and worshiped Him, and did the best he could in his illiterate state; he was as it were but a mere plowboy. He laid hold of it with all his heart, though he saw he would have to wage war with sin, and wickedness, and abominations, and the oppositions of the people. He began to trust in the Lord; and what was the consequence? Wherever the words of the gospel which the angel revealed to him were preached among the children of men, it had its effect. The church was at length organized with a few humble men. The learned might laugh at them because of their ignorance, but their words were like daggers to their hearts, and like a two-edged sword, piercing and dividing asunder the very thoughts and intents of the hearts of men. The honest in heart began to receive their testimony, and it continued to spread from town to town, from city to city, from state to state, and from nation to nation, until we see the fruits of it here today in this tabernacle of the Lord in the tops of the mountains.—JD 2:197, February 25, 1855.

Joseph Smith, Authority ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP41KEYS RECEIVED BY JOSEPH SMITH. He received powers and keys from under the hands of Moses for gathering the house of Israel in the last days; he received under the hands of Elias the keys of sealing the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers; he received under the hands of Peter, James, and John the apostleship, and everything belonging thereto; he received under the hands of Moroni all the keys and powers required of the stick of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim; he received under the hand of John the Baptist the Aaronic Priesthood, with all its keys and powers, and every other key and power belonging to this dispensation, and I am not ashamed to say that he was a prophet of God, and he laid the foundation of the greatest work and dispensation that has ever been established on the earth.—JD 16:267, October 8, 1873..

Gospel, Restoration ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP42REACTION TO THE RESTORATION. This gospel was committed to Joseph Smith, and connected with this gospel was the proclamation, "Fear God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come." This was the position in which Joseph Smith was placed when he was in the flesh; it was the position of those that were connected with him, his brother Hyrum, and others of his father's house, as well as the Twelve Apostles, the seventies, and those early elders of Israel who were called to make the proclamation of this gospel to the world. They were sustained by the power of God. They were called and commanded to go forth into the world and preach this gospel to the inhabitants of the earth, without purse or scrip. This is the manner we traveled in early days. The early elders of the Church were called to pass through a great deal. Joseph Smith himself, from the hour that he received the records from the hand of Moroni, and commenced to proclaim the restoration of the gospel, to the day of his death, had to suffer tribulation. The whole world arose against him-priest and people. What was the matter? Simply that Joseph Smith was like other prophets and apostles. He brought forth a dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which came in contact with the traditions of the people-traditions which have been handed down from generation to generation. But he was sustained in his work. He knew very well when he undertook to introduce this gospel that it would be unpopular. His brethren knew this also. But being called of God, and a dispensation of the gospel having been committed to his hands and the hands of his brethren, the gospel had to be preached.—JD 22:205-206, January 9, 1881.

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP43JOSEPH SMITH AS A PROPHET. It has been my faith and belief from the time that I was made acquainted with the gospel that no greater prophet than Joseph Smith ever lived on the face of the earth save Jesus Christ. He was raised up to stand at the head of this great dispensation—the greatest of all dispensations God has ever given to man. He remarked on several occasions when conversing with his brethren: "Brethren, you do not know me, you do not know who I am."

Joseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP43As I remarked at our priesthood meeting on Friday evening, I have heard him in my early days while conversing with the brethren, say, "I would to God that I could unbosom my feelings in the house of my friends." Joseph Smith was ordained before he came here, the same as Jeremiah was.—JD 21:317, October 10, 1880.

Joseph Smith, Foreordination ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP43HIS FOREORDINATION. I believe that God Almighty reserved a certain class of men to carry on his word. They have been born into the world in this generation. I believe this was the case with Joseph Smith. I believe he was ordained to this work before he tabernacled in the flesh . He was a literal descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, and the Lord called him and ordained him. He gave unto him the keys of the kingdom. He received the record of the stick of Joseph from the hands of Ephraim, to stand with the Bible, the stick of Judah, in the last days as a power to gather the twelve tribes of Israel, before the coming of Shiloh, their king.—JD 22:206, January 9, 1881.

Joseph Smith, Foreordination ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP44WHY NOT "GREAT" MEN? With regard to the faithful leaders of this church and kingdom, beginning with Joseph Smith, how many times have I heard men say in my travels-Why did God choose Joseph Smith, why did he choose that boy to open up this dispensation and lay the foundation of this church? Why didn't he choose some great man, such as Henry Ward Beecher? I have had but one answer in my life to give to such a question, namely, that the Lord Almighty could not do anything with them, he could not humble them.—JD 21:193, July 3, 1880.

Throughout his discourses President Woodruff uses various statistical figures to represent the magnitude of this and other problems. In Chapter 7, for example, he states (after using such a figure): "Whether these statistics are anything like correct it is not of much importance to discuss. He then goes on to discuss what is important, namely, the magnitude of the problem. The reader should bear this in mind.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
