Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

45Chapter 4

45Revelation

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP45THE RIGHT TO KNOWLEDGE

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP45The heavens are full of knowledge, full of instruction, full of revelation and of principle and decree, and I may say of judgment, all to be made use of in their day and time, and we have a right to all the knowledge, all the revelation, all the principles of truth, that we can claim by faith and diligence in serving the Lord and in the performance of our duty.—JD 23:326, December 10, 1882.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP45WHAT IS REVELATION?

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP45THE TESTIMONY OF THE FATHER AND THE SON. What is revelation? The testimony of the Father and Son. How many of you have had revelation? How many of you have had the Spirit of God whisper unto you—the still small voice? I would have been in the spirit world a great many years ago if I had not followed the promptings of the still small voice. These were the revelations of Jesus Christ, the strongest testimony a man or a woman can have. I have had many testimonies since I have been connected with this Church and kingdom. I have been blessed at times with certain gifts and graces, certain revelations and ministrations; but with them all I have never found anything that I could place more dependency upon than the still small voice of the Holy Ghost.—JD 21:195-196, July 3, 1880.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP45THE INSPIRATION OF THE HOLY GHOST TO MAN. What is revelation? It is the inspiration of the Holy Ghost to man. Joseph Smith said to Brother John Taylor in his day: "Brother Taylor, you watch the impression of the Spirit of God; you watch the whisperings of Spirit to you; you carry them out in your life, and it will become a principle of revelation in you, and you will know and understand this spirit and power." This is the key, the foundation stone of all revelation. Joseph Smith was full of revelation. He could translate anything given to him of God. He could receive revelation without the Urim and Thummim. Many of the principal revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were received without the use of the Urim and Thummim. They were given to him by the inspiration of Almighty God. In my own experience I have endeavored to get acquainted with that Spirit, and to learn its operations. I have many times had that Spirit manifested to me, and if I had not followed its whisperings to me, I should have been in my grave long ago, with many of my companions.—MS 53:642 (1891).

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP46THE MIND AND WILL OF GOD. The Lord has taught us in a modern revelation contained in this book, the Doctrine and Covenants, that it matters not whether he speaks from heaven by his own voice, or by the ministration of angels, or by the mouth of his servants when they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost, it is all the same the mind and will of God.—JD 19:223, September 16, 1877.

Standard Worksa-Woodruff, WilfordTP46MEANS OF COMMUNICATION FROM GOD TO MAN

Standard Worksa-Woodruff, WilfordTP46RECORDED KNOWLEDGE. My mind reverts to the channels of communication from God to man. Here we have the Bible which gives a history and prophecy of the prophets from Adam down. The Lord, through all the destruction that has taken place in the various libraries of the world—like the great library of Alexandria, for example—has preserved the record of the Jews, at least we have a portion of it to read. Then, again, we have the Book of Mormon, the stick of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim, giving a history of the ancient inhabitants of this country from the time of their leaving the Tower of Babel to their disappearance from the land, and of the visitation of Christ to them. We have these books from which to obtain knowledge. Then we have the book of Doctrine and Covenants, our testament, which contains the most glorious, godlike, solemn, and eternal truths ever recorded within the lids of a book on the earth. All these records are the words of God to man; and though the heavens and earth pass away, not one jot or tittle will ever fall unfulfilled.

Living Oraclesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP47LIVING ORACLES. Then the Lord has other ways of communicating his mind and will. We have the living oracles with us, and have had from the day that Joseph Smith received the ministrations of Moroni, the Nephite, John the Baptist, Peter, James and John, Moses, Elias, Elijah, Jesus Christ—from that day we have had the living oracles to teach us the word of the Lord.—JD 22:331, October 8, 1881.

Scriptures, Value ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP47THE SCRIPTURES AS REVELATION. I read these—the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and I regard them as eternal truths.... I consider that the Doctrine and Covenants, our testament, contains a code of the most solemn, the most godlike proclamations ever made to the human family. I will refer to the "Vision" alone, as a revelation which gives more light, more truth, and more principle than any revelation contained in any other book we ever read. It makes plain to our understanding our present condition, where we came from, why we are here, and where we are going. Any man may know through that revelation what his part and condition will be. For all men know what laws they keep, and the laws which men keep here will determine their position hereafter; they will be preserved by those laws and receive the blessings which belong to them.—JD 22:146-147, April 3, 1881.

Living OraclesScriptures, Value ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP48THE SCRIPTURES AND THE LIVING ORACLES. Now, we may take the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and Doctrine and Covenants, and we may read them through, and every other revelation that has been given to us, and they would scarcely be sufficient to guide us twenty-four hours. We have only an outline of our duties written; we are to be guided by the living oracles. The Ten Commandments are very good, and the great and glorious principles pertaining to the redemption of man, the revelations pertaining to events that are past and to the things of the mysterious and unborn future, and there are also many choice and precious things relating to the redemption of man, to the present and future greatness of the Saints; but where can we find one revelation that tells us that we should raise three hundred teams, or twelve hundred yoke of cattle, to bring up the poor from the Missouri river. We have been informed by the revelations of the Lord Jesus Christ that there should be a temple built in Jackson county; but has there been a revelation to tell us how long or how high it should be? No, we have got to be governed by the mind and will of God, and this must be apparent to this people; it shows itself more and more.—JD 9:324, April 8, 1862.

ChristendomBiblea-Woodruff, WilfordTP48IT REQUIRES FAITH TO BELIEVE THE REVELATIONS OF GOD. Where is the man, priest, or people, in the whole sectarian world, today, who believes in the literal fulfilment of the revelations of God contained in the Bible? If there is one I should like to see and converse with him. The whole Christian world professes to believe the Bible, and perhaps they do when it is shut. But open the Bible and read the declarations contained therein, concerning the last dispensation of the fulness of times, and where is the man who believes them? You cannot find one, and it requires faith even among the Latter-day Saints to believe the revelations of God, and to prepare themselves for those things which await the world.—JD 18:111, September 12, 1875.

49I always have had faith in the Bible and in the revelations of God since I was a boy like these sitting on these seats, eight or ten years old, when I went to the Presbyterian Sunday School and read about Jesus Christ. I believed then that he was the Savior of the world; I believed that the Old and New Testament was true. I believe it today.—JD 18:35, June 24, 1875.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP49THE MEANING OF REVELATION

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP49DO THIS PEOPLE HAVE REVELATION. The question arises in the minds of the people in our day and generation, does President Woodruff have revelation? Do his counselors have revelation? Do the Twelve Apostles have revelation? Do this people have revelation? . . .

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP49I have sat and listened to every apostle that is before me now bear record during this conference. Did not these apostles speak by the Holy Ghost and the power of God? They did, and their testimony is recorded in the great library of the celestial kingdom of God. They could not edify us without it. I would to God that the inhabitants of the earth would get rid of the idea that revelation ceased when Christ was put to death. It is a false doctrine. Revelation belongs to the salvation of the children of men.—MS 57:738-739, October 6, 1895.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP49"WE ARE NOT WITHOUT REVELATION." We talk of revelation. There has been a feeling of wonder many times as to why Brigham Young did not have revelation, why John Taylor did not have revelation, why Wilford Woodruff does not have revelation, why any other apostle does not have revelation. I hold in my hand a book of revelations, enough to lead this Church into the celestial kingdom of God. Anybody who will obey that law will have all the revelation that he can fulfill on earth. We are not without revelation. The heavens are full of it, so is the Holy Priesthood.—MS 51:547 (1889).

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP50"THERE IS NO END TO ... THE REVELATIONS OF GOD TO MAN." Whenever the Lord requires any prophet, seer, revelator, apostle, or leading man of the church to speak, the Spirit of the Lord is with him to give counsel to the people from time to time, and he is moved upon, and such the people ought to hear. But I want you to understand this one thing: The Holy Priesthood and power of God do not stop there; it does not stop with the Twelve Apostles, it does not stop with our leading men of Israel—there is not a man on God's footstool that is sent forth into the world to preach the gospel but ought to have the Spirit of the Lord upon him and the revelation of God to him. There is no end to the Holy Ghost and the power of God and the revelations of God to man. This is our position before the world. Every man should have the Holy Priesthood with him, of some kind or other, when he goes to preach the gospel; he should occupy some position of that kind. The Holy Ghost should be with that man. The Holy Ghost is with that man, revelation is with that man, if he lives his religion and does his duty before God.

Scriptures, Canon ofRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP50. . . The Bible is all right, the Book of Mormon is all right, the Doctrine and Covenants is all right, and they proclaim the work of God and the word of God in the earth in this day and generation until the coming of the Son of Man; but the Holy Priesthood is not confined particularly to those books, that is, it did not cease when those books were made. It belongs to every man that goes forth into the world, and these are our principles, and these are our rights and these are our duties, and these are our gifts. The Holy Ghost is not confined to any one man, but everyone should have it.—CR 23, October, 1897.

RevelationPriesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP51PRIESTHOOD AND REVELATION. Many have an idea that it is something very strange for men nowadays to have revelation, and that nobody should have revelation excepting brother [John] Taylor. Here, my brethren and sisters, you are upholding the quorum of the twelve twice a year in general conference, besides doing so at your quarterly conference, as prophets, seers and revelators, and you pray for them twice a day, and perhaps oftener, and should it be anything very strange if they should receive a revelation? How strange, indeed! There are in this church some six thousand seventies, and four thousand high priests, and four thousand elders, who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, besides many thousands of priests holding the Aaronic Priesthood, [^1] and I would like to ask, if it was wrong to desire revelation? What business have we with this priesthood, if we have not power to receive revelation? What is the priesthood given for? If we do not have revelation, it is because we do not live as we should live, because we do not magnify our priesthood as we ought to; if we did we would not be without revelation, none would be barren or unfruitful. We have one man who holds the keys of the kingdom of God upon the earth, and it is his business to give the word of the Lord for the guidance of the Church. But here we have apostles and men of God, holding the Holy Priesthood, acting in behalf of the church in different parts of this Territory, and also in different parts of the earth; and we have men, say, acting as Church agents in Europe, part of whose business it is to charter ships for the transit across the ocean of tens of thousands of the people of God, is it the right of such men to have revelation from the Lord to guide them in their operations? Yes, it is; and no man should undertake to act in positions affecting the interests of Zion, unless he lives so as to be guided and directed by revelations of God. And every man who presides over a temple should live day by day in the revelations of Jesus Christ. And every seventy, and every high priest, and every man bearing the Holy Priesthood should live in that way to get revelation to guide and direct him in his labors. This idea that no man has any right to call upon God and receive revelation is wrong, and it has been wrong whenever it has existed in any age of the world. As was said of old, when a complaint was made concerning certain of the elders prophesying in the camp of Israel, so say I: "I would to God that all were prophets"; because the spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus.—JD 21:298, August 1, 1880.

Living OraclesRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP52A CLARIFYING STATEMENT. Before dismissing this assembly I feel it my duty to say a few words. I addressed the Saints a short time this afternoon upon a certain subject, and that was in bearing my testimony to the keys of the kingdom of God. . . . After the meeting I began to reflect, from remarks which I made, that perhaps many of the people might get an entirely wrong idea of my views with regard to the kingdom of God. I referred to the Doctrine and Covenants—a code of revelations which the Lord gave to Joseph Smith. This book contains some of the most glorious revelation upon doctrine, upon principle, upon government, upon the kingdom of God and the different glories, and upon a great many things which reach into the eternal worlds. My leaving this subject there, perhaps, might lead my friends to suppose that I did not believe in any more revelation. This would be a great mistake. For if we had before us every revelation which God ever gave to man; if we had the Book of Enoch; if we had the untranslated plates before us in the English language; if we had the records of the Revelator St. John which are sealed up, and all other revelations, and they were piled up here a hundred feet high, the church and kingdom of God could not grow, in this or any other age of the world, without the living oracles of God.

Living Oraclesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP53The Presidency of the Church is composed of three men—the President and his counselors; and not only does the President of the Church need revelation daily, in order to pass through the labor, the care and the business that rests upon him, but his counselors need it. Every one of the twelve apostles need it in all their administrations throughout the world; and not only the twelve apostles, but the seventies, the high priests, the bishops, the elders, and all who belong to the Melchizedek or Aaronic Priesthood—all need it in their administrations in the world. No man can go forth and lift up his voice and declare the gospel of Jesus Christ without revelation. He needs the Holy Priesthood with him every day of his life. I do not wish to be misunderstood in this matter. Every man or woman that has ever entered into the church of God and been baptized for the remission of sins has a right to revelation, a right to the Spirit of God, to assist them in their labors, in their administrations to their children, in counseling their children and those over whom they are called upon to preside. The Holy Ghost is not restricted to men, nor to apostles or prophets; it belongs to every faithful man and woman, and to every child who is old enough to receive the gospel of Christ.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP53I am very much opposed to false doctrine, either preaching it myself or having anybody else preach it. I, therefore, wish to make this correction if there is any need of it. God never had a church or a people, in any age of the world, that were governed and controlled except by revelation. The living oracles of God were among them—those who held the keys of the kingdom, and they had to receive revelation to assist them in all their work. The elders of Israel, when they go abroad to the nations of the earth, need the Spirit of God, to tell them to go here, or go there, that they may search out the honest in heart. Let us all understand this, so that we may not be divided in our views and sentiments.—MS 51:548-549 (1889).

Church GovernmentRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP54REVELATION TO THE CHURCH AND IN THE CHURCH

Church GovernmentRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP54REVELATION FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH COMES THROUGH THE APPOINTED CHANNEL. It is this pre-knowledge which God has given concerning his work . . . which is one of the chief causes of the strength possessed by the Latter-day Saints. It is the principle of revelation from the head of the church to the church itself—a principle which in its operation is not confined to one man, or to three men, or to twelve men; but is extended to every individual in the Church, in greater or less degree, as each one chooses to avail himself of it. There is an appointed way, however, in which revelation from the Lord for the government of his church is received. There is but one man on the earth, at a time, who holds this power. But every individual member has the privilege of receiving revelation from the Lord for his guidance in his own affairs, and to testify to him concerning the correctness of public teachings and movements.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP54The great promise which accompanies the preaching of the gospel . . . is that the Holy Spirit will be bestowed upon the sincerely penitent who obey its holy ordinances. In this way the Almighty reveals his purpose to those who obey his commandments, and whose lives are pure and acceptable before him, so that they may be prepared for the events and trials that may lie in their pathway.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP55If there are any members of the church who do not know by their own experience that this is true, they may be assured that they do not live up to that privilege.—MS 307-308, April 6, 1888.

Following the BrethrenRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP55INSPIRATION TO THE HEAD OF THE CHURCH. The Lord . . . is just as able to inspire me, or Brother Cannon, or any other man, when the time comes, as he has inspired other men in past ages. I know what the will of God is concerning this people, and if they will take the counsel we give them, all will be well with them.—DW 38:389, March 3, 1889.

Revelations, Unpublisheda-Woodruff, WilfordTP55WHERE ARE THE REVELATIONS OF JOSEPH'S SUCCESSORS. Where are the revelations of President Young? Do you find them on record? Only a few; but the Holy Ghost and the revelations of God were with Brigham Young from the day that he received this gospel until the day that he laid down his life and his tabernacle was carried to the grave. There was no necessity particularly for Brigham Young to give written revelation, only in a few instances. So with John Taylor. So with Wilford Woodruff. And so in a great measure probably with all who may follow us, until the coming of the Son of man. But are we without revelation? We are not. We know our duty, and in a measure we know what lies before us. Some of the people have had the idea that the Presidency of this Church and the twelve apostles should have nothing to do with temporal matters. Well, we would be in a bad fix if we did not deal in temporal matters. Joseph Smith stood at the head of this dispensation all the days he dwelt in the flesh. So did Brigham Young. I traveled with Brigham Young at home and abroad, and I never saw a day in my life but what he had the spirit and power of revelation of God with him. This power was with him when he came to this land. I was with him when he laid the foundations of our temples, and when he laid out the city of Salt Lake. He did all these things by the inspiration and Spirit of Almighty God.—MS 56:642, October 8, 1894.

Revelations, Unpublisheda-Woodruff, WilfordTP56BRIGHAM'S REVELATION. I know the Lord is with this people. I traveled with Joseph Smith quite a length of time. I traveled with Brigham Young forty years, at home and abroad. I traveled with him to this country (Utah). We came with the pioneers. Brigham Young, though he never wrote many revelations, had the revelations of God with him from the day that he embraced this work till the day of his death. I have often thought of the time when he was asked if he would not go on to California instead of stopping in this barren land. What was his answer? I was with him when he gave that answer. He said, "No, I am going to stay right here. I am going to build a temple here; I am going to build a city here; I am going to build a country here." Has it not been so? Yes, it has. Was it not by revelation? Certainly it was.—MS 57:741-742, October 6, 1895.

Revelations, Unpublisheda-Woodruff, WilfordTP56This is one thing I want to say to my friends and to the Saints of God, that without the Holy Ghost, without direct revelation and the inspiration of God continually, Brigham Young could not lead this people twenty-four hours. He could not lead them at all. Joseph could not have done it, neither could any man. This power is in the bosom of Almighty God, and he imparts it to his servants the prophets as they stand in need of it day by day to build up Zion.—JD 14:33, May 6, 1870.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP56AUTHORITY AND REVELATION. The law of God is in the mouths of those who are set to lead us. If the Lord should give a revelation through them that would appear contrary to our traditions—our customs, or reveal new principles—things which have been hid from the foundation of the world, it should not try the faith of the Saints. The Lord has given revelations according to the capacity of the children of men.—JD 6:120, December 6, 1857.

President of the ChurchRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP57THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH MUST BE SUSCEPTIBLE TO THE REVELATIONS OF GOD. The Lord would not permit me to occupy this position one day of my life, unless I was susceptible to the Holy Spirit and to the revelations of God. It is too late in the day for this Church to stand without revelation.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP57OTHERS NEED THE SAME GIFT IN ORDER TO MAGNIFY THEIR CALLINGS. Not only the President of the Church should possess this gift and give it unto the people, but his counselors and the apostles and all men that bear the Holy Priesthood, if they magnify their callings, should possess that gift for themselves and to assist them in their duties, although they may not be called to give revelations to lead and direct the Church. The spirit of revelation belongs to the priesthood.—MS 56:324, May 21, 1894.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP57My faith is that no man, in this or any other generation, is able to teach and edify the inhabitants of the earth without the inspiration of the Spirit of God.—JD 15:275, January 12, 1873.

RevelationPresident of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP57AUTHORITY OF THE PROPHET. The quorum of the twelve may exhaust their talent and acquirements in exhibiting principle upon any matter which belongs to the head to reveal, and yet the Prophet has to point out the error and set us right. The whole Church may unite to carry out any point that ought to come through the head, and we could not effect it. It requires Brother Brigham to tell us what is right and what is wrong in many things, because that is his place and calling. There is a perfect channel existing between the Lord and him, through which he obtains wisdom, which is diffused through other channels to the people. That we know. We have got to learn to bring this knowledge into practice.—JD 6:119, December 6, 1857.

First PresidencyRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP58WALKING IN THE LIGHT OF REVELATION. I feel and see the importance of this work, and I see the necessity of our walking up to the line of our duty, that we may live and walk daily in the light of the Lord. I realize that the Presidency of this Church stand between this people and the Lord, for they are the head, and I realize that God reveals to them his will, and therefore we should look unto them for light and for information. The head may be full of light, of inspiration, revelation, and of the mind and will of God, but if those officers who stand next to them, and if we ourselves are asleep in relation to our duties, and are not in a fit state to receive that light, do you not see that the river is dammed up at the head? There is no current or medium through which the light may flow to the limbs and branches of the body.—JD 4: 190-191, January 25, 1857.

Word of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP58THE WORD OF THE LORD BELONGS TO ALL THE PEOPLE. I have heard some of our brethren remark, "If the twelve apostles have the word of the Lord, we would like to receive it." I want to say a few words with regard to the word of the Lord. They sometimes wonder why President Young does not give them the word of the Lord. I have been acquainted with President Young more than forty years . . . and I never saw a day from that day until the present, but what President Young, even before the twelve apostles were organized, had the word of the Lord for the people; and instead of thinking there is no word of the Lord, my faith is that there is not an elder in Israel who has any business to preach, unless he has the word of the Lord to the people. The twelve apostles should have the word of the Lord to the people; the high priesthood should have the word of the Lord to the people; these four thousand seventies, the messengers of Israel to the nations of the earth, should have the word of the Lord to the people; and every elder of Israel, when he speaks, should have the word of the Lord, and the whole Church and kingdom of God, men and women, should have, each for himself and herself, the testimony of Jesus Christ which is the spirit of prophecy. This should be in the possession of every man and woman in the Church, for their own government and guidance, and this has always been the teaching to us of President Brigham Young. And this is backed up by the revelations which the Lord has given in these last days, as you will find if you read the twenty-second section of the book of Doctrine and Covenants.—JD 18:125-126, October 8, 1875.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP59THE CONSTANT NEED FOR REVELATION PARTICULARLY NECESSARY FOR THIS DISPENSATION. Take the whole history of the world down to the present generation, and has there ever been a time when the people of God did not need revelation? I say, nay. Now I would ask this congregation; I would ask all the Jews, the Catholics, the Protestants, I would ask the clergy of all nations: Can this mighty dispensation of which every prophet has spoken, be fulfilled, and can these great events transpire in the earth, without revelation from God? No, most assuredly not. God never gave a greater dispensation than the one in which Joseph Smith was called and ordained of God to organize the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. It required revelation. It will require it to the winding-up scene. Zion cannot be built up, nor can the nations of the earth be warned of the great judgments that are at the door without it.—MS 57:738-739, October 6, 1895.

Missions of the Twelve to the British IslesRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP60AN EXAMPLE. How many times have we been called by revelation to go to the right and left, here, there, and the other place, contrary to our expectation?

Missions of the Twelve to the British IslesMissionary WorkRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP60I will here relate what took place in my own experience. I was in Staffordshire in the year 1840. I was in the town of Stanley and held a meeting in the City Hall. I had a week's appointments out in that town. Before I rose to speak to the people, the Spirit of the Lord said to me, "This is the last meeting you will hold with this people for many days." I told the congregation when I arose what the Spirit of the Lord had manifested to me. They were as much surprised as I was. I did not know what the Lord wanted, but I saw the purpose of God afterwards. The Spirit of the Lord said to me, "Go south." I traveled eighty miles; went into the south of England. As soon as I arrived, I met John Benbow. It was clearly made manifest to me why I had been called thither. I had left a good field, where I was baptizing every night in the week. When I got to this place, I found a people—some 600 of them—who had broken off from the Wesleyan Methodists and formed themselves into a sect called the United Brethren. I found that they were praying for light and truth and that they had gone about as far as they could go. I saw that the Lord had sent me to them. I went to work amongst them and ultimately baptized their superintendent, forty preachers and some 600 members; I baptized every member of that denomination, but one. Altogether some 1800 were baptized in that field of labor. I suppose some of those then baptized may be in this congregation today. I name these things to show how we have to be governed and led by the revelations of God day by day. Without this we can do nothing.—JD 21:315, September 19, 1880.

ScriptureMissionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP60REQUIRED BY THE MISSIONARY ELDERS. The Lord has told us in some of the revelations which he has given in our day, that all of his messengers or servants, his elders who are sent forth to teach, should speak as they are moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and when they follow this counsel, what they say, the Lord says, is scripture, it is the mind and will of the Lord, it is the word of the Lord, and it is the power of God unto salvation.—JD 16:263, October 8, 1873.

Spirit of Prophecya-Woodruff, WilfordTP61THE PEOPLE AND REVELATION

Spirit of Prophecya-Woodruff, WilfordTP61EVERY MAN AND WOMAN MAY ENJOY PROPHECY. It is the privilege of every man and woman in this kingdom to enjoy the spirit of prophecy, which is the Spirit of God; and to the faithful it reveals such things as are necessary for their comfort and consolation, and to guide them in their daily duties.—JD 9:324, April 8, 1862.

RevelationSpirit of Prophecya-Woodruff, WilfordTP61Oh! Ye Latter-day Saints, you talk about revelation, and wonder if there is any revelation. Why, bless your souls, say nothing about the apostles and elders around me, these mountains contain thousands upon thousands of devoted women, holy women, righteous women, virtuous women, who are filled with the inspiration of Almighty God. Yes, these women have brought forth an army of sons and daughters in these mountains, by the power of God, and these sons and daughters partake of the inspiration of their mothers, as well as of their fathers. Yes, we have revelation. The Church of God could not live twenty-four hours without revelation.—DW 45:545, October 9, 1892.

WomenRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP61"O MY FATHER," A REVELATION TO A WOMAN. With regard to our position before we came here, I will say that we dwelt with the Father and with the Son, as expressed in the hymn, "O My Father," that has been sung here. That hymn is a revelation, though it was given unto us by a woman—Sister Eliza R. Snow. There are a great many sisters who have the spirit of revelation. There is no reason why they should not be inspired as well as men.—MS 56:229, April 9, 1894.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP62AN ACKNOWLEDGED PEOPLE LED BY REVELATION. We cannot find anywhere within the lids of the Bible where the Lord ever had a people he acknowledged, except they were led by immediate revelation.—JD 2:192, February 25, 1855.

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP62THE POWER OF FAITH IN REVEALING THE WORD OF THE LORD. If this people would rise up and do their duty, when men rise before them in this stand to point out the way of life, the Spirit of the Lord would reveal the things necessary for the people to understand, for the faith of the people would draw them out. All that is required is for the people to arouse themselves, and get the light of God within them.—JD 4:193, January 25, 1857.

Faitha-Woodruff, WilfordTP62EXERCISE FAITH IN THE REVELATIONS OF GOD. As the ancients had faith; as the world was created by faith; as Noah built an ark and preached the gospel of repentance for one hundred twenty years by faith; as Abraham went out not knowing where he was going by faith; as the ancients performed many mighty works, such as the subduing of cities and kingdoms by faith; therefore I say to the Latter-day Saints, you are required by the God of Israel, your heavenly Father, and by his Son Jesus Christ, by the holy angels, and by every principle of eternal truth, to exercise faith in the revelations of God, for they will be fulfilled as the Lord lives.—JD 25:10, January 6, 1884.

Discernment, Gift ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP62REVELATION AND DISCERNMENT. There has never been a time when a doctrine has been presented to us by the servants of God that has appeared new or mysterious, but what the Spirit of God has been ready to bear testimony to the truth of the same. When there have been cases of contention to know who was the biggest man, the Spirit of God has always made known who was in the wrong, and this is a great blessing unto us, one of the greatest that ever was given unto the children of men, to be able to discern the right from the wrong in all cases that may come under our observation.—JD 9:325, April 8, 1862.

Trutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP63TRUTH IS WHAT WE ARE AFTER. Truth is what we are after, and we are not afraid of the doctrines of any man; we are willing to stand by the revelations of God.—JD 17:194, October 7, 1874.

These figures represent the current strength of the various bodies of priesthood in 1880.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
