Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

64Chapter 5

64The Nature of Priesthood

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP64THE LIVING CHANNEL BETWEEN GOD AND MAN

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP64PRIESTHOOD: LIVING COMMUNICATION. The Holy Priesthood is the channel through which God communicates and deals with man upon the earth; and the heavenly messengers that have visited the earth to communicate with man are men who held and honored the priesthood while in the flesh; and everything that God has caused to be done for the salvation of man, from the coming of man upon the earth to the redemption of the world, has been and will be by virtue of the everlasting priesthood.—MS 51:657 (1889).

Priesthood, History ofPriesthood in Biblical Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP64A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE PRIESTHOOD. The highest calling the Lord ever called any human being to, in any age of the world, has been to receive the Holy Priesthood, with its keys and powers, and to be called to go forth to the inhabitants of the earth and teach them the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and to qualify and prepare them for a part in the first resurrection and to go back into the presence of God, their Creator, to dwell in glory worlds without end. The Lord bestowed that blessing, that priesthood and that power in the beginning of creation. Father Adam was called of God and ordained to the fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood—ordained to the highest office and gift of God to man on the earth. Adam bestowed that blessing upon seven of his sons—Seth, Enos, Jared, Canaan, Mahalaleel, Enoch, and Methuselah. They were all ordained high priests by their father Adam, and possessed the privilege and the right to understand the gospel of Jesus Christ and to give it to the human family, so that they mighty qualify and prepare themselves for eternal life. In tracing the history of the dealings of God with men from that day to this, we find the Lord has in various dispensations and times given unto the sons of men that blessing. Israel had it in the beginning, from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob down, and until Moses, who traveled with the children of Israel forty years in the wilderness. They had the gifts and graces of that priesthood bestowed upon them, and they had the privilege of magnifying their callings and preparing themselves for eternal life. But Israel would not accept the Melchizedek Priesthood, and therefore it was taken from them, and the lesser priesthood was conferred upon them while they traveled in the wilderness. It is not necessary for me to spend time in tracing this priesthood through the six thousand years that have past and gone; but it has been manifest in every age and dispensation when God has had prophets and apostles on the earth. Jesus Christ came into the world in the meridian of time. He was the great high priest to Israel. He was the Son of God, the Savior of the world. He chose his apostles, he organized his church. He bestowed upon these apostles all the gifts and graces belonging to the apostleship. In that dispensation it seems that they were called to lay down their lives for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. The Savior himself was put to death. The apostles were all, with one exception, put to death in their day and time, until finally the priesthood was taken home to God, and remained there for a length of time. But my views are that whenever the inhabitants of the earth were prepared for the gospel of Jesus Christ and the power of the priesthood, it has been bestowed upon them.—MS 58:305-306, April 5, 1896.

AdamPriesthood in Biblical Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP65ADAM'S PRIESTHOOD. I find in the history recorded in the Bible, from the days of Adam down through the different dispensations and generations, that prophets have existed on the earth. Adam, himself, was a prophet, and he ordained his sons to the Melchizedek Priesthood; the gospel of Christ was taught to him after the Fall, and he attended to the ordinances of the house of God. He was a high priest, and, as a high priest, held the keys of the kingdom of God. There were many sons who were high priests, having been ordained to this office by their father Adam. Three years before his death he called together Seth, Enos, Jared, Cainan, Mahaleel, Methuselah, and many other of his descendants in the valley of Adam-Ondi-Ahman, and there rose up and blessed them with his great and last patriarchal blessing. This has been given to us by revelation; and these men were prophets and high priests.—JD 13:319, September 5, 1869.

Priesthood, Keys ofNoah (Builder of the Ark)Adama-Woodruff, WilfordTP66THE POSITION OF ADAM AND NOAH IN THE PRIESTHOOD. The Prophet Joseph taught us that father Adam was the first man on the earth to whom God gave the keys of the everlasting priesthood. He held the keys of the presidency, and was the first man who did hold them. Noah stood next to him, he being the father of all living in his day, as Adam was in his day. These two men were the first who received the priesthood in the eternal worlds, before the worlds were formed. They were the first who received the everlasting priesthood or presidency on the earth. Father Adam stands at the head, so far as this world is concerned. Of course, Jesus Christ is the Great High Priest of the salvation of the human family. But Adam holds those keys in the world today; he will hold them to the endless ages of eternity. And Noah, and every man who has ever held or will hold the keys of presidency of the kingdom of God, from that day until the scene is wound up, will have to stand before Father Adam and give an account of the keys of that priesthood, as we all will have to give an account unto the Lord, of the principles that we have received when our work is done in the flesh.—DW 38:389, March 3, 1889.

AdamJoseph Smith, Mission ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP67GREATNESS OF JOSEPH SMITH. I look upon Joseph Smith as the greatest prophet that ever breathed the breath of life, excepting Jesus Christ. Father Adam, as I have said, stands at the head; but Joseph Smith was reserved to lay the foundation of this great kingdom and dispensation of salvation to the whole human family in these last days, to build up Zion, to establish God's kingdom, and to prepare it for the coming of the Son of Man. He held these keys. After him, as has been said, came Brother Brigham.—DW 38:389, March 3, 1889.

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP67WHAT IS THE PRIESTHOOD FOR?

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP67TO ADMINISTER THE ORDINANCES OF THE GOSPEL. What is the priesthood for? It is to administer the ordinances of the gospel, even the gospel of our Father in heaven, the eternal God, the Eloheim of the Jews and the God of the Gentiles, and all he has ever done from the beginning has been performed by and through the power of that priesthood, which is "without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life," and the administration of his servants holding this priesthood is binding, being the savior of life unto life or death unto death.—JD 19:360, June 30, 1878.

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP67TO DO THE WORKS WHICH GOD HIMSELF HAS PERFORMED. I have ever read with a great deal of interest that revelation given to Joseph Smith in answer to his prayer in Liberty jail. I have ever looked upon that revelation of God to that man, considering the few sentences it includes, as containing as much principle as any revelation God ever gave to man. He gave Joseph to understand that he held the priesthood, which priesthood was after the order of God, after the order of Melchizedek, the same priesthood by which God himself performed all his works in the heavens and in the earth, and any man who bore that priesthood had the same power. That priesthood had communication with the heavens, power to move the heavens, power to perform the work of the heavens, and wherever any man magnified that calling, God gave his angels charge concerning him and his ministrations were of power and force both in this world and the world to come; but let that man use that priesthood for any other purpose than the building up of the kingdom of God, for which purpose it was given, and the heavens withdraw themselves, the power of the priesthood departs, and he is left to walk in darkness and not in light, and this is the key to apostasy of all men whether in this generation or any other.—JD 21:190-191, July 3, 1880.

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP68Let me say to this congregation that our heavenly Father performs all his works—the creation of worlds, the redemption of worlds—by the power of the eternal priesthood. And no man on earth, from the days of father Adam to the present time, has ever had power to administer in any of the ordinances of life and salvation only by the power of the Holy Priesthood. You will find this to be the case in the whole history of the prophets of God.

Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP68"NO MAN TAKETH THIS HONOR UNTO HIMSELF." When Aaron was given the priesthood he was called by revelation. "No man taketh this honor unto himself but he that is called of God as was Aaron." Jesus Christ himself had to be called of God. He was a high priest. He left the priesthood on the earth with his apostles. They officiated in it until they were put to death. It is by that power that we administer in this day and generation.—JD 24:242-3, July 20, 1883.

Priesthood Authoritya-Woodruff, WilfordTP68PRIESTHOOD—AN ELEMENT OF DIFFERENCE WITH THE CHRISTIAN WORLD. With regard to priesthood we differ from the Christian world. We believe there is no man in heaven or upon earth that administers in the ordinances of the gospel without the priesthood, and we defy the whole world to point to a single passage of scripture from the time of father Adam down to Jesus Christ, showing that any man had power to administer in any of the ordinances of the gospel without the priesthood. And we say as Paul said, in referring to this delegated power of heaven, that "no man taketh this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron:" and he was called of God through Moses with whom he communicated. Therefore men cannot legally and authoritatively go forth to preach the gospel until they are sent; and men cannot hear the word and be converted by the same unless they hear it through the mouth of a preacher who is sent, and who has power to administer in the ordinances of the gospel.—JD 23:78, March 26, 1882.

Priesthood Powera-Woodruff, WilfordTP69POWER OF THE PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood Powera-Woodruff, WilfordTP69ALL HAVE POWER. All the organizations of the priesthood have power. The deacon has power, through the priesthood which he holds. So has the teacher. They have power to go before the Lord and have their prayers heard and answered, as well as the prophet, the seer, or the revelator has. It is by this priesthood that the work of God has been accomplished. It is by this priesthood that men have ordinances conferred upon them, that their sins are forgiven, and that they are redeemed. For this purpose has it been revealed and sealed upon our heads.—MS 52:595-596 (1890).

Priesthood Powera-Woodruff, WilfordTP69POWER IS FOR HUMAN GOOD. Let all Israel remember that the eternal and everlasting priesthood is bestowed upon us for the purpose alone of administering in the ordinances of life and salvation, both for the living and the dead, and no man on earth can use that priesthood for any other purpose than for the work of the ministry, the perfecting of the Saints, edifying the body of Christ, establishing the kingdom of heaven, and redeeming Zion. If we attempt to use it for unrighteous purposes, like lightning from heaven, our power, sooner or later, falls, and we fail to accomplish the designs of God.—MS, 49:546, August, 1887.

Sealing PowerPriesthood Blessingsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP70ETERNAL NATURE OF BLESSINGS CONFERRED BY THE PRIESTHOOD. When an apostle, or president, bishop, or any man holding the priesthood officiates, he administers by the authority of the Lord Jesus Christ; then that priesthood has effect, and all the blessings that a servant of God bestows upon the children of men will take effect both in this life and in that which is to come. If I have a blessing given to me by the Holy Priesthood, or if I receive a blessing from a patriarch, those gifts and blessings will reach into the other world; and if I am true to my covenants through this life, I can claim every blessing that has been conferred upon me, because that authority by which they were conferred is ordained of God; and it is that by which the sons of the Most High administer unto the children of men and ordinances of life and salvation; and those official acts will have their effect upon those persons beyond the grave as well as in this life. These are the true riches; they are riches that will last to all eternity, and we have power through these blessings, conferred by the gospel, to receive our bodies again, and to preserve our identity in eternity.—JD 9:162-163, December 1, 1861.

Sealing Powera-Woodruff, WilfordTP70THE SEALING ORDINANCES. There is not a man who has lived since the Church went into the wilderness and the kingdom of God was taken from the earth, until Moroni rent the veil and gave to Joseph Smith the records of the Book of Mormon, and until Peter, James and John sealed upon him the keys of the Holy Priesthood, who can claim a wife in the resurrection. Not one of them has been married for eternity, but only until death. But unto the Latter-day Saints the sealing ordinances have been revealed, and they will have effect after death, and, as I have said, will reunite men and women eternally in the family organization. Herein is why these principles are a part of our religion, and by them husbands and wives, parents and children will be reunited until the links in the chain are reunited back to father Adam. We could not obtain a fulness of celestial glory without this sealing ordinance . . . which is one of the most glorious principles of our religion.—JD 13:167, December 12, 1869.

Priesthood Authoritya-Woodruff, WilfordTP71PROPER AUTHORITY. There never was a man and never will be a man, in this or any other age of the world, who has power and authority to administer in one of the ordinances of the house of God, unless he is called of God as was Aaron, unless he has the Holy Priesthood and is administered to by those holding that authority.—JD 16:266, October 8, 1873.

Priesthood, Keys ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP71THE KEYS OF THE PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Keys ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP71THE KEYS DELIVERED. Every key relating to this dispensation was given to the Prophet Joseph, and they remain with the priesthood today. We have no right to walk in the dark.—JD 19:135-136, October 13, 1877.

Apostolic SuccessionKeys of the Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP71JOSEPH'S FINAL MEETING WITH THE TWELVE. All that President Young or myself, or any member of the quorum need have done in the matter was to have referred to the last instructions at the last meeting we had with the Prophet Joseph before starting on our mission [to the eastern states]. I have alluded to that meeting many times in my life.

Apostolic SuccessionKeys of the Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP71The Prophet Joseph, I am now satisfied, had a thorough presentiment that that was the last meeting we would hold together here in the flesh. We had had our endowments; we had had all the blessings sealed upon our heads that were ever given to the apostles or prophets on the face of the earth. On that occasion the Prophet Joseph rose up and said to us: "Brethren, I have desired to live to see this temple built. I shall never live to see it, but you will. I have sealed upon your heads all the keys of the kingdom of God. I have sealed upon you every key, power, principle that the God of heaven has revealed to me. Now, no matter where I may go or what I may do, the kingdom rests upon you."

Apostolic SuccessionKeys of the Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP72Now, don't you wonder why we, as apostles, could not have understood that the prophet of God was going to be taken away from us? But we did not understand it. The apostles in the days of Jesus Christ could not understand what the Savior meant when he told them "I am going away; if I do not go away the Comforter will not come." Neither did we understand what Joseph meant. "But," he said, after having done this, "ye apostles of the Lamb of God, my brethren, upon your shoulders this kingdom rests; now you have got to round up your shoulders and bear off the kingdom." And he also made this very strange remark, "If you do not do it you will be damned."

Apostolic SuccessionKeys of the Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP72THE KEYS EMBRACED IN THE APOSTLESHIP. I am the last man living who heard that declaration. He told the truth, too; for would not any of the men who have held the keys of the kingdom of God or an apostleship in this Church have been under condemnation, and would not the wrath of God have rested upon them if they had deserted these principles or denied and turned from them and undertaken to serve themselves instead of the work of the Lord which was committed to their hands?

Apostolic SuccessionKeys of the Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP73When the Lord gave the keys of the kingdom of God, the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood, of the apostleship, and sealed them upon the head of Joseph Smith, he sealed them upon his head to stay here upon the earth until the coming of the Son of Man. Well might Brigham Young say, "The keys of the kingdom of God are here." They were with him to the day of his death. They then rested upon the head of another man—President John Taylor. He held those keys to the hour of his death. They then fell by turn, or in the providence of God, upon Wilford Woodruff.

Apostolic SuccessionKeys of the Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP73I say to the Latter-day Saints, the keys of the kingdom of God are here, and they are going to stay here, too, until the coming of the Son of Man. Let all Israel understand that. They may not rest upon my head but a short time, but they will then rest on the head of another apostle, and another after him, and so continue until the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ in the clouds of heaven to "reward every man according to the deeds done in the body."

Succession in the PresidencyPriesthood, Keys ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP73THE KEYS ARE EXERCISED BY MEANS OF PRESIDENCY. I want to add another thing because I feel it my duty to say it to the Latter-day Saints. There is a feeling—it was so in the days of Joseph Smith—that he was not the man to lead the Church. Even his bosom friends, men with whom he saw the angels of God, Oliver Cowdery and others, considered him a fallen prophet and thought they ought to lead the Church. This history is before you and before the world. The same feeling was manifest in the days of Brigham Young when he was called to hold the keys of the Presidency of the Church. There were other men who thought they should be appointed to that office. But the God of heaven manifested to you, and to me, and to all men, who were in Nauvoo, upon whom the mantle had fallen. Brigham Young took his place, and led the Church and kingdom of God up to the day of his death.

President of the ChurchPriesthood, Keys ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP74There are men today, there will be men till the coming of the Son of Man, I expect, who feel as though they ought to lead the Church, as though it is not going on right—that this, that, and the other is wrong. I say to all Israel at this day, I say to the whole world, that the God of Israel, who organized this Church and kingdom, never ordained any President or Presidency to lead it astray. Hear it, ye Israel, no man who has ever breathed the breath of life can hold these keys of the kingdom of God and lead the people astray.—MS 51:546-547 (1889).

74EXERCISING THE POWER OF THE PRIESTHOOD: PRESIDENT WOODRUFF'S BLESSING TO THE OCTOBER CONFERENCE, 1890. (President W. Woodruff stepped forward to the breastwork of the stand and said): Before dismissing this conference I want to say a few words to the Latter-day Saints. The Lord has said, by revelation, to those who hold the keys of the kingdom of God: "Whomsoever thou shalt bless I will bless and whomsoever thou shalt curse I will curse."

74I have traveled something like a hundred and seventy-five thousand miles in my day and time, and I have preached the gospel to the nations, to the islands of the sea and to my own country. I have met, in some instances, men who profess to have faith in God and to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who have stood up before me and cursed the Prophet of God, Joseph Smith, and blasphemed the name of God. But in the midst of all these things, I have never seen a moment of my life when I felt to curse anybody. I hope I never shall. But I have told these men, under these circumstances, that the curse of God would overtake them; and in no instance, when I have been moved upon to say that, has it ever fallen unfulfilled; for they have been marked cases of the judgments of God overtaking them. But with regard to blessings, I will say, if there was ever an hour in my life that I felt to bless the Latter-day Saints, it is at the present time. My heart is drawn out with love and gratitude to God and my brethren with whom I am surrounded. I have been sustained as a weak instrument in the hands of God as the President of this Church. Since I have been called to this office I have been sustained by the Latter-day Saints, and for over fifty years of my life as an apostle. Why should not my heart be drawn out in love to such a people? The world know not the love of the Latter-day Saints. They do not comprehend it. It never entered into their souls. I am surrounded here with prophets, apostles, elders and Saints of the living God; and in the morning of the resurrection, when they come out of their graves, they will pass by the Gods and the angels who are set there to watch the interests of the celestial world; they will go to those thrones, kingdoms, principalities and powers which have been ordained of God for them to occupy—those who dwell in this dispensation as well as in other ages of the world. If I am faithful, I shall meet you there; I shall meet these Saints of the living God there. Therefore, I feel it is my privilege to bless the Latter-day Saints. I cannot go abroad, as a man, and spread this gospel to the world and administer to them the ordinances thereof, to have any effect, without the Holy Priesthood; and I, as a man, cannot bless the inhabitants of earth, so that the Lord is bound to acknowledge it, only by the power of the Holy Priesthood; and that power I feel to exercise at the present time in blessing my brethren and sisters.

75In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I feel to bless my counselors—Presidents George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith. They have stood by me in all the labors of life, as far as we have been associated, since we have entered into the new and everlasting covenant. On the same principle I feel to bless these apostles who surround me. We have been united. We are united in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and they have the gratitude of my heart for the labors of love and life which they have carried out in their day and time. I feel to bless the presidents of the seventies, with all their quorums in this Church, with every blessing that I have power to bestow upon them, as a servant of the living God. I feel to bless the high priests, who bear the high and Holy Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek—their presidents and all who belong to the quorums. I also feel to bless the thousands of the elders of Israel who have entered into covenant with the Lord, who have received a portion of the Melchizedek Priesthood, and who have gone forth and been faithful in the ordinances of the house of God. I feel to bless the bishopric and the lesser priesthood, which is after the order of Aaron—the first priesthood sealed upon the heads of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery by John the Baptist, who held it, and who laid down his life for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. I feel to bless these Latter-day Saints, as fathers and mothers, as brothers and sisters, in all the ordinances of the house of God. I feel to bless them in their families, in their flocks, and in their herds, and in all they put their hands unto. As far as I have the power to bless, they have the blessings of my heart and my spirit, in every sense of the word. And I say to all Israel, God bless you.

76Let us live, brethren and sisters, that when we have finished our work and our testimony, as other generations have done, we will receive the same exaltation and glory. The world do not know you. The world do not know this work. They do not understand it. They have not entered into the spirit of it; they never will except they obey the gospel of Jesus Christ and the law of the celestial kingdom.

76(The vast audience then rose to their feet and President Woodruff pronounced the final benediction.)—MS 52:755-757. (1890).

Priesthood AuthoritySpirit Worlda-Woodruff, WilfordTP77ETERNITY OF THE PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood AuthoritySpirit Worlda-Woodruff, WilfordTP77THE PRIESTHOOD AND ITS WORK ETERNAL. The same priesthood exists on the other side of the veil. Every man who is faithful is in his quorum there. When a man dies and his body is laid in the tomb, he does not lose his position. The prophet Joseph Smith held the keys of this dispensation on this side of the veil, and he will hold them throughout the countless ages of eternity. He went into the spirit world to unlock the prison doors and to preach the gospel to the millions of spirits who are in darkness, and every apostle, every seventy, every elder, etc., who has died in the faith, as soon as he passes to the other side of the veil, enters into the work of the ministry, and there is a thousand times more to preach there than there is here.

Spirit Worlda-Woodruff, WilfordTP77REALITY OF THE WORK IN ETERNITY. I have felt of late as if our brethren on the other side of the veil had held a council, and that they had said to this one, and that one, "Cease thy work on earth, come hence, we need help," and they have called this man and that man. It has appeared so to me in seeing the many men who have been called from our midst lately.—JD 22:333-334, October 8, 1881.

Spirit Worlda-Woodruff, WilfordTP77And I will here say that every elder of Israel who lays down his life, whether he dies in his bed, or is put to death by the enemies of truth, when he goes into the spirit world his works follow him, and he rests in peace. The priesthood is not taken from him, and he has thousands more to preach to there than he ever had here in the flesh. But it depends upon the living here to erect temples, that the ordinances for the dead may be attended to, for by and by you will meet your progenitors in the spirit world who never heard the sound of the gospel. You who are here in Zion have power to be baptized for and to redeem your dead.—JD 17:250, October 9, 1874.

1946 Bookcraft
