Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

79Chapter 6

79The Responsibility of the Priesthood

Priesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP79THE OATH AND COVENANT OF THOSE WHO RECEIVE THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD

Priesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP79THE BASIC DOCTRINE. What does the Savior, the Son of God, say to us in our testament? He says, in speaking of the priesthood of Melchizedek, that "they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; for he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father, receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore, all that my Father hath shall be given unto him. And this is according to the oath and covenant which belongeth to the priesthood. Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved." (Doctrine and Covenants 84:35-40.)

PersecutionPriesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP79Who in the name of the Lord can apprehend such language as this? Who can comprehend that, by obeying the celestial law, all that our Father has shall be given unto us—exaltations, thrones, principalities, power, dominion—who can comprehend it? Nevertheless it is here stated. How few there are on the earth today, or in any dispensation, who have been able to abide the celestial law of God. It brings down the hatred of the whole generation in which we live. No man can live the celestial law without bringing upon his head persecution. It cost the Savior his life; he suffered an ignominious death upon the cross. Joseph Smith sealed his testimony with his blood, as also have others connected with this Church and kingdom.—JD 22:209, January 9, 1881.

Priesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP80ALL WHO RECEIVE THE PRIESTHOOD RECEIVE THE OATH AND COVENANT. I often reflect upon the promises made concerning the priesthood. The Lord, in a revelation upon this subject, says, Doctrine and Covenants, Section 84, 33rd to 40th verses: "For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their calling, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies. . . . All that my Father hath shall be given unto him. Therefore, all those who receive the priesthood, receive this oath and covenant of my Father, which he cannot break, neither can it be moved."

Joint-Heirs with ChristPriesthood, Oath and Covenant ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP80JOINT HEIRSHIP WITH JESUS. Now, I sometimes ask myself the question, Do we comprehend these things? Do we comprehend that if we abide the laws of the priesthood we shall become heirs of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ? I realize that our eyes have not seen, our ears have not heard, neither hath it entered into our hearts to conceive the glory that is in store for the faithful.

PriesthoodProbationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP80THE PRIESTHOOD TO BE PROVEN AND TRIED. We are placed in a position to be proven and tried; we must be, we have been, we shall be, until we get through with our labors in the flesh. The Lord told Joseph Smith that he would prove us in all things, whether we will abide in his covenant, even unto death, that we may be found worthy: "for if we will not abide in his covenant; we are not worthy of him." Jesus Christ abode in the covenant; he kept all the commandments while he was upon the earth. He even was baptized by the hands of John, although it was not for the remission of Sin, but to fulfil all righteousness. There was no part of the gospel that Christ did not fulfil, and he called upon Joseph Smith to fulfil the same. This he did. He laid down his life. He went to the spirit world, and he is there watching over this people. He has power there, and so have our brethren who have gone to the other side of the veil. They are laboring for us. They are watching to see how we perform the work left to our charge.—JD 23:329-330, December 10, 1882.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP81APOSTASY IS NOT PROFITABLE FOR THE PRIESTHOOD. It won't pay to apostatize: "there is no money in it." Any man who receives this priesthood and tastes of the word of God, and of the powers of the world to come—any man that turns away from these things, apostatizes, and turns away from the Church of God, shall not, in accordance with the revelations of the Lord to Joseph Smith, "have forgiveness of sins in this world nor in the world to come." (Doctrine and Covenants 84:41.)—JD 23:331, December 10, 1882.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP81RESPONSIBILITY

Apostasy of Individualsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP81"WE ARE UNDER SACRED COVENANTS TO STAND BY THE TRUTH." Let me say to my brethren and sisters, our responsibilities are great, far greater than the outside world who reject the gospel. We have received the light, the knowledge of God; we are under sacred covenants to stand by the truth, and by one another in righteousness. If we are found traitors to the cause, crucifying the Son of Man afresh, great will be our condemnation.—JD 18:221, August 13, 1876.

Apostasy of Individualsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP81WE MUST WAKE UP! I feel that we as a people have got to rise up and clothe ourselves with the power of God. There must be a reformation, or a change, in our midst. There is too much evil among us. The devil has got too much power over us. A good many that bear the name of Christ and the Holy Priesthood, are getting cold in the things of God. We must wake up; we must trim our lamps, and be prepared for the coming of the Son of Man.—JD 21:285, July 3, 1880.

Apostasy of Israela-Woodruff, WilfordTP82REASONS FOR WEEDING OUT UNRIGHTEOUSNESS. If we are afraid to rebuke iniquity, or ashamed to cast it off ourselves, Israel would go to hell, we should be cut off as a people, and the Lord would raise up another, for he is bound to have a people in the last days who will keep his commandments, and magnify their calling, and prove themselves friends of God, and maintain the principles of righteousness, and honor them before God, angels, and men, that his kingdom may be established in purity, and be prepared for the coming of the Messiah; for Christ is coming again to earth; he is preparing the bride, and here is a portion of it before me today.

Apostasy of Israela-Woodruff, WilfordTP82Will he receive us to himself? Are we prepared for his coming and kingdom and fulness thereof, unless we are sanctified, and lay aside sin, and do right? No. We must sanctify ourselves, and keep the commandments of God, and do these things that are required at our hands, before we can be prepared for the coming of the Great Bridegroom.—JD 2:202, February 25, 1855.

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP82A CALL TO THE PRIESTHOOD TO ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY. It is the word of the Lord through the mouth of his servant Brigham, and has been for a long time the word of the Lord to me, that as twelve apostles, as seventy apostles, as high priests, and as elders of Israel, it is time that we should rise up and bear the burden that rests upon the shoulders of Brigham Young, who is far advanced in life, and has had the weight and burden of this Church and kingdom upon his shoulders. It is our duty to rise up and bear off this burden, and lift it from our President, and also to cry aloud unto the people to unite themselves together. It is our duty to cease shaking in our shoes for fear the Lord Almighty should give some of his words to govern and control us in our temporal affairs. Who, to use a comparison, expects to have a forty-acre lot alone in the kingdom of God, or in heaven, when we get there? None need expect it, for in that kingdom, in heaven or upon earth, we shall find unity, and the Lord requires at our hands that we unite together, according to the principles of his celestial law.

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP83This is what I consider to be the word of the Lord to us. It is our duty to unite ourselves together, and to sustain the institutions which have been established in these mountains by the revelations of God unto us.—JD 18:126-127, September 12, 1875.

Priesthood Callingsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP83WE CAN AFFORD TO SERVE GOD. I wish to say to our leading men, the presidency of this Church, the twelve apostles, the presidents of stakes and their counselors, the bishops, the seventies, the high priests and elders, and to all men bearing the Holy Priesthood, as well as to all who have entered into covenant with God, that we can, as individuals and as a people, afford to maintain our integrity in this our day and generation, regardless of consequences. We can afford to be true and faithful to God; we can afford to carry out every principle and commandment which God has given unto us; we can afford to do this, as much so as prophets and apostles and people of God of other dispensations and generations. And I would say to all Israel, there is not one soul of us who can afford to compromise one of the revelations or one of the commandments which God has committed to our charge. No man can afford to do this who is called of God to build up this kingdom. We can afford, however, to meet the consequences, whatever they may be. And I would say to all present this day, we should have, and that we have as much comfort, as much hope and as much cause to trust in God, and have received as much encouragement, by the overruling hand of Almighty God in our behalf, to go on magnifying our calling and to be true and faithful to every commandment which God has given unto us, as the people of any other generation had in their day; and for one I can say, "It is the kingdom of God or nothing" for me, and I am willing to risk the consequences.

Priesthood Callingsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP84I know that I cannot afford to disobey any commandment which God has given to me, because there is no man who holds the priesthood, and possessing the inspiration and the gifts of God and the light of truth, but would be ashamed both in the flesh and in the spirit world to meet his God, and to be obliged to acknowledge that he did not obey his commandments. And I will here say that whenever we do our duty, whenever we keep the commandments which have been made known to us, we will see the fulfilment of the promises which God has made to us with regard to this day, age and dispensation. There is no promise which God has made to us but what will be fulfilled to the very letter.—JD 22:146, April 3, 1881.

Chasteninga-Woodruff, WilfordTP84CHASTISEMENT. Do I blame President Young because he chastises us? No. Would he be a father to us, a prophet, and a high priest of God, if he saw his brethren going wrong, and would not warn and chastise them? The chastisement of a friend is far better than the kisses of an enemy.—JD 2:198, February 25, 1855.

84TO THE PRIESTHOOD—"BEAR OFF THIS KINGDOM!". I feel to say to my brethren who have received the Holy Priesthood: we occupy a position in the world which is of great importance to us. We have received the teachings of heaven; in fact, I believe there never was a people since God made the world, who received more teachings than the Latter-day Saints for the last fifty years. The world has rejected the light of truth, and the fulness of the Gentiles will come in. But it is our duty to preach the gospel to them, until the Lord says, "It is enough." We must roundup our shoulders, and bear off this kingdom.—JD 22:208, January 9, 1881.

Eternal Lifea-Woodruff, WilfordTP85AN APPEAL TO SEEK ETERNAL REALITIES. Brethren, for God's sake do not let us set our hearts on the things of this world to the neglect of the things of eternal life. Do not let the bishops feel it is a hard matter to carry out any of the counsels given by those who are called to direct all these things. Bless your souls, if you lived here in the flesh a thousand years, as long as Father Adam, and lived and labored all your life in poverty, and when you got through, if, by your acts, you could secure your wives and children in the morning of the first resurrection, to dwell with you in the presence of God, that one thing would amply pay you for the labors of a thousand years. What is anything we can do or suffer, to be compared with the multiplicity of kingdoms, thrones, and principalities that God has revealed to us?

85Well, we have got the kingdom, and we must bear it off.—JD 21:284, July 3, 1880.

1946 Bookcraft
