Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

86Chapter 7

86Priesthood and Church Leadership

Leadershipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP86SOME CHARACTERISTICS. I rejoice before the Lord this day that we have leaders in Israel that are qualified for their place and station to preside over this people, and who will seek their welfare, and are not afraid or ashamed to rebuke wickedness in high places, whether manifested by their brethren or neighbors if they do wrong. Their minds are quick as the vivid lightning of heaven; they are filled with the visions of eternity; they are not asleep, but they comprehend the elements around them; they read and digest them, and they know exactly what course to pursue; the leaders of this people know what they are doing, what is approaching the world; and we may all know the same things by reading the scriptures and by prayer, and through the ministering of the Holy Ghost conferred upon us.—JD 2:197, February 25, 1855.

Humilitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP86WHY GOD CALLS THE HUMBLE. The Lord has chosen the weak things of the world to lead this people. Joseph Smith was but a young man when he died—not forty years of age. He lived nearly fourteen years after the organization of this Church. President Brigham Young followed him. Who was Brigham Young? He was a painter and glazier. He was a humble man. But the Lord called him to lead this people. You know what he has done, and the spirit that was with him. The Lord was with him, and he continued to lead this people by the power of God and by the revelations of Jesus Christ. He laid the foundation of a great work in these mountains of Israel. Many strangers who have recently visited us have marveled and wondered at Salt Lake City being laid out in the manner it was. I have told them that I helped Brigham Young lay out this city in the midst of sagebrush, in 1847. There was not a white man's house then within a thousand miles of us. What was John Taylor? He was a wood turner, and he led the Church for quite a time. Wilford Woodruff was a miller and a farmer; that was about the highest ambition he ever arrived at as far as this world was concerned. That is about the way the Lord has chosen these men. Why did he not choose these learned and great men? As I have often said, he could not handle them. God has always chosen the weak things of the earth.—MS 53:782 (1891).

Following the Brethrena-Woodruff, WilfordTP87LEADERSHIP AND THE FLOCK. I contend that there is one principle by which the Lord leads his servants, and if we are faithful, they will lead us in the way of life; and inasmuch as we have faith to believe in their instructions—in the teachings of the Holy Spirit through them, we are always in the safe path, and shall be sure of our reward.

Following the Brethrena-Woodruff, WilfordTP87You take a shepherd, for instance; and, according to the ancient practice, we learn that they always went forward and prepared the way, so that there could be no danger in advance but what the shepherd would learn of in time to save the sheep. If they are allowed to run by the shepherd, the wolves are apt to catch them and destroy them; and the very moment that men in this kingdom attempt to run ahead or cross the path of their leaders, no matter in what respect, the moment they do this they are in danger of being injured by the wolves.—JD 5:83, April 9, 1857.

First Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP87THE FIRST PRESIDENCY AND THE TWELVE

First Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP87COUNSEL FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY. Whatever counsel the Presidency of this Church have been led to give unto this people, it has been dictated by the Spirit and power of God, and our safety and salvation lies in obeying that counsel and putting it into practice. We should learn to listen to the operation and manifestation of the Spirit of Truth.—JD 4:94-95, October 6, 1856.

First Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP88Pray for the Presidency of this Church—pray for them to have the spirit of revelation.—JD 5:269, September 27, 1857.

SustainingFirst Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP88SUSTAINING THE PRESIDENCY. Then I hope my brethren and sisters will feel in their hearts to sustain the Presidency of the Church, by their faith, works, and prayers, and not suffer them to carry all the load, while we hide ourselves in the rear. If we should do this we are not worthy, we are not worthy of our position as elders in Israel, and fathers and mothers in Israel. Let each one bear their share; and if we will correct our own follies, and set in order our own houses, and do that which is right, we shall then do some good, and help to lift the load that rests upon those that lead.—JD 2:199-200, February 25, 1855.

Pridea-Woodruff, WilfordTP88"THE HIGHER OUR POSITION THE MORE OUR RESPONSIBILITY." The position which I occupy, and that occupied by my brethren the apostles, should not have tendency, if we have the Spirit of God, to make us lifted up or exalted in our spirits before the Lord. I know, as the God of Israel lives, that I have no power, nor have I had, in this Church, to perform any work pertaining to this kingdom, until it has been given unto me by the God of heaven. I know Joseph Smith had not, nor Brigham Young, nor John Taylor, nor any apostle or elder in this Church and kingdom. And the moment that I attempt to become lifted up in the pride of my heart, because of any position that I hold, that moment I become a very unwise man. So with anyone else. The higher our position the more our responsibility.—MS 51:338 (1889).

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP89THE OBLIGATIONS OF THE PRESIDENT AND OTHER AUTHORITIES OF THE CHURCH. It is my duty to have fellowship with God, as weak an instrument as I am in the hands of God. It is my duty to have power with God. And when I have this, then my counselors should stand by me and with me. We should be of one heart and mind in all matters, temporal and spiritual, that come before us in the labor of the Church and kingdom of God. And I am thankful to say that this has been the case since I have been called to this position, or since the organization of the Presidency of the Church. Standing connected with us here are the Twelve Apostles. It is their duty to be of one heart and one mind. They have no right to be otherwise. They cannot be otherwise and prosper before God. They should be one with us, and we one with them. They have their rights; they have their agency. But when the Presidency of the Church say unto any of them, "This is the word of the Lord," or, "This is right," they should take hold and work with us. The law of God requires this union at our hands. It is the duty of the seventies, also, to be united with the Twelve Apostles. The seventies are called upon by the apostles to go forth and labor in the vineyard of the Lord, and they work together. So, brethren and sisters, with every organization in this Church. There should be union. There should be no discord, no disunion. If there is, the Lord is not pleased with it, and we are hindered in our work. I want all the quorums to understand this.

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP89The lesser priesthood should be united. Here is Bishop Preston. He stands at the head of the Aaronic Priesthood. He has got counselors. They should be united together. They should be united with the lesser priesthood, and they should labor to promote their interest and welfare. I have no fault to find with the brethren in these matters. I mention these things as duties devolving upon us.—MS 52:594 (1890).

Communiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP90COMMUNION WITH GOD—A NECESSITY. Men who have held any portion of the Holy Priesthood, and have had its gifts, graces, and blessings bestowed upon them, have been under the necessity of having communion with God. In the whole history of the world I have never read of any man whom God called to stand at the head of his work, who has not sought the Lord while in that position; and the Lord has been with him. It is my faith that the Lord will never permit any man upon whose shoulders he places the authority and power to lead Israel, to go astray, or to lead the children of God from the path of duty. The Lord would remove such a man from his place.—MS 52:578 (1890).

Temptationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP90THE LEADERS ARE TEMPTED. If anybody supposes that the Presidency and apostles here are never tempted of the devil, they are mistaken. We are tempted all the time, more or less, and we have to war against these things in order to stand and maintain our position.—MS 57, 756, October 6, 1895.

Prophetsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP90WHAT IS A PROPHET? It has been remarked sometimes, by certain individuals, that President Young has said in public that he was not a prophet nor the son of a prophet. I have traveled with him since 1833, or the spring of 1834; I have traveled a good many thousand miles with him and have heard him preach a great many thousand sermons; but I have never heard him make that remark in my life. He is a prophet, I am a prophet, you are, and anybody is a prophet who has the testimony of Jesus Christ, for that is the spirit of prophecy. The elders of Israel are prophets. A prophet is not so great as an apostle. Christ has set in his Church, first, apostles; they hold the keys of the kingdom of God.—JD 13:165, December 12, 1869.

Counselinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP90RELATIONS BETWEEN THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH AND THE APOSTLES. The Prophet Joseph, in his day, consulted with the apostles, and sought their views on important matters and principles. He would say, "I want you to tell me your views and feelings about this, that and the other." The agency which God has given us was never taken from us, either by him or his Prophet. We used to express our feelings to the Prophet, and we did so with all good conscience before God. As a general thing our views were alike; but if there was anything in them different from what Joseph considered was right, when we got through he would tell us thus and so. Then we did not stand against that, but we united upon it. One of the apostles once brought before the Prophet Joseph a very peculiar kind of a system. Joseph listened to him very patiently, and when this brother got through, he said, "Brother Joseph, what do you think of that?"

Counselinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP91"Why," says he, "Brother ______________, it is a beautiful system, and I have only one fault in the world to find about it."

Counselinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP91"What is it?"

Counselinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP91"It is not true."

Counselinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP91Of course, when a man gets up a thing that is not true, he has to lay it aside.—MS 52:593 (1890).

Succession in the Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP91THE QUESTION OF SUCCESSION. [On the 28th of March, 1887, President Wilford Woodruff wrote to one of the brethren in answer to this question: Do you know of any reason in case of the death of the President of the Church why the Twelve Apostles should not choose some other person than the President of the Twelve to be the President of the Church?"]

Succession in the Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP91I know several reasons why he should not. First, at the death of the President of the Church, the Twelve Apostles become the presiding authority of the Church, and the president of the Twelve is really the President of the Church by virtue of his office as much while presiding over the Twelve Apostles as while presiding over his two counselors. In the appointment of Brigham Young and John Taylor to the Presidency of the Church, it never entered the heart of any one of the Twelve Apostles to claim the right to preside over Brigham Young or John Taylor, as they were all the presidents of the Church, and if they were not fit to preside over the Church they were not fit to preside over the Twelve Apostles. Second, in case of the death of the President of the Church it takes the majority of the Twelve Apostles to appoint the President of the Church, and it is very unreasonable to suppose that the majority of that quorum could be converted to depart from the course marked out by inspiration and followed by the apostles at the death of Christ and by the Twelve Apostles at the death of Joseph Smith. I see no reason for discussing this subject until there is some reason for it.-Cowley 561.

Brigham YoungSuccession in the Presidencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP92BRIGHAM YOUNG'S SUCCESSION. I have heard two or three of the brethren testify about Brother Young in Nauvoo. Every man and every woman in that assembly, which perhaps might number thousands, could bear the same testimony. I was there, the Twelve were there, and a good many others, and all can bear the same testimony. The question might be asked, why was the appearance of Joseph Smith given to Brigham Young? Because here was Sidney Rigdon and other men rising up and claiming to be the leaders of the Church, and men stood, as it were, on a pivot, not knowing which way to turn. But just as quick as Brigham Young rose in that assembly, his face was that of Joseph Smith-the mantle of Joseph had fallen upon him, the power of God that was upon Joseph Smith was upon him, he had the voice of Joseph, and it was the voice of the shepherd. There was not a person in that assembly, Rigdon, himself, not excepted, but was satisfied in his own mind that Brigham was the proper leader of the people, for he [Rigdon] would not have his name presented, by his own consent, after that sermon was delivered. There was a reason for this in the mind of God; it convinced the people. They saw and heard for themselves, and it was by the power of God.—JD 15:81, April 8, 1872.

Apostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP93THE APOSTLESHIP

Apostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP93What position can any man occupy on the face of the earth, that is more noble, Godlike, high, and glorious than to be a messenger of salvation unto the human family? What more responsible position can a man occupy than to be an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ? I do not know of any in this or any other generation.—JD 13:319, September 5, 1869.

Apostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP93THOUGHTS ON THE APOSTLESHIP: DISCOURSE AT THE FUNERAL OF EZRA T. BENSON, SEPTEMBER 5, 1869. Tracing down the sacred history through the different ages and dispensations, we learn that many prophets existed among the children of men. Moses was a lawgiver in Israel, and held the office of a prophet, seer and revelator. When I say that many prophets have existed, it probably needs some qualification. The number of persons thus honored of God has not been many when compared with the whole of the people who have lived; but in every gospel age and dispensation, God has had his prophets and servants upon the earth to make known his will to its inhabitants. In the days of Moses, elders were chosen as his counselors; and seventy elders were ordained to bear record of the things of God and to assist Moses in the work to be performed in his day; but we do not read of apostles being chosen under Moses's dispensation. Jesus tabernacled in the flesh to establish the kingdom of his Father upon the earth, and when he was thirty years of age he went forth administering in the ordinances of the house of God, and he chose twelve apostles to assist him, and he gave to them the keys of the kingdom of God. And the highest office that any man has ever held on the face of the earth in this or any other generation is that of an apostle.

Council of the TwelveApostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP94We read that God set in his church first apostles, then prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers, gifts, graces, and helps; and the office of an apostle entitles him to hold the keys of the kingdom of God; and what he binds on earth is bound in heaven and what he looses on earth is loosed in heaven. The history of the twelve whom Jesus chose is to be found in the New Testament; within the lids of that book their travels, the course they pursued and the doctrines they taught are published to the world. Nearly the whole of them sealed their testimony with their blood. Some were crucified as their Master was; some were beheaded; and all, except John, suffered martyrdom in some way for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ. This was the fate of the first quorum of apostles we have any history of.

Council of the TwelveApostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP94After the death and resurrection of the Savior, when he ministered to his disciples the last time on earth, he informed them that he had other sheep not of this fold whom he was going to visit and minister unto. The Book of Mormon is a record of the descendants of the house of Israel who dwelt on this continent anciently. In that record we find that Christ, after his death and resurrection, visited that branch of the house of Israel which dwelt on this continent. On the occasion of that visit we are informed that Jesus chose twelve apostles and gave to them the same power, keys, gifts, and graces that he had given to his apostles on the eastern continent, and they went forth and magnified their callings. All of this quorum of the Twelve Apostles had the promise of departing and being with Christ when they were seventy-two years old, except three of them. To these three Jesus gave a promise similar to that which he gave to John the Revelator namely, that they should tarry in the flesh until he came. History informs us that the wicked tried to kill John in various ways, placing him, on one occasion, in a cauldron of boiling oil, but his life was preserved; and that finally, in the reign of Domitian Caesar, he was banished to the Isle of Patmos to work in the lead mines. While there he was blessed with visions, revelations, knowledge, light and truth, a portion of which we have recorded in what are called the Revelations of St. John. In the reign of Nerva, John was recalled, and afterwards wrote his epistles. The first quorum of apostles were all put to death, except John, and we are informed that he still remains on the earth, though his body has doubtless undergone some change. Three of the Nephites, chosen here by the Lord Jesus as his apostles, had the same promise-that they should not taste death until Christ came, and they still remain on the earth in the flesh.

Council of the Twelvea-Woodruff, WilfordTP95Thus we have an account in the Bible and Book of Mormon of but two quorums of Twelve Apostles being chosen previous to this dispensation; but in these last days the Lord called upon Joseph Smith, gave him power and authority to organize his church and kingdom again upon the earth, and gave him the Holy Priesthood and the keys of the kingdom of God. Joseph was ordained to the apostleship under the hands of men holding the keys of the kingdom of God in the days of Jesus-namely, Peter, James and John.

Apostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP95I shall not occupy time with entering into the details of these things. I have referred to them to show the importance of the office held by Brother Benson. He was a member of one of the three quorums of apostles that have ever been chosen on the face of the earth since Jesus Christ tabernacled in the flesh, that we have any knowledge of. The first was chosen when Jesus commenced his public labors in the flesh; the second after his resurrection, here on this continent; and the third, since the revelation of the gospel in our own day. Here we find only thirty-six men, chosen at various times and dispensations, in six thousand years, to hold this order of priesthood, unless they were chosen in the days of Enoch and at times in which the Bible does not inform us. This number has been increased, however, by others who have been chosen to fill vacancies in these quorums, as in the case of Judas, and others; but it is safe to say that the entire number who have held this office from the days of Adam until today has been very limited. As to the number of inhabitants who have dwelt on the earth during that period, it is a pretty difficult matter to form any correct idea in relation to it. I do not think that any statistician could tell this to any degree of correctness. It is a kind of a given point in these days to say that the population of the earth is about a thousand millions, and that this number pass away every generation. It is also estimated that about three generations pass away in a century; this gives three thousand millions in a century, thirty thousand millions in a thousand years, and one hundred and eighty thousand millions in six thousand years-about the period that is supposed to have elapsed since the creation of man upon the earth. Whether these statistics are anything like correct it is not of much importance to discuss; but it is an important reflection that Brother Benson, who has been associated with us so many years, is one of the chosen few, of all the immense numbers who have dwelt on the face of the earth, who have been called to hold the office of apostle.—JD 13:319-321, September 5, 1869.

Apostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP96SOME REQUIREMENTS OF THE APOSTLESHIP. I have been associated with the apostleship for over fifty years. I knew those men. I knew their lives. When the prophet Joseph organized the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, he taught this principle of union to them. He gave them to understand that they must be of one heart and one mind, and they must take upon themselves fully the name of Christ; that if God commanded them to do anything they must go and do it; that if they married a wife they could not stay at home three or four years to take care of her if they were called to go to the nations of the earth.

Apostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP97I myself started on a mission six weeks after I was married, and I was gone two or three years. So with others of my brethren. It mattered not what temporal work we had to do, when we were called to go abroad we had to go. This was one of the requirements of the apostleship. We also had to be united. We could not contend one with another. If we did, the spirit of God would be withdrawn from us, and we would receive chastisement at the hands of the Lord. Under the celestial law of the kingdom of God men must unite together; men must love one another; men must stand by this Holy Priesthood and maintain the powers of it while they dwell in the flesh, in order to honor God and to be prepared to receive their inheritance in the world to come.

Council of the TwelveApostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP97As I have said before, I have been a member of the quorum of the apostles for over fifty years. I have been acquainted with its ups and downs. I have been familiar with its apostates. I have also been acquainted with the union that has existed. I can say that I never associated with a class of men that ever manifested the same love for one another as the apostles of the Church have when they have been faithful. Of course, we have seen days of sorrow. After the first quorum was called of God; after they had had the ministration of angels and seen the power of God manifested, some of them yielded to temptation. They said, "We have served God long enough, and now we are going to serve ourselves." They stopped praying and went to merchandising. They stopped serving God, and took a decided stand against the prophet whom God had raised up to lay the foundation of this Church and kingdom. What were the consequences? It sent them to perdition. Their power fell like lightning from the heaven. Their priesthood was taken from them, and sealed upon the heads of other men. It has remained so to this day, and will, for all I know, to the endless ages of eternity. With all the light they had, with all the power they had, and with all the manifestations they had from God out of heaven, they turned from these things and rejected them. Those were days of sorrow to me and to those who remained faithful; for one-half of the quorum fell and turned against Joseph. But the Lord was with him. So were Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball and others of the brethren of the quorum. They stood by him; while others deserted him and were cut off the Church and they today are in the spirit world, without the priesthood, without the crown, without their glory, and without celestial blessings that were promised them on condition of their faithfulness.

Council of the TwelveApostleshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP98With this exception, the quorum of the Twelve Apostles have been united. We knew this was the work of God. We knew the God of heaven had laid this apostleship upon our shoulders. We knew, as Joseph Smith told us just before his martyrdom, that if we did not round up our shoulders and bear off this kingdom we would be damned. No man can receive this apostleship; no man can be called to this important calling, and then turn away from it, without condemnation or being cursed by the hand of God. It matters not what sacrifices God requires at our hands in the building up of his kingdom, we have got to meet these things and trust in him.—MS 52:579-580 (1890).

Apostolic Successiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP99STATEMENT ON THE SELECTION OF MARRINER W. MERRILL, ANTHON H. LUND, AND ABRAHAM H. CANNON, OCTOBER 6, 1889. I wish to say to this assembly of Latter-day Saints, that there are three vacancies in the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, in consequences of the organization of the First Presidency. We have felt that it is time to fill that quorum now, at this conference, and the people should be prepared for the presenting by the Twelve Apostles of such names as they may feel by the spirit of God to be worthy and proper persons to receive this ordination or to occupy this position. These apostles are prophets, seers and revelators. I have confidence in them; I believe they have power to present such things as would be in accordance with the will of God. They (the apostles) presented to me a list of names. I wish here to say, and I want it understood, that neither myself, President George Q. Cannon, nor President Joseph F. Smith, who are my counselors, presented any of these names. We left it with the quorum of the apostles. I became thoroughly satisfied that they had upon that list such names as would be acceptable unto the Lord. We took those names and made it a matter of prayer, and the spirit of the Lord manifested unto me those whom we should appoint. They have all been accepted by the quorum of the apostles as well as the Presidency of the Church. I have a reason for making these remarks.—MS 51:753-754 (1889).

Apostlesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP99ADMONITION TO THE APOSTLES. I will say to the apostles, our responsibility is very great. The prophets who organized the Church and laid the foundation of this last dispensation, with a whole quorum of apostles, have finished their testimony and gone into the spirit world. We have been called to take their places. What manner of men ought we to be? The whole earth is ripening in iniquity, and the Zion of God should be prepared for the coming of the bridegroom. We should humble ourselves before the Lord, and be in a position to be filled with the spirit of our calling, with the Holy Ghost, and with the revelations of Jesus Christ, that we may know the mind and will of God concerning us, and be prepared to magnify our calling and bring to pass righteousness, and be valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ to the end of our pilgrimage here in the flesh. The prophets, apostles, and all the heavenly hosts are watching over us. There never was a time when the work of God required a more faithful testimony and labor from the apostles and elders than today.—MS 48:804, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

Seventiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP100ADMONITION TO THE SEVENTIES. I would say to the seventies, who stand connected with the quorum of the Twelve Apostles, as messengers to the nations of the earth, it has fallen to your lot to go forth and assist to prune the vineyard once more, and for the last time, before the coming of the Son of Man. The Lord said, fifty-seven years ago, that the field was white for the harvest, and he had set his hand to prune the vineyard once more, and for the last time. The elders were commanded at that day to thrust in their sickle and reap while it was called today, for soon night would come, when no man could reap. Brethren, it is much nearer night now than it was fifty-seven years ago. The Savior said at that day, that the angels were crying day and night for the privilege to go forth and reap down the earth. He informed them they must wait a little season until the harvest was fully ripe. The nations must be warned, Zion must be established, and the wheat, or the Saints, be gathered into the garner, then the angels might go forth and reap the tares, gather them in bundles and prepare them for the burning.

Seventiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP100Since that day many thousands of the Saints have been gathered to Zion from the nations of the earth. But you are called upon at this late day to still go forth and warn the Gentiles with the proclamation of the gospel. Therefore, brethren, you who are called to go into the vineyard, whether apostles, high priests, seventies, or elders, do not be weary in well doing. Remember, you are messengers of salvation. Keep yourselves pure and spotless before God and all men. Seek to bring to pass righteousness, and save the souls of men. Labor faithfully that your garments may be clean from the blood of all men, and that the nations may be left, without excuse in the day of God's judgments upon the wicked, which is nigh at hand, and those judgments will be poured out without measure.

Elder, Melchizedek PriesthoodSeventiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP101All the messengers in the vineyard should be righteous and holy men, and call upon the Lord in mighty prayer, In order to prevail. It is the privilege of every elder in Israel, who is laboring in the vineyard, if he will live up to his privileges, to have dreams, visions and revelations, and the Holy Ghost as a constant companion, that he may be able thoroughly to gather out the blood of Israel and the meek of the earth, and bring them into the fold of Christ.

MartyrsElder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP101It is true that the elders who are called to bear record of the gospel of Christ to the nations of the earth are many times called to pass through persecution for the gospel's sake, and in some instances to lay down their lives, as did the ancient Saints, and quite a number in our day, for Christ's sake. But there seems to be a special crown of glory, laid up for every man who is martyred for Christ's sake and the gospel's. No matter in what age of the world he lays down his life for Christ's sake, he will find it again, and eternal life in the world to come, Therefore, brethren, let us be diligent in our labors in this last hour in the vineyard. The Lord said to Oliver Cowdery, if he labored all the days of his life and saved but one soul, how great would be his joy in the kingdom of heaven with that one soul. We have everything to encourage us in our labors in the vineyard of the Lord.—MS 48:804-805, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

Worldlinessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP102FOR APOSTLES, ELDERS, BISHOPS, AND ALL TO THINK ABOUT

Worldlinessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP102A LABOR OF RESPONSIBILITY. As I view it, we are not placed here as elders of Israel, apostles, or bishops, merely to get rich in gold and silver, and the things of this world. We have a labor laid upon our shoulders. Joseph Smith had, Brigham Young had, the Twelve Apostles have, we all have, and we will be condemned if we do not fulfil it. We shall find it out when we get to the other side of the veil. It is through this neglect of duty that so many have left this Church and kingdom of God. There is hardly a tithe of the people who have been baptized in water for the remission of sins that have died in the faith. In the United States there are tens of thousands of apostate Mormons. Many a time in my reflections I have wished I could fully comprehend the responsibility I have to God, and the responsibility every man is under who bears the priesthood in this generation. But I tell you, brethren, I think our hearts are set too much upon the things of this world. We do not appreciate, as men bearing the Holy Priesthood in this generation should, the mighty responsibility we are under to God and high heaven, as well as to the earth. I think we are too far from the Lord.—JD 21:281-282, July 3, 1880.

Responsibilitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP102It is our duty as apostles, as elders and as Latter-day Saints, to contemplate, to reflect, to read the word of God, and to try to comprehend our condition, our position, and our responsibility before the Lord. If our eyes were opened, if the veil were lifted, and we could see our condition, our responsibility, and could comprehend the feelings of God our heavenly Father, and the heavenly hosts, and the justified spirits made perfect, in their watch-care over us, in their anxiety about us in our labors here in the flesh; we would all feel that we have no time to waste in folly or anything else which brings to pass no good.—JD 21:191, July 3, 1880.

Bishopsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP103THE BISHOP'S CALLING. If we are called to the office of a bishop we should fulfil the duties pertaining to that office. I know it has been considered a very hard office, and one to which a good deal of time has to be devoted. Yet there are a great many bishops who don't spend much time in it, while others are true to their calling. A bishop's calling is an important one. He is called to be a father to the people of his ward.—JD 21:281, July 3, 1880.

High Priestsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP103THOUGHTS FOR THE HIGH PRIESTS. While this labor is going on among the nations of the earth, there is a great labor and responsibility resting upon the whole ministry who dwell in Zion. There is labor sufficient for every man who bears any portion of the Holy Priesthood, in the various capacities in which the brethren are called to act. The high priests, whose calling is to preside, are called upon to officiate in Zion as high counselors, presidents of stakes, and counselors, bishops, and counselors, superintendents of Sabbath schools and Mutual Improvement associations. In every capacity in which they are called to act, they have an immense field in which to improve their talents and magnify their calling. Here is where the high priests are mainly called to preside, officiate and labor.

High Priestsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP103There never was a time when the Holy Priesthood, in its various branches, offices and labors, had a greater work to perform, than in our day. The searching out of iniquity, the purifying, sanctifying and cleansing of the people, the uniting of the Saints and the general perfecting of Zion, rest upon the brethren and the Holy Priesthood who dwell in Zion. . .

Elder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP104WORK OF THE ELDERS IN "THE INSTITUTIONS OF ZION." One of the most important and responsible fields of labor in Zion is that committed to the care of those who preside over and teach in the primaries, Sabbath schools, and Improvement associations, and those who are teaching private day schools among the Latter-day Saints. Who can comprehend the result of the labor performed by the elders of Israel in these branches? No man, unless filled with the revelations of heaven and the inspiration of Almighty God. We send out hundreds of elders, who go to the nations of the earth to preach the gospel of Christ. After spending two or three years as missionaries, if they have converted a dozen souls and brought them into the Church, they think they have done a good work, which they certainly have. But here, the elders who are presiding over and teaching in these institutions in Zion, filled with the children of the Latter-day Saints, have an army of immortal souls before them to guide and teach, and to direct their minds, that they may be qualified to step forth and take hold of the Church and kingdom of God and build it up and bear it off triumphantly, after their fathers and elders are laid in the tomb. O what a mission is given to the sons of Ephraim, the elders of Israel, the Latter-day Saints! To warn the whole world of the judgments which are to come, preach the gospel to all people, gather the Saints from all nations, build up Zion, and prepare for the coming of the Son of Man, standing in holy places, while judgments waste the wicked.—MS 48:805-806, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

FamilyElder, Melchizedek Priesthooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP104ADVICE TO THE ELDERS. I wish to say a few words to the elders. I suppose we are all elders. Do you teach your families the way of life and salvation? Do you teach your wives and children the counsel of God? We should impress upon the minds of our children the evil consequences of committing sin or breaking any of the laws of God, they should be made to understand that by doing wrong they will inherit sorrow and tribulation which they can easily escape by doing right, and they should learn this principle by precept without learning sorrow and affliction by experience from doing wrong.—JD 4:97, October 6, 1856.

1946 Bookcraft
