Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

107Book Two

The Position and Practices of the Church

"I wish to have the Latter-day Saints understand their appointment, position, and responsibility before the God of heaven, and their responsibility to both Jew and Gentile, in this and the other side of the veil."

—WILFORD WOODRUFF,

JD 18:110, September 12, 1875.

109Chapter 8

109The Work of the Last Dispensation

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP109TO INAUGURATE A REIGN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS. This is the only dispensation which God has ever established that was foreordained, before the world was made, not to be overcome by wicked men and devils. All other dispensations have been made war upon by the inhabitants of the earth, and the servants and Saints of God have been martyred. This was the case with Jesus and the apostles in their day. The Lord gave the good old prophet Enoch, president of the Zion of God, who stood in the midst of his people three hundred and sixty-five years, a view of the earth in its various dispensations, showing him that the time would come when it would groan under the wickedness, blasphemy, murders, whoredoms and abominations of its inhabitants. The prophet asked the Lord whether there would ever be a time when the earth should rest; and the Lord answered that in the dispensation of the fulness of times the earth would fill the measure of its days, and then it would rest from wickedness and abominations, for in that day he would establish his kingdom upon it, to be thrown down no more for ever. Then a reign of righteousness would commence and the honest and meek of the earth would be gathered together to serve the Lord, and upon them would rest power to build up the great Zion of God in the latter days. These things were also shown to Abraham, and many others of the ancient servants of God had glimpses of them by vision, revelation and the inspiration of the Spirit of God, and what they saw, or an account of what they saw, has been left on record.

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP109This dispensation is one that all the patriarchs and prophets had their eye upon, and the Lord has commenced it, and has carried it on now for more than forty years, since this Church was organized with six members. We have not altogether traveled on beds of ease, we have had warfare and opposition from the commencement until this day; but we and the world may set our hearts at rest concerning "Mormonism," for it will never cease until the Lord Jesus Christ comes In the clouds of heaven.—JD 17:245-246, October 9, 1874.

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP110THE WORK OF THIS DISPENSATION

Dispensation of the Fullness of Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP110EVERYTHING TO BE REVEALED. The day has already dawned when the light of heaven is to fill the earth; the day in which the Lord has said that nothing should be kept hidden, whether it be things pertaining to one God, or many Gods, to thrones, principalities or powers; the day in which everything that has been kept from the knowledge of man ever since the foundation of the earth, must be revealed; and it is a day which the ancient prophets looked forward to with a great deal of interest and anxiety.

Marvelous Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP110THE GOSPEL TO BE PREACHED TO EVERY NATION. It is a day in which the gospel is to be preached to every nation, tongue and people for a witness of what shall follow; a day in which the Israel of God who receive it in their dispersed and scattered condition are to gather together to the place appointed of God, the place where they will perform the "marvelous work and wonder" spoken of by the ancients who, in vision, saw our day; and where they will begin to inherit the promises made to the fathers respecting their children.

Marvelous Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP110THE WORK IS UNDER WAY. The work that is to be so marvelous in the eyes of men has already commenced, and is assuming shape and proportions; but they cannot see it. It will consist in preaching the gospel to all the world, gathering the Saints from the midst of all those nations who reject it; building up the Zion of God; establishing permanently in the earth his kingdom; preparing for the work of the gathering of the Jews and the events that will follow their settlement in their own lands, and in preparing for ourselves holy places in which to stand when the judgments of God shall overtake the nations. This is truly a good work; and it is a marvel (when we look at it with our natural eyes) how this people are sustained in their faith and hope of accomplishing it, besides having to provide for the wants of themselves and families, which is of itself as much as most men can accomplish.—JD 24:51-2, January 27, 1883.

Marvelous Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP111A SHORT WORK. The Lord is going to make a short work in the earth, and he will defend his anointed, his prophets, his Zion and his people. This is the decree of Almighty God.—JD 18:116, September 12, 1875.

New Jerusalema-Woodruff, WilfordTP111BUILDING THE NEW JERUSALEM. We are called upon to work with the Lord just as fast as we are prepared to receive the things of his kingdom. But I am satisfied there has got to be a great change with us in many respects before we are prepared for the redemption of Zion and the building up of the New Jerusalem. I believe the only way for us is to get enough of the Spirit of God that we may see and understand our duties and comprehend the will of the Lord.—JD 16:36, April 7, 1873.

United Ordera-Woodruff, WilfordTP111TO BE BUILT BY THE UNITED ORDER AND CELESTIAL LAW. It has been promised that the New Jerusalem will be built up in our day and generation, and it will have to be done by the United Order of Zion and according to celestial law. And not only so, but we have to keep that law ourselves if we ever inherit that kingdom, for no man will receive a celestial glory unless he abides a celestial law; no man will receive a terrestrial glory unless he abides a terrestrial law, and no man will receive a telestial glory unless he abides a telestial law.—JD 17:250, October 9, 1874.

112THE FULNESS OF TIMES—VIEWED FROM SALT LAKE CITY IN 1881. Now, I want to say something with regard to the dispensation in which we live. The God of heaven has set his hand to fulfil the volume of revelation which the Bible contains, to build up that kingdom that Daniel the Prophet saw in the interpretation of the dream of Nebuchadnezzar. The God of heaven has sent forth that angel which John the Revelator saw "fly in the midst of heaven having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give glory to him for the hour of his judgment is come." That angel has delivered the gospel to Joseph Smith, and I know it. I bear my record and testimony to this truth. It is the truth of the living God. He has set his hand, as I have said, to build up this kingdom. Isaiah has written its history. Look at these valleys of the mountains. I came here on the 24th of July, 1847. What did I find? A barren desert, as barren as the desert of Sahara. There was no mark of the white man. It did not look as if any white man could live here at all. How is it today? Travel through the length and breadth of this territory and behold the cities, towns, villages, gardens, orchards, fields, and crops that cover this once barren desert. What does it means? It means that God Almighty is carrying out his purposes, it means that he has brought to his remembrance what his prophets and apostles have spoken; and all things shall be fulfilled to the very letter, even to the winding-up scene. From whence has come this congregation; from whence have come the Saints gathered together together these mountains of Israel? They have been gathered from every nation as far as the gospel has been preached. We have been gathered together by the power of the gospel. Yet, as I have remarked many times in my public discourses, if we had preached until we were as old as Methuselah, we could never have got men and women to leave their homes if they had not been moved upon by the Holy Ghost. The elders of Israel preached the gospel unto them and promised them in the name of Jesus Christ, that if they would receive this gospel they would receive the Holy Ghost. Is there a man on the face of God's footstool today that would dare make such a promise as that unless he were backed up by the power of God? No, not one. If the elders of Israel had been impostors, deceivers, they would have been very soon found out; but the God of Israel has backed up their testimony, and it is on this principle that these valleys are filling with the people of God today.—JD 22: 344, October 23, 1881.

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP113THE GATHERING OF ISRAEL

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP113PRECEDES CHRIST'S COMING. I do not suppose that there has been any dispensation upon the earth in which a greater variety of evidence, or important evidence of the divinity of the Latter-day work, has been given than that which is occurring, and that will continue to occur, until the second coming of the Son of Man. There is no man upon the earth who believes in the literal fulfilment of prophecy as contained in the Old and New Testaments, but who must in his heart believe that the God of heaven will in the latter days set his hand to perform a great work and a wonder in the earth; and that he will call forth his Church out of the wilderness of darkness and establish it upon the foundation of apostles and prophets with Christ Jesus as the chief cornerstone. There is no man that believes in the literal fulfilment of the revelations of God through the prophets who does not believe that the Lord will in the latter days gather a people together out of every nation under heaven, and that he will also gather the dispersed of Judah—the Jews—that have been trodden under the feet of the Gentiles for the last 1,800 years for shedding the blood of the Messiah.—JD 23:77-78, March 26, 1882.

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP114IN THE LAST DAYS. The Jews will be moved upon by and by, and they will return to the land of their fathers, and they will rebuild Jerusalem. These Lamanites here will receive the gospel of Christ in fulfilment of the revelations of God. The prophets which have been shut up in the north country with the nine and a half tribes led away by Shalmanezer, King of Assyria, thousands of years ago, will come in remembrance before God; they will smite the rocks and mountains of ice will flow down before them, and those long lost tribes will come forth in your day and mine, if we live a few years longer, and they will be crowned under the hands of the children of Ephraim—the elders of Israel who dwell in the land of Zion. And by and by the testimony of the gospel will be sealed among the Gentiles, and the gospel will turn to the whole house of Israel, and the judgments of God will back up the testimony of the elders of this Church, and the Lord will send messengers who will go forth and reap down the earth. [^1] —JD 18:38, June 24, 1875.

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP114THE PRINCIPLE OF GATHERING: ITS PURPOSE AND MEANING. The principle of gathering has been preached for the past thirty-seven years. Before this principle was preached by the elders, a great many of the people had received the spirit of it; and the consequence was, that no sooner had it been taught by the Presidency of the Church, than the people everywhere were ready to receive it. It had been revealed to them by the Holy Ghost, whose office it is to reveal that which is past, present, and that which is to come, and no surer, stronger testimony can be given to anyone than it affords. We have gathered here for the express purpose of establishing Zion which, according to the scriptures, must be before the gospel can be sent to the Jews.—JD 18:221, August 13, 1876.

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP115AFTER FORTY YEARS’ LABOR. We can see how fully the revelation, calling us to go to the western countries, has been fulfilled. In less than forty years, a standard has been lifted up, and people gathered here from France, England, Scotland, Wales, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and almost all the nations of Europe in fulfilment of that revelation. When it was given no man among us knew anything about Salt Lake or the Rocky Mountains; but it has been fulfilled before our eyes. We have come up here and in so doing have fulfilled the revelations of God, so far.—JD 15:282, January 12, 1873.

JewsGentiles, Fulness ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP115GOSPEL, JEWS, AND GENTILES

JewsGentiles, Fulness ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP115ALTHOUGH RESTORED TO THE GENTILES, THE GOSPEL WILL ALSO GO TO THE JEWS. The gospel is now restored to us Gentiles, for we are all Gentiles in a national capacity, and it will continue with us if we are faithful, until the law is bound, and the testimony sealed, and the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, when it will again revert to the Jews, whom the Lord will have prepared to receive it. They will gather to their own land, taking with them their gold and silver, and will rebuild their city and temple, according to the prediction of Moses and the prophets. When this time arrives, which is nigh, even at our doors, let the Gentile nations who reject the gospel which is now sent to them, prepare to meet the judgments of an offended God! For when their cup is full even to the brim, the Lord will then remember the chastisements of the Jews, his favored people, and at whose hands they will have received double for their iniquities. Offenses must come, said the Savior, but woe unto them by whom they come. Woe unto the Gentiles, who have administered afflictions to the Jews for these many years! Woe unto them if they now reject this only means of salvation, for the awful calamities spoken of in these books, the Bible and Book of Mormon, will certainly befall them.—JD 18:220-221, August 13, 1876.

Gentilesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP116MEANING OF "GENTILES." Sometimes our neighbors and friends think hard of us because we call them Gentiles; but, bless your souls, we are all Gentiles. The Latter-day Saints are all Gentiles in a national capacity. The gospel came to us among the Gentiles. We are not Jews, and the Gentile nations have got to hear the gospel first. The whole Christian world has got to hear the gospel, and when they reject it, the law will be bound and the testimony sealed, and it will turn to the house of Israel. Up to the present day we have been called to preach the gospel to the Gentiles, and we have had to do it.—JD 18:112, September 12, 1875.

Israel, Judah, People ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP116THE WORK OF RESTORING JUDAH. Again, here is Judah, which is the tribe of Israel from whom Jesus sprang; how many times have I seen them among the nations of the earth, standing in their synagogues, even gray-haired rabbis, with their faces to the east, calling on the great Eloheim to open the door for them to go back to Jerusalem, the land of their fathers, and to send their Shiloh, their king of deliverance. When I have seen this my soul has been filled with a desire to proclaim unto them the word of God unto eternal life, but I knew I could not do this, the time had not come, I could not preach to them. I might have stood in their midst for a month and preached unto them Jesus Christ or their Shiloh and king, but I should have failed to establish one particle of faith in their minds that he was the true Messiah.

Jesus Christ, Second Coming ofIsrael, Judah, People ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP117THE JEWS WILL ACCEPT CHRIST AT HIS COMING. They do not believe in Jesus Christ; there is an unbelief resting upon them, and will until they go home and rebuild Jerusalem and their temple more glorious than at the beginning, and then by and by, after this Church and kingdom has arisen in its glory, the Savior will come to them and show the wounds in his hands and side, and they will say to him, "Where did you get those wounds?" and he will answer, "In the house of my friends." Then their eyes will begin to open, and they will repent and mourn, they and their wives apart, and there will be a fountain opened for uncleanness to the house of Judah, and they will for the first time receive Jesus Christ as their Savior, they will begin to comprehend where they have been wandering for the space of two thousand years.

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP117THE CONVERSION OF JUDAH. You cannot convert a Jew, you may as well try to convert this house of solid walls as to convert them into the faith of Christ. They are set in their feelings, and they will be until the time of their redemption. They are looking forward to the time when they will go home and rebuild Jerusalem. They have looked for it many hundreds of years. They are looking for the coming of their king. They do not suppose for a moment that he has already come, but they are looking for him to come as the Lion of the tribe of Judah, not as a lamb led to the slaughter and as a sheep that is dumb before his shearers; they are looking for him to come with power and great glory.

Israel, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP117I thank God that the day is at hand when the Jews will be restored. I have felt to pray for them; I feel interested in their behalf, for they are of the seed of Abraham and a branch of the house of Israel, and the promises of God still remain with them. It is true they fell through unbelief, and the kingdom was taken from them and given to the Gentiles, and when it came from them, it came clothed with all its gifts, powers, and glory, priesthood and ordinances which were necessary for the salvation of men, and to prepare them to dwell in the presence of the Gods; and when the kingdom was given to the Gentiles, they for a while brought forth the natural fruits of the kingdom. But they, like the Jews, have fallen through the same example of unbelief, and now, in the last days, the kingdom of God has to be taken from the Gentiles, and restored back to every branch and tribe of the house of Israel; and when it is restored to them, it must go back with all its gifts, and blessings, and priesthood which it possessed when it was taken from them. But the Lord has said that in restoring these blessings to the children of Abraham, that he would be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. But from what branch or part of the house of Israel will the Lord look for this petition or request to issue, if not from the Latter-day Saints? For we are out of the tribe of Joseph through the loins of Ephraim, who has been as a mixed cake among the Gentiles, and are the first fruits of the kingdom, and the Lord has given unto us the kingdom and priesthood and keys thereof. Hence the Lord will require us to ask for those blessings which are promised unto Israel, and to labor for their salvation.—JD 4:232-233, February 22, 1857.

JewsIsrael, Gathering ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP118GATHERING OF THE JEWS IN UNBELIEF. As I have been reading to you today, the Jews have got to gather to their own land in unbelief. They will go and rebuild Jerusalem and their temple. They will take their gold and silver from the nations and will gather to the Holy Land. When they have done this and rebuilt their city, the Gentiles, in fulfilment of the words of Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and other prophets, will go up against Jerusalem to battle and to take a spoil and a prey; and then, when they have taken one-half of Jerusalem captive and distressed the Jews for the last time on the earth, their Great Deliverer, Shiloh, will come. They do not believe in Jesus of Nazareth now, nor ever will, until he comes and sets his foot on Mount Olivet and it cleaves in twain, one part going towards the east, and the other towards the west. Then, when they behold the wounds in his hands and in his feet, they will say, "Where did you get them?" And he will reply, "I am Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, your Shiloh, Him whom you crucified." Then, for the first time will the eyes of Judah be opened. They will remain in unbelief until that day. This is one of the events that will transpire in the latter day.—JD 15:277-278, January 12, 1873.

Israel, Tribes of, Ten Losta-Woodruff, WilfordTP119THE TEN TRIBES OF ISRAEL. Again, here are the ten tribes of Israel; we know nothing about them only what the Lord has said by his prophets. There are prophets among them, and by and by they will come along, and they will smite the rocks, and the mountains of ice will flow down at their presence, and a highway will be cast up before them, and they will come to Zion, receive their endowments, and be crowned under the hands of the children of Ephraim, and there are persons before me in this assembly today who will assist to give them their endowments. They will receive their blessings and endowments, from under the children of Ephraim, who are the first fruits of the kingdom of God in their dispensation, and the men will have to be ordained and receive their priesthood and endowments in the land of Zion, according to the revelations of God.—JD 4:231-232, February 22, 1857.

American Indiansa-Woodruff, WilfordTP119THE AMERICAN INDIANS. We are all Gentiles by nationality, we are of the Gentile nations who hold the sway of the earth. Not only will the Jews have blessings again, but these poor despised Indians will enjoy the light and glory of the gospel of Christ; their fathers proclaimed blessings upon them, by the spirit of prophecy and revelation, which are as assuredly to rest upon a remnant of that people as they exist, though they are now the most miserable beings that live upon the face of the earth. Nevertheless, a remnant of them will embrace the gospel, and their eyes will be opened and they will understand that they are of Israel. Our missionaries have labored among them, and what effect has it had? But little. Missionaries of different orders have labored among them, with little or no success.

American Indiansa-Woodruff, WilfordTP120We cannot do a great deal for that people, only pray for them, and treat them kindly, until the power of God begins to rest upon them, and they are waked up by the visions of heaven, and the angels begin to converse with them. They will be inspired by the spirit of the power of God, like other branches of Israel, and the day will come when the poor Utahs, and Piedes, and other degraded tribes in these mountains will again feel they possess souls among men as their fathers did before them. The ten tribes will also come in remembrance before the Lord, and they will again return with outstretched arms to their lands, and be led by leaders inspired by the Spirit and power of God, and they will come with visions, revelations, and prophets, and they will be baptized and ordained under the hands of the children of Ephraim, who bear the Holy Priesthood on the earth at that time, and they will be crowned with glory, power, immortality, and eternal lives before God.—JD 2:200-1, February 25, 1855.

Lamanitesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP120LO, THE POOR INDIAN! Why are these Lamanites roaming about in misery and wretchedness, living upon reptiles of the earth? Why are they cursed so bitterly, and brought down so low, for they are of the seed of Israel? It is because the chastening rod of the Almighty has rested upon them and their fathers. We should be very cautious and careful to keep the commandments of God, and do right, while we have such examples of the dealings of God with the nations who have broken his laws. We shall be corrected in all our errors, that we may become sanctified, and be prepared for those glories, principles, powers, and privileges which the Lord has promised to reveal to us.—JD 2:198, February 25, 1855.

Lamanitesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP121THE LAMANITES AND FULFILMENT OF PROPHECY. I am looking for the fulfilment of all things that the Lord has spoken, and they will come to pass as the Lord God lives. Zion is bound to rise and flourish. The Lamanites will blossom as the rose on the mountains. I am willing to say here that, though I believe this, when I see the power of the nation destroying them from the face of the earth, the fulfilment of that prophecy is perhaps harder for me to believe than any revelation of God that I ever read. It looks as though there would not be enough left to receive the gospel; but notwithstanding this dark picture, every word that God has ever said of them will have its fulfilment, and they, by and by, will receive the gospel. It will be a day of God's power among them, and a nation will be born in a day. Their chiefs will be filled with the power of God and receive the gospel, and they will go forth and build the new Jerusalem, and we shall help them. They are branches of the house of Israel, and when the fulness of the Gentiles has come in and the work ceases among them, then it will go in power to the seed of Abraham.—JD 15:272, January 12, 1873.

See also Chapter 20, "The Second Coming of Christ," for other references to these "messengers."

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
