Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

122Chapter 9

122The Mission of the Latter-day Saints

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP122THE CALLING OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP122A UNIQUE POSITION. There is no other people since the foundation of the world called to perform the work which you, Latter-day Saints, are called to perform. The God of heaven has given you the kingdom, the great and last kingdom, the only kingdom which has ever been set up on this earth to remain until the coming of the Son of Man. Although in its infancy, this work has a great and a mighty future; and as I have often said, the eyes of all the hosts of heaven are over us; the eyes of God himself, and the eyes of all the prophets and apostles who have ever lived in the flesh are watching this people. They know that they are not (neither can they be made) perfect without you; and they fully understand that we cannot be made perfect without them. They understand the greatness, the extent, the power and the glory of this dispensation.

Gratitudea-Woodruff, WilfordTP122CAUSE FOR GRATITUDE. I feel that of all people under heaven we ought to be the most grateful to our God; and that we ought to remember to keep our covenants, and humble ourselves before him, and labor with all our hearts to discharge faithfully the responsibilities which devolve upon us, and the duties which are required at our hands. For we can afford to do anything which God requires of us; but none of us can afford to do wrong. It would cost far more than this world with all its wealth is worth for the Latter-day Saints to do wrong and come under the disfavor of Almighty God.—JD 22:148, April 3, 1881.

Gratitudea-Woodruff, WilfordTP123We occupy a different position from any other generation; there has never been a generation since God made the world that has been called upon to perform the work that the Latter-day Saints have.—JD 22:232, June 26, 1881.

123OUR POSITION. I consider this to be our position today: we have the privilege of walking in the light; we have the privilege of comprehending and knowing the truth—of knowing the way to be saved and exalted in the presence of our Father and God. We are in a position to know his mind and will, through his servants the prophets. The Lord has given unto us teachers and inspired men-men who are inspired by the Spirit and power of God—clothed them with truth, and endowed them with wisdom to teach us at all times the path we should walk in. This is a great blessing, whether we realize it or not.—JD 8:268, August 26, 1860.

Pridea-Woodruff, WilfordTP123FALSE PRIDE NOT JUSTIFIED. We have no chance to be lifted up in the pride of our hearts with regard to the position we occupy. If the President of the Church or either of his counselors or of the apostles or any other man feels in his heart that God cannot do without him, and that he is especially important in order to carry on the work of the Lord, he stands upon slippery ground. I heard Joseph Smith say that Oliver Cowdery, who was the second apostle in this Church, said to him, "If I leave this Church it will fall."

Pridea-Woodruff, WilfordTP123Said Joseph, "Oliver, you try it." Oliver tried it. He fell; but the kingdom of God did not. I have been acquainted with other apostles in my day and time who felt that the Lord could not do without them; but the Lord got along with his work without them. I say to all men—Jew and Gentile, great and small, rich and poor—that the Lord Almighty has power within himself, and is not dependent upon any man, to carry on his work; but when he does call men to do his work they have to trust in him.—DW 40:559-560, April 6, 1890.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP124THE MISSION OF THE SAINTS. We have come to this earth upon a mission; and we have been gathered to the valleys of these mountains that we may be taught and instructed in the things of God; that we may magnify our calling before the Lord; that we may become saviors upon Mount Zion; that we may have power to go forth and warn the nations of the earth. I look upon the mission of the Latter-day Saints as being as important as that of any people that ever lived in any age of the world. I have often expressed my views with regard to this. As elders of Israel, very few of us fully comprehend our position, our calling, or relationship to God, our responsibility, or work the Lord requires at our hands. The Lord has given unto us the priesthood. This is conferred upon us that we may administer in the ordinances of life and salvation. But to enable us to perform our duties acceptably, there is one thing we need, one and all of us, and that is the Holy Spirit.—JD 23: 328-329, December 10, 1882.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP124THE PRIME OBJECTIVE. We have nothing else to do but to build up the kingdom of God. If we do this he will keep us and provide for us. We want to labor as a body of priesthood, to enter into the holy of holies; we want to come before God, and pray until we get the spirit of this work, until we comprehend our calling before God.—JD 24:53, January 27, 1883.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP124THE ANSWER TO A PARABLE. The Lord compared the kingdom of heaven to ten virgins; five were wise and five were foolish; five had oil in their lamps and five had not. Now the question is, how can we keep oil in our lamps? By keeping the commandments of God, remembering our prayers, do as we are told by the revelations of Jesus Christ, and otherwise assisting in building up Zion. When we are laboring for the kingdom of God, we will have oil in our lamps, our light will shine and we will feel the testimony of the spirit of God. On the other hand, if we set our hearts upon the things of the world and seek for the honors of men, we shall walk in the dark and not in the light. If we do not value our priesthood, and the work of this priesthood, the building up of the kingdom of God, the rearing of temples, the redeeming of our dead, and the carrying out of the great work unto which we have been ordained by the God of Israel—if we do not feel that these things are more valuable to us than the things of the world, we will have no oil in our lamps, no light, and we shall fail to be present at the marriage supper of the Lamb.—JD 22:208, January 9, 1881.

Progressa-Woodruff, WilfordTP125WE CANNOT REMAIN IN ONE GROOVE OR POSITION. The Latter-day Saints cannot stand still; we cannot become stereotyped. God has decreed that his Zion must progress. We cannot remain in one groove or position. We must build up the Zion and kingdom of God on the earth, or fail in the object of our calling and receiving the priesthood of God in these latter days.—JD 16:35, April 6, 1873.

Blessings of the Faithfula-Woodruff, WilfordTP125"ALL THIS AND HEAVEN TOO." All is peace in Zion, and I thank God for it. I am reminded of a saying made by Brother Cannon upon entering the well-furnished parlor of one of President Merrill's houses, of Richmond, in Cache County.

Blessings of the Faithfula-Woodruff, WilfordTP125"What," he said, "all this and heaven too?"

Blessings of the Faithfula-Woodruff, WilfordTP125Yes, God intends to give to his Saints the good things of the earth, as well as the blessings of heaven, as they shall become able to use them properly.—JD 24:54, January 27, 1883.

Chasteninga-Woodruff, WilfordTP125WE MUST UNITE TO BUILD ZION. Again, I will say to this congregation, God Almighty will afflict these Latter-day Saints if they do not pursue the course they are called upon to pursue. The Lord will build up Zion and carry out his purposes; but we will be chastised unless we listen to the counsels of the servants of God. If these Latter-day Saints turn to the right or the left, on political questions or on other principles, to separate themselves one from another and from the commandments of God, the Lord Almighty will hold them responsible and they will be chastised for doing it. I know this as well as I know I am alive. I am anxious for the salvation of the Latter-day Saints. I do not know anything about what you are on politics, but we should be united together and labor together to build up Zion. We have been called from the nations of the earth to do that; and if we do not do it, the judgments of Almighty God will rest upon us.—CR 47, October, 1897.

SelfishnessUnitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP126WITH "EVERY MAN FOR HIMSELF," IT IS THE DEVIL FOR US ALL. What are the things of this world? What are houses and lands, goods and chattels, and the treasures of the earth generally, to us? What are they to any Saints of God compared with eternal life? We should certainly be as well off to unite ourselves and our interests together in the things of God as to be separate. There have been too much selfishness and division and every man for himself amongst us, and the devil for us all.—JD 17:246, October 9, 1874.

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP126In every age of the world the Saints of God have been obliged to be united. Babylon may divide; the inhabitants of the earth may have all the division they wish for; but they will all receive the results of that disunion, and have done all the way through. But the Saints of God cannot prosper unless they are united.—DW 42:305, August 3, 1890.

Unitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP126"IF YE ARE NOT ONE YE ARE NOT MINE." The subject that I have upon my mind is, union among the Latter-day Saints. The Savior said to his apostles anciently, and to the apostles in our day: "I say unto you, be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine." "I and my Father are one."

GodheadUnitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP127There is a principle connected with this that I think is very important to us as a people and as a Church on the earth. With all the divisions, and all the discontent, and the quarrelings and opposition among the powers on earth, or that have been revealed from heaven, I have never heard that it has ever been revealed to the children of men that there was any division between God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. They are one. They always have been one. They always will be one, from eternity unto eternity. Our Heavenly Father stands at the head, being the author of the salvation of the children of men, having created and peopled the world and given laws to the inhabitants of the earth. This principle is shown unto us by the revelation of the laws which belong to the different kingdoms. There is a celestial kingdom, a terrestrial kingdom, and a telestial kingdom. There is a glory of the sun; a glory of the moon, and a glory of the stars; and as one star differs from another star in glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead. In the celestial kingdom of God there is oneness—there is union.—MS 52:577 (1890).

127RESPONSIBILITY OF THOSE WHO ACCEPT THE GOSPEL. We are held responsible for this work and the building up of the kingdom of God according to the best light and knowledge and revelation which God has given unto us. We ought to be thankful to the Lord for his mercies unto us. I feel as though his hand has been visible in the establishing of his Church here in the Rocky Mountains, from our first arrival as pioneers in the valleys of the mountains, when we found a barren desert, until the present. It is a great blessing to receive the gospel of Christ, to receive the Holy Priesthood, and to be called to labor in the priesthood for the salvation of the children of men. This labor is upon us and will remain upon us until the coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven, to reward every man according to the deeds done in the body.—CR 1-2, October, 1897.

Dutya-Woodruff, WilfordTP128OUR DUTY. We have been raised up of the Lord to take this kingdom and bear it off. This is our duty; but if we neglect our duty and set our hearts upon the things of this world, we will be sorry for it. We ought to understand the responsibility that rests upon us. We should gird up our loins and put on the whole armor of God. We should rear temples to the name of the Most High God, that we may redeem the dead.—JD 22:334, October 8, 1881.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP128Ours is no ordinary calling. Great opportunities and privileges have been bestowed upon us. To us, as a people, has been entrusted the grand and glorious labor of laying the foundation of the kingdom of God upon the earth. Every act of our lives should be performed with this in view. Nothing should be done by anyone calling himself a Latter-day Saint that will conflict with the policy which God has announced as proper to be adopted in establishing that kingdom.—MS 50:309, April 6, 1888.

Youtha-Woodruff, WilfordTP128TO THE YOUNG PEOPLE OF 1889. Who is going to take this kingdom and bear it off? Unto whom is the Lord going to look to take this kingdom in its final triumph and prepare it in its perfection and glory for the coming of the Son of Man? To our sons and daughters. It is these young men and maidens who dwell in these valleys of the mountains that have got to assume this responsibility. Upon their shoulders this kingdom has got to rest, when their fathers and elders have passed to the other side of the veil. This is before me just as plain as the light of the sun in the firmament of heaven.—MS 51:594 (1889).

Celestial Lawa-Woodruff, WilfordTP129OUR AIM: THE CELESTIAL LAW. Our aim is high. There are a few in this generation who have attempted to keep the celestial law. I desire to keep that law, so that when I have finished my probation here, I may get into the presence of my Heavenly Father, where our Savior is, where the old patriarchs and prophets are, where Joseph Smith and his brethren the apostles and those who have lived faithful until the day of their death are. That is my desire, and when I say I desire this for myself, I desire the same for my family.—JD 22:210, January 9, 1881.

Celestial Lawa-Woodruff, WilfordTP129We are trying to abide the celestial law of God; we are preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ, and endeavoring to carry out its principles. Now the question is, will it pay us to do so? Will it pay us to be faithful? Will it pay us to pass through whatever trials or afflictions, or persecutions, or even death itself, for the kingdom of God, for salvation and eternal life, the greatest of all gifts which God can bestow on the children on men? I say it will, and I hope that the Latter-day Saints, that all men in authority that we will all be faithful before the Lord, that we will remember our prayers, labor for the Holy Spirit, labor to know the mind and will of God, that we may know the path to walk in, that we may obtain the spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost, and that we may overcome the world and magnify our calling till we get through this probation.—JD 22:209-210, January 9, 1881.

Enemiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP129"WE DO NOT SEEK ANY MAN'S HURT." We do not seek any man's hurt, however much of an enemy he may be to us, we leave him in the hands of God, we know that he will reward him, and the reward will be all that God, saints, angels, devils or wicked men can ask and it will be all that any man can want.—JD 17:193, October 7, 1874.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP130THE LESSON OF FIFTY YEARS. It is now over fifty years since the organization of this Church and kingdom, and since its birth it has continued to progress and grow in numbers and in influence and power, and it will do so until Zion presents herself before the heavens in her glory, power and dominion, as the old prophets have seen it in vision. Then, what manner of men and women ought we to be, who are called to take part in the great latter-day work? We should be men and women of faith, valiant for the truth as it has been revealed and committed into our hand. We should be men and women of integrity to God, and to his Holy Priesthood, true to him and true to one another. We should not permit houses and land, gold and silver, nor any of this world's goods to draw us aside from pursuing the great object which God has sent us to perform. Our aim is high, our destiny is high, and we should never disappoint our Father, nor the heavenly hosts who are watching over us. We should not disappoint the millions in the spirit world who, too, are watching over us with an interest and anxiety that have hardly entered into our hearts to conceive of. These are great and mighty things which God requires of us.—JD 22:233, June 26, 1881.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP130I hope we live our religion. I hope we strive to keep the commandments of God. We occupy a very important position in the world. There are very few of the inhabitants of the earth who are laboring to build up Zion. There are very few, apparently, who are able to abide the law of God. There are very few who are willing to sacrifice anything for eternal life and salvation, and thousands will have to inherit a kingdom other than the celestial.

Mission of the Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP130Nevertheless, my brethren and sisters, we are laboring and progressing in this work. Zion is advancing; the kingdom of God is rolling on. The progress of this kingdom has never stopped from the day of its organization; it never will until it has accomplished all for which it has been organized and established on the earth to accomplish.—JD 23:330, December 10, 1882

Gratitudea-Woodruff, WilfordTP131I feel to say that there is no people under heaven who have so much cause to rejoice and to be grateful as the Latter-day Saints.—JD 22:148, April 3, 1881.

Spiritual versus Temporala-Woodruff, WilfordTP131"THE PRINCIPLES WE ADVOCATE WILL REMAIN FOREVER." We should live our religion. I have no fears with regard to the kingdom of God. We may have fears in regard to ourselves. This man may apostatize, the others may apostatize, John Taylor, myself, or anybody else may die, but it will make no difference with regard to this work. Israel will never be without a lawgiver. Zion will become all that Israel saw it, in its beauty, power and glory in the earth. I wanted to say so much to strangers here as well as Latter-day Saints. We believe in these principles with every sentiment of our soul. We expect them, we are ready to die for them, but they will never be destroyed. We may go to prison, we may suffer all manner of persecution, but the principles we advocate will remain forever.—JD 22:346, October 23, 1881.

Spiritual versus Temporala-Woodruff, WilfordTP131Gold and silver may pass away; houses and lands may perish; all temporal matters will pass away; but the priesthood never, salvation never, the kingdom of God never, and prophecy will never fall unfulfilled.—MS 58:306, April 5, 1896.

131I pray God to pour out his Holy Spirit upon us, that our ears may be open to hear and our hearts to understand the things of the kingdom of God, which is my prayer in the name of Jesus Christ.—JD 24:244, July 20, 1883.

132THE RESPONSIBILITY TO PREACH THE GOSPEL

132It is no light thing for any people in any age of the world to have a dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ committed into their hands, and when a dispensation has given, those receiving it are held responsible before high heaven for the use they make of it.—JD 22:205, January 9, 1881.

Missionaries, Calling ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP132GOSPEL MUST BE THOROUGHLY AND FAITHFULLY PREACHED TO EVERY NATION. The gospel must be thoroughly and faithfully preached to every nation under heaven, and the Lord holds us responsible, for verily the trust has been imposed upon us, and it behooves us to see to it.—JD 19:228, September 16, 1877.

Missionaries, Calling ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP132We are commanded to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth. The elders of Israel have been doing this for the last fifty years. We are still doing it, in the United States and other parts of the world. We shall continue to labor among the Gentiles just as long as the Lord says we must do so. But at the same time we have now been commanded to turn to a branch of the house of Israel. Here are the Lamanites, thousands and thousands of them surround us. They look to us for the gospel of Christ. It is our duty to go to them and organize them, and preach to them the words of life and salvation.—JD 23:330, December 10, 1882.

Fulness of the Gentilesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP132THE GENTILE FULNESS. The gospel of Christ has to go to the Gentiles until the Lord says "enough," until their times are fulfilled, and it will be in this generation.—JD 15:278, January 12, 1873.

Fulness of the Gentilesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP132When the Gentiles reject the gospel it will be taken from them, and go to the house of Israel, to that long suffering people that are now scattered abroad through all the nations upon the earth, and they will gather at home by the thousands, and by hundreds of thousands, and they will rebuild Jerusalem, their ancient city, and make it more glorious than at the beginning, and they will have a leader in Israel with them, a man that is full of the power of God and the gift of the Holy Ghost; but they are held now from this work, only because the fulness of the Gentiles has not yet come in. Tens of thousands among the Gentile nations will receive the gospel, but the majority of them will reject it, and then the Jews will receive it; and it will go to them with all the gifts, blessings, and powers it possessed when it was taken from them.—JD 2:200, February 25, 1855.

Missionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP133THE MISSIONARY SPIRIT. I have waded swamps and swum rivers, and have asked my bread from door to door; and have devoted nearly fifty years to this work. And why? Was there gold enough in California to have hired me to do it? No, verily; and what I have done and what my brethren have done, we have done because we were commanded of God. And this is the position we occupy today. We have preached and labored at home and abroad, and we intend to continue our labors, by the help of God, as long as we can have liberty to do it, and until the Gentiles prove themselves unworthy of eternal life, and until the judgments of God overtake the world, which are at the door.—JD 23:130, May 14, 1882.

Missionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP133WHAT GREATER CALLING. What greater calling can any man have on the face of the earth than to hold in his hands power and authority to go forth and administer in the ordinances of salvation? Do we prize these things in their fulness? I do not think we do. Nevertheless, so far we have been enabled to maintain our position, and to go forth and fulfil our missions as far as we have had time and opportunity. Certainly there has been nothing in this work that I have had greater consolation in, than in preaching the gospel to my fellow men and in administering unto them the ordinances of the house of God, both for the living and the dead.—MS 58:507, April 5, 1896.

Missionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP134THE JOY OF SENDING MISSIONARIES. I will say for myself and when I say it for myself I think I speak for a great many others—there is no joy that I have ever had that has been greater than that which has come to me in having sons receive the Holy Priesthood and go forth and administer among the nations of the earth the ordinances of life and salvation. It is a glorious gift to the sons of men. You give any soul the principles of life and salvation and administer these ordinances to him, and you become an instrument in the hands of God in the salvation of that soul. There is nothing given to the children of men that is equal to it.—DW 52:545-546, April 6, 1896.

Missionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP134WORDS TO THE MISSIONARIES. I wish to say a few words to the missionaries—to those who are going abroad to preach the gospel of Christ. I want to give you a word of exhortation and counsel, brethren: that is, whenever you are in doubt about any duty or work which you have to perform, never proceed to do anything until you go and labor in prayer and get the Holy Spirit. Wherever the Spirit dictates you to go or to do, that will be right; and, by following its dictates, you will come out right.

Missionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP134We shall be brought to many places during our career in the ministry among the nations of the earth, where we may consider a certain course of procedure to be right; but, if we do not know, it will be better for us to go before the Lord, and ask in faith that we may be instructed in the way of life.

RevelationMissionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP134I will take the liberty of saying that it is your privilege, brethren, to get the mind and will of the Lord in relation to your duties while abroad among the people; and it is also the privilege of the whole people who are called Israel to obtain the revelations of the Holy Spirit to guide them in every duty in life. Whatever position a man may stand in, it is his privilege, as a Saint of God, to enjoy this blessing; and a man who understands himself will not move without the operations of the Spirit to lead him.—JD 5:85, April 9, 1857.

135When we send men upon missions, or to perform any branch of business or labor, of course we expect them to perform it, and the Lord expects them to do the same.—JD 21:281, July 3, 1880.

Missionary WorkRevelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP135THE NECESSITY OF REVELATION IN PREACHING THE GOSPEL. There is no elder who has gone out to preach and who has baptized anybody but knows that he has had to have revelation to enable him to magnify his calling. He could not live without this and do his duty.—MS 56:642, October 8, 1894.

Missionary WorkTeaching with the Spirita-Woodruff, WilfordTP135There is one particular feature connected with the preaching of the gospel: You may send out a thousand elders and they will all teach the same doctrines; they will all labor for the building up of the same Church, they will be united; for their faith, their doctrines, and the organization of the Church have all been made known unto them by the revelations of God: hence they will see eye to eye in regard to the principles of the gospel. Supposing a thousand ministers of different denominations were to be sent out into the world, it would be very different with them from what it is with the elders of the Church of Christ: they would not be so united or so harmonious in their sentiments. Our union and oneness of sentiment constitutes one of the prominent beauties of the organization of the kingdom of God.—JD 8:265, April 22, 1860.

Teaching with the Spirita-Woodruff, WilfordTP135TESTS OF TRUTH. When he who has the authority preaches the gospel, he promises, in the name of Jesus Christ, to all that believe and obey, that the Holy Ghost will be given them. By virtue of this promise, all such can know for themselves, whether it is of God, or whether it is of man. If an unauthorized man goes forth, pretending to proclaim this same gospel, and it matters not how able and talented he may be, his doctrine can be detected, because the promises which were to follow the believers in Christ are not realized, the Holy Ghost which imparts its gifts unto men are not received, and hence the fallacy of the doctrines of men is exposed, so that none need be deceived.—JD 18:219, August 13, 1876.

Missionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP136THE WORLD'S RESPONSE TO THE GOSPEL MESSAGE. The Lord has offered the fulness of the everlasting gospel to the inhabitants of the earth today and they refuse to receive it. Brother (Orson) Pratt, here, myself, and thousands of us have traveled ten thousand miles on foot, without purse or scrip, carrying our knapsack or valise, and we have waded swamps, swum rivers, and begged our bread from door to door to preach the gospel to this generation. And how many have we got to the same gospel in all its simplicity and plainness that Jesus preached, and that the Holy Ghost rests upon those who believe it? Two of a city and one of a family, as the prophet has said, and we have gathered them to Zion. Nevertheless, the warning voice has gone forth to the world.—JD 18:115-116, September 12, 1875.

Teaching with the SpiritMissionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP136MISSIONARY SUCCESS. The whole secret of our success as far as making converts is concerned is, that we preach the same gospel in all its simplicity and plainness that Jesus preached, and that the Holy Ghost rests upon those who receive it, filling their hearts with joy and gladness unspeakable, and making them as one; and they then know of the doctrine for themselves whether it be of God or man.—JD 23:129, May 14, 1882.

Teaching with the SpiritMissionary Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP136What the Latter-day Saints have done by way of preaching the gospel under all kinds of difficulties, building up cities and subduing waste lands, and establishing themselves in the earth, they have done by the revelations and commandments of God to them.—JD 23:131, May 14, 1882.

1946 Bookcraft
