Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

138Chapter 10

138Characteristics of the Church and Kingdom of God

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP138GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP138THE NEW TESTAMENT PRESCRIPTION. The New Testament clearly shows that whenever God has had a people upon the earth—when he has had a church and kingdom in the world, it has been organized with prophets and apostles, and has been endowed with revelations, with diverse kinds of gifts, with healing power, with miracles, with dreams, and I may say with every member that belongs to the body of Christ, necessary for the edifying of the body, for the work of the ministry, or sanctifying of the people.—JD 2:192, February 25, 1855.

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP138CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRUE CHURCH—PRIESTHOOD AND REVELATION. The Lord never had—and never will have to the end of time—a church on earth without prophets, apostles, and inspired men. Whenever the Lord had a people on the earth that he acknowledged as such, that people were led by revelation. No man can find anything contrary to this. When the gospel was given to the Jews, all the gifts and graces and powers thereof, accompanied it. It was accompanied by the eternal priesthood—which is after the order of the Son of God, without which no man can administer in the ordinances of life and salvation.—JD 24:240, July 20, 1883.

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP138Now, have the Gentiles had that church and kingdom of God in their midst since the ancient apostles were put to death? I think not. At the present time there are some six hundred threescore and six different religions—different roads to heaven and to hell—in the world; but none of these bear much resemblance to the gospel as taught by Jesus Christ and his apostles. The whole Christian world today rises up against these Latter-day Saints because they profess to believe in revelation, in prophets and apostles. This has been the case ever since the organization of this Church.—JD 24:240-241, July 20, 1883.

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP139DANIEL'S PROPHECY. The God of heaven also proclaimed through Daniel, four thousand years ago, that in the latter days he would set up a kingdom which should never be destroyed; and the kingdom should not be left to other people, but it should break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it should stand forever. That prophet also declared that a little stone should be cut out of the mountain without hands; that the stone should become a great mountain and fill the whole earth; and that it should break in pieces all other kingdoms. Was that prophet inspired by the Spirit and power of God? I say in the name of Israel's God, he was, and so was Isaiah when he spoke of the gathering of the people unto the mountains of Israel to establish the Zion of God in its beauty, strength, power and glory.—JD 25:7, January 6, 1884.

Leadershipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP139FEARLESS LEADERSHIP. I rejoice that this kingdom is blessed with a leader, or leaders, who are not ashamed or afraid to watch over the interests of Zion—at all times to seek diligently the welfare of the children of Israel; who will point out the path for this people to walk in, whether that path may be popular or unpopular; leaders who will not hesitate to rebuke sin and wickedness; whether emanating from high or low places.—JD 2:191, 192, February 25, 1855.

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP139PROPHETIC LEADERSHIP. The Lord never had a people in any age of the world without prophets to lead them, even to the present day; and this is the reason why this Church and kingdom is so diverse from the views, feelings, and traditions of the nations around us, and that has caused it to meet with great opposition, persecution, and opposing spirits from the commencement, and perhaps may continue to do so until the winding-up scene.—JD 2:192, February 25, 1855.

140A KINGDOM OF PRIESTS—TO BUILD UP THE KINGDOM OF GOD. Now, having said so much on that subject, I want to say to my brethren and sisters, that we are placed upon the earth to build up Zion, to build up the kingdom of God. The greater proportion of the male members of Zion, who have arrived at the years of early manhood, bear some portion of the Holy Priesthood. Here is a kingdom of priests raised up by the power of God to take hold and build up the kingdom of God.—JD 22:333, October 8, 1881.

140SEARCHING AND BUILDING. And I will also say we cannot be fruitful in the things of the kingdom of God, except we are diligent in searching for the things of God. It is our duty to do so. We have been called by the spirit of revelation, by the voice of God from heaven, through the mouth of his prophets, to preach the gospel and build up this kingdom. This is the word of the Lord unto us.—JD 22:206, January 9, 1881.

Commandmentsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP140It may be asked—What are the commandments of the Lord? Many of them are contained in these records, the Bible, Book of Mormon, and book of Doctrine and Covenants; and we have the living oracles with us, and have had from the commencement.—JD 18:189, April 6, 1876.

ProgressBaptism for the Deada-Woodruff, WilfordTP140CHANGE AND DEVELOPMENT—A CHARACTERISTIC OF THE KINGDOM. How did we feel when we first heard the living could be baptized for the dead? We all went to work at it as fast as we had an opportunity, and were baptized for everybody we could think of, without respect to sex. I went and was baptized for all my friends, grandmothers, and aunts, as well as those of the male sex; but how was it? Why, by-and-by, it was revealed, through the servants of the Lord, that females should be baptized for females, and males for males; but the full particulars of this order were not revealed till after the days of Joseph: therefore this shows an advance in the building up of the kingdom, the gathering of Israel, and the warning of the nations of the earth. [^1] —JD 5:85, April 9, 1857.

Evil Speakinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP141THE SHIP ZION MOVES ONWARD BUT DOES NOT DRIFT. So many things have occurred which are entirely different to preconceived notions as to the course that would be taken in building up Zion that each one needs to have a knowledge that God is leading us in the path which we are now pursuing. To some who are inclined to despond and to take a gloomy view of affairs, the ship Zion may, perhaps, appear to be drifting away from its old moorings because things are being done or movements consented to which, to their eyes, portend disaster to us and to the work of God.

Jesus Christ As Head of ChurchEvil Speakinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP141There has always been a few among us who have been filled with evil forebodings, and who have failed to see the wisdom of God in the steps which his people have been led to take. They have questioned and found fault with the counsel that has been given and the measures which have been adopted and have asserted that revelation had ceased and the Saints were no longer guided by men to whom God made known his will. Experience has proved that in all such cases those who make these accusations are themselves in the dark.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP141But the faithful people—those who have lived strictly in accordance with their profession as Saints and with the requirements of the gospel—have not been assailed by doubts of this character. There might be many things which they could not fully understand, the reasons for which might not be fully apparent to them at the time; but possessing the Spirit of God, and being led by it, they trusted in the Lord and felt satisfied to leave the management of his kingdom and its affairs to his supreme wisdom. Time developed to their minds the correctness of the course which the Church had been led to adopt. This has occurred so frequently in our career that the instances will readily suggest themselves to those familiar with our history. In this way, however, the faith of the people has been constantly tested.—MS 50:309, April 6, 1888.

Jesus Christ As Head of Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP142GOD IS AT THE HELM. I want to get this principle into your minds, that God Almighty is guiding the course of this Church and kingdom; and we are not; and he has organized it for this day and generation, and it never will be rooted out of the earth again.—JD 24:54, January 27, 1883.

142BUILDING THE KINGDOM

142TO REDEEM THE EARTH. The God of heaven has put into our hands the gospel, the priesthood, the keys of his kingdom, and the power to redeem the earth from the dominion of sin and wickedness under which it has groaned for centuries, and under which it groans today. Let us lay these things to heart, and try to live our religion; so that when we get through we may look back on our lives, and feel that we have done what was required of us, individually and collectively.—JD 14:6, January 1, 1871.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP142A MISSION OF SALVATION. One of the proverbs common among the Saints of God in the dispensation in which we live—the dispensation of the fulness of times, is, "The kingdom of God or nothing." President Young has been trying to get us to labor to build up the kingdom of God. This kingdom has been given into the hands of the Latter-day Saints to establish on the earth, and unless we labor for its advancement we shall certainly fall short of salvation, for all the salvation there is, whether for Jew, Gentile, saint, or sinner, is in connection with this kingdom.—JD 16:32-33, April 7, 1873.

Inspirationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP143QUALIFICATIONS FOR BUILDING THE KINGDOM OF GOD. I have never believed any man was qualified from the days of father Adam to our day to go forth among the inhabitants of the earth with the declaration of the gospel of Jesus Christ, in a way and manner to convince them or teach them the gospel in its truth and purity, and in the power of God, only by inspiration. I have never believed that any man was qualified in any age of the world to build up the kingdom of God, or do the will of God only upon that principle. And I have felt, both while abroad in the world, as well as at home, that when called upon to teach the Latter-day Saints or anybody else—I have felt as though my lips ought to be touched with a live coal from the altar and my heart filled with inspiration from Almighty God.—JD 24:236, July 20, 1883.

143NEED OF INDIVIDUAL TESTIMONY. A man must become acquainted with the Lord, acquainted with the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ and receive them before he is qualified to understand the work of God, or the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.—JD 24:239, July 20, 1883.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP143GROWTH OF THE KINGDOM. I realize that the kingdom of our God, of which we are members, is only in its infancy, although we look upon it as being great, compared with what it has been.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP143It commenced like a small mustard seed, but it has gradually increased until the birds begin to lodge in its branches; and yet it is but small, compared with what it is to be. We have had many symbols and figures presented to our minds to illustrate the growth and increase of the kingdom of God; and I will here say, in respect to its being like the comparison made by Daniel, it answers the figure very well—only, instead of its rolling down hill, it has come up hill into the mountains; and I do hope and pray that it may continue to grow and increase in strength and in power, that when it rolls down hill it may go with mighty power and accelerated speed, that it may not require so much toil, labor, and fatigue to carry the kingdom from the mountains as it did to bring it up.—JD 5:82, April 9, 1857.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP144A GREAT FUTURE. This kingdom is rising in these valleys of the mountains, and it will eventually spread itself abroad through the length and breadth of North and South America. We may now look forward into the great future that lies before us, and it will require just as much of a stretch of faith now as it did in the beginning to look at the kingdom of God upon the earth as it is to be built up in this dispensation, so that the word of the Lord may go forth from Zion, the servants of God be clothed with the power of the priesthood, to give counsel and to preside over the nations of the earth, when the kingdoms of this world shall become the kingdom of our God and his Christ.—JD 9:165, December 1, 1861.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP144Now, so far as I am concerned, I want to say to my friends, and to all peoples, I have no fears with regard to the kingdom of God, I have no fears with regard to Zion; I have no fears with regard to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, it is in the hands of the Almighty, and all that He hath said with regard to its work in the latter days will come to pass in spite of earth and hell combined. I want the world to understand this. These are eternal truths. The principles will live when our nation is broken to pieces and wasted away, and when we ourselves have passed away to the spirit world. There is no power beneath the heavens that can hinder, stop or destroy the progress of truth and the decrees of Almighty God. I want to have the Latter-day Saints understand these things. We are in the hands of God. This is a very different generation from any other. It is a generation when the Lord has decreed—and that, too, before the world was made—that in the last days the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed nor given to other people; the little stone cut out of the mountains without hands shall become a great mountain and fill the whole earth. These are the declarations of the Lord himself.—JD 22:345-346, October 23, 1881.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP145TO FILL ALL THE EARTH. This kingdom is but a very small stone, comparatively speaking. It is not yet a great mountain, neither has it filled the whole earth; but, as the Lord lives, it will. This is how I feel; and I sincerely desire that we may have our minds opened upon the subject of the building up of the kingdom of God. In this we shall have joy, no matter whether in prosperity or adversity.—JD 8:272, August 26, 1860.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP145THE KINGDOM OF GOD TO STAND. Where have you ever read that the kingdom of God would be overthrown in the last days? You cannot find it anywhere on the pages of the records of divine truth. No; the revelations of God will be fulfilled. And we must exercise faith in that direction.—JD 25:10, January 6, 1884.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP145I will repeat what I have often said—there is no power beneath the heavens that can remove Zion out of her place, or destroy this Church and kingdom, as long as the people do the will of God, for he will sustain them, and overrule the acts of their enemies for their good and for the final triumph of his truth in the earth.—JD 22:233, June 26, 1881.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP145GETTING THE KINGDOM TO ROLL. As I remarked last evening in the high priests' quorum, we have been rolling this kingdom uphill, up a mountain; we have been toiling against a mighty current all the day long from its first organization, but the day will soon come, if this people will do their duty and take hold of the kingdom of God as they should do, it will soon get on the top of the mountain, and then it will begin to roll down from the mountains, and it will gather both strength and speed as it goes, and then instead of singing "Get out of the way, the handcart's rolling," it will be "Get out of the way, the kingdom's coming," and it will not stop until it has filled the whole earth. The Lord has proclaimed this in all the revelations he has given on the subject.—JD 4:229, February 22, 1857.

Kingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP146WHY BE STARTLED. It startles men when they hear the elders of Israel tell about the kingdoms of this world becoming the kingdom of our God and his Christ. They say it is treason for men to teach that the kingdom Daniel saw is going to be set up, and bear rule over the whole earth. Is it treason for God Almighty to govern the earth? Who made it? God, did he not? Who made you? God, if you have any Eternal Father. Well, whose right is it to rule and reign over you and the earth? It does not belong to the devil, nor to men. It has never been given to men yet; it has never been given to the nations. It belongs solely to God and he is coming to rule and reign over it.—JD 13:164, December 12, 1869.

Time ManagementKingdom of God, on Eartha-Woodruff, WilfordTP146TIME IS PRECIOUS. There is no time to throw away, and I would to God that the elders of Israel could fully realize and comprehend the great work that God has put upon their shoulders—the building up of his kingdom.—JD 21:192, July 3, 1880./

See also, "The Law of Adoption," in Chapter XI.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
