Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

147Chapter 11

147Temples and Temple Work

Temple WorkDead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP147General Considerations

Temple WorkDead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP147WHY BUILD TEMPLES. We are building temples to the name of the Lord. What are we building them for? That we may enter in and redeem the living and the dead.—JD 22:209, January 9, 1881.

Temple WorkDead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP147This is the reason why we are inspired to build these temples . . . because the day has come when they are needed. Joseph Smith went into the spirit world to unlock the prison doors in this dispensation or generation. He stayed here long enough to lay the foundation of this kingdom and obtain the keys belonging to it. The last time he ever met with the Quorum of the Twelve was when he gave them their endowments, and when they left him he had a presentiment that it was the last time they would ever meet. He had something to do the other side of the veil. He had a thousand to preach to there, where you and I have one in the flesh. And this is the great word of the last dispensation—the redemption of the living and the dead.—JD 21:194, July 3, 1880.

Dead, Salvation ofFamily, Eternala-Woodruff, WilfordTP147ETERNAL RELATIONSHIPS. There is hardly any principle the Lord has revealed that I have rejoiced more in than in the redemption of our dead; that we will have our fathers, our mothers, our wives and our children with us in the family organization, in the morning of the first resurrection and in the celestial kingdom. These are grand principles. They are worth every sacrifice. When we get home with God and with the prophets and apostles we will rejoice exceedingly. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him."—MS 52:596 (1890).

Dead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP148REDEMPTION OF THE DEAD. We have a great work before us in the redemption of our dead. The course that we are pursuing is being watched with interest by all heaven. There are fifty thousand millions [^1] of people in the spirit world who are being preached to by Joseph Smith, and the apostles and elders, his associates, who have passed away. Those persons may receive their testimony, but they cannot be baptized in the spirit world, for some body on the earth must perform this ordinance for them in the flesh before they can receive part in the first resurrection, and be worthy of eternal life. It takes as much to save a deadman as a living one. The eyes of these millions of people are watching over these Latter-day Saints. Have we any time to spend in trying to get rich and in neglecting our dead? I tell you no.—JD 22:34, June 26, 1881.

Endowmenta-Woodruff, WilfordTP148THE ENDOWMENT—A HISTORICAL INSIGHT. I was reading in the News last evening a speech reported to have been made by Joseph Smith III, son of the Prophet Joseph Smith, in which he accuses us of pursuing an entirely different course from that of his father; that his father had nothing to do with the endowments which form a part of our religious faith. I wish to say that Joseph Smith III utters falsehoods when he says what he is reported to have said about his father: for I bear record to this congregation, and I ask our young people to bear it in mind after I am gone, that Joseph Smith first made known to me the very ordinances which we give to the Latter-day Saints in our endowments. I received my endowments under the direction of Joseph Smith. . . Joseph Smith himself organized every endowment in our Church and revealed the same to the Church, and he lived to receive every key of the Aaronic and Melchizedek priesthoods from the hands of the men who held them while in the flesh, and who holds them in eternity.—JD 23:131, May 14, 1882.

Endowmenta-Woodruff, WilfordTP149THE LORD'S ENDOWMENTS. The Lord has had his endowments a great many years ago. He has ascended to his thrones, principalities and powers in the eternities. We are his children. He has given us a law, and he has placed us here on the earth to obey that law. We are here to fill a probation and receive an education.—JD 22:209, January 9, 1881.

Dead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP149THE PHILOSOPHY OF SALVATION FOR THE DEAD

Dead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP149A DOCTRINE OF EQUALITY. God is no respecter of persons; he will not give privileges to one generation and withhold them from another; and the whole human family, from father Adam down to our day, have got to have the privilege, somewhere, of hearing the gospel of Christ; and the generations that have passed and gone without hearing that gospel in its fulness, power and glory, will never be held responsible by God for not obeying it. Neither will he bring them under condemnation for rejecting a law they never saw or understood; and if they live up to the light they had they are justified so far, and they have to be preached to in the spirit world. But nobody will baptize them there, and somebody has got to administer for them by proxy here in the flesh, that they may be judged according to men in the flesh and have part in the first resurrection.—JD 18:190-191, April 6, 1876.

Dead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP149AN EXTENSIVE MISSION. Our mission is more extended and extensive than we realize. We are bordering upon the millennium. We are living in the great and last dispensation, in the which the God of Israel expects us, his servants, his sons and daughters, to perform the work which has been left to our charge. It is our duty to build these temples. It is our duty to enter into them and redeem our dead. Joseph Smith is preaching to the spirits in prison; so are all the elders who have died in the faith. There are millions of them there, and they must have the gospel offered to them. Joseph Smith and others cannot baptize the spirits in water, it is not the law; but their posterity, their sons and daughters who are living in the last dispensation, are expected to go into these temples and there redeem their dead. This is a good work and it is a great blessing for men and women to have this privilege. We have one of these temples finished, and we are doing a great work in that temple. A hundred and sixty-two thousand persons have been baptized for the dead, and nearly seventy thousand endowments have been given in that temple. We have only just begun this work. We want the Logan temple finished, as also the temple at Manti, that the people may go forth and redeem their dead. Our forefathers are looking to us to attend to this work. They are watching over us with great anxiety, and are desirous that we should finish these temples and attend to certain ordinances for them, so that in the morning of the resurrection they can come forth and enjoy the same blessings that we enjoy. We are living in the flesh and have the privilege of receiving the gospel of Christ for ourselves. Our forefathers had not this privilege; and as their posterity when we meet them in the spirit world we shall have the joy and satisfaction of knowing that we did our duty by them while here upon the earth. We occupy a position in this capacity towards them the same as we do to this generation. We occupy the position of saviors upon Mount Zion.—JD 23:330-331, December 10, 1882.

Spirits in PrisonDead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP151THE REDEMPTION OF THE SPIRITS OF MEN WHO DIED WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE OF THE GOSPEL. There has been a good deal said here with regard to baptism for the dead. When Joseph Smith had laid the foundation of this word he was taken away. There are good reasons why it was so. Jesus sealed his testimony with his blood. Joseph Smith did the same, and from the day he died his testimony has been in force upon the whole world. He has gone into the spirit world and organized this dispensation on that side of the veil; he is gathering together the elders of Israel and the Saints of God in the spirit world, for they have a work to do there as well as here. Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Father Smith, David Patten and the other elders who have been called to the other side of the veil have fifty times as many people to preach to as we have on the earth. There they have all the spirits who have lived on the earth in seventeen centuries—fifty generations, fifty thousand millions of persons who lived and died here without having seen a prophet or apostle, and without having the word of the Lord sent unto them. They are shut up in prison, awaiting the message of the elders of Israel. We have only about a thousand millions of people on the earth, but in the spirit world they have fifty thousand millions; and there is not a single revelation which gives us any reason to believe that any man who enters the spirit world preached the gospel there to those who lived after him; but they all preach to men who were in the flesh before they were. Jesus himself preached to the antediluvian world, who had been in prison for thousands of years. So with Joseph Smith and the elders—they will have to preach to the inhabitants of the earth who have died during the last seventeen centuries; and when they hear the testimony of the elders and accept it there should be somebody on the earth, as we have been told, to attend to the ordinances of the house of God for them.—JD 16:269, October 8, 1873.

Spirits in PrisonDead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP152THOUSANDS TO EMBRACE THE GOSPEL IN THE SPIRIT WORLD. Great and glorious are these principles which God has revealed to us concerning the redemption of our dead. I tell you when the prophets and apostles go to preach to those who are shut up in prison, and who have not received the gospel, thousands of them will there embrace the gospel. They know more in that world than they do here.—MS 56:341, May 28, 1894.

Dead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP152DISCERNING THE SIGNIFICANT. Oh, I wish many times that the veil were lifted off the face of the Latter-day Saints. I wish we could see and know the things of God as they do who are laboring for the salvation of the human family who are in the spirit world; for if this were so, this whole people, with very few, if any, exceptions, would lose all interest in the riches of the world, and instead thereof their whole desires and labors would be directed to redeem their dead, to perform faithfully the work and mission given us on earth; so that when we ourselves should pass behind the veil and meet with Joseph and the ancient apostles, and others who are watching over us and who are deeply interested in our labors, we might feel satisfied in having done our duty.—JD 21:302, August 1, 1880.

Saviors on Mount Ziona-Woodruff, WilfordTP152Many of us have traveled a great many years in the vineyard of the Lord, trying to save the souls of men and lay up treasures in heaven. Thousands have been redeemed in these temples. You have one here in Logan. We have been called as saviors upon Mount Zion, while the kingdom has been the Lord's. These are glorious principles. To be saved ourselves, and to save our fellow men, what a glorious thing! What is gold and silver; what are the riches of this world? They all perish with the using. We pass away and leave them. But if we have eternal life, if we keep the faith and overcome, we shall rejoice when we go upon the other side of the veil.—MS 52:596 (1890).

Baptism for the Deada-Woodruff, WilfordTP152REVELATION AND THE REDEMPTION OF THE DEAD

Baptism for the Deada-Woodruff, WilfordTP152THE BEGINNING. What have you to say about redeeming the dead, or the work of the temples of our God, that is not already revealed? I will say this: When the Prophet Joseph had this revelation from heaven, what did he do? There are witnesses here of what he did. He never stopped till he got the fulness of the word of God to him concerning the baptism for the dead. But before doing so he went into the Mississippi River, and so did I, as well as others, and we each baptized a hundred for the dead, without a man to record a single act that we performed. Why did we do it? Because of the feeling of joy that we had, to think that we in the flesh could stand and redeem our dead. We did not wait to know what the result of this would be, or what the whole of it should be. Finally the Lord told the Prophet: "When any of you are baptized for our dead, let there be a recorder, and let him be eyewitness of your baptisms; let him hear with his ears, that he may testify of a truth, saith the Lord; that in all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven; whatsoever you bind on earth, may be bound in heaven; whatsoever you loose on earth, may be loosed in heaven." That was the beginning of this work.

RevelationDead, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP153MORE REVELATION TO COME. I want to say, as the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that we should now go on and progress. We have not gotten through with revelation. We have not gotten through with the work of God. But at this period we want to go on and fulfil this commandment of God given through Malachi—that the Lord should send Elijah the prophet, "and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse." Ye sons of men, I say unto you, in the name of Israel's God, those very principles, that God has revealed are what have stayed the judgments of the Almighty on the earth. Were it not for these principles, you and I would not be here today. We have had prophets and apostles. President Young, who followed President Joseph Smith, led us here. He organized these temples and carried out the purposes of his calling and office. He laid the foundation of this great temple on this block, as well as others in the mountains of Israel. What for? That we might carry out these principles of redemption for the dead. He accomplished all that God required at his hands. But he did not receive all the revelations that belong to this work; neither did President Taylor, nor has Wilford Woodruff. There will be no end to this work until it is perfected.—MS 56:324-325, May 21, 1894.

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP154ADDED REVELATION: "THE LAW OF ADOPTION." I want to lay before you what there is for us to do at this present time; and in doing this I desire particularly the attention of President Lorenzo Snow, of the Salt Lake Temple; President M. W. Merrill, of the Logan Temple; President J. D. T. McAllister, of the Manti Temple, and President D. H. Cannon, of the St. George Temple, and those associated with them. You have acted up to all the light and knowledge that you have had; but you have now something more to do than what you have done. We have not fully carried out those principles in fulfilment of the revelations of God to us, in sealing the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers. I have not felt satisfied, neither did President Taylor, neither has any man since the Prophet Joseph who has attended to the ordinance of adoption in the temples of our God. We have felt that there was more to be revealed upon this subject than we had received. Revelations were given to us in the St. George Temple, which President Young presented to the Church of God. Changes were made there, and we still have more changes to make, in order to satisfy our Heavenly Father, satisfy our dead and ourselves. I will tell you what some of them are. I have prayed over this matter, and my brethren have. We have felt, as President Taylor said, that we have got to have more revelation concerning sealing under the law of adoption. Well, what are these changes? One of them is the principle of adoption. In the commencement of adopting men and women in the temple at Nauvoo, a great many persons were adopted to different men who were not of the lineage of their fathers, and there was a spirit manifested by some in that work that was not of God. Men would go out and electioneer and labor with all their power to get men adopted to them. One instance I will name here: A man went around Nauvoo asking every man he could, saying, "You come and be adopted to me, and I shall stand at the head of the kingdom, and you will be there with me." Now, what is the truth about this? Those who were adopted to that man, if they go with him, will have to go where he is. He was a participator in that horrible scene—the Mountain Meadow massacre. Men are in danger sometimes in being adopted to others, until they know who they are and what they will be. Now, what are the feelings of Israel? They have felt that they wanted to be adopted to somebody. President Young was not satisfied in his mind with regard to the extent of this matter; President Taylor was not.

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP155When I went before the Lord to know who I should be adopted to (we were then being adopted to prophets and apostles) the Spirit of God said to me, "Have you not a father, who begot you?"

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP155"Yes, I have."

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP155"Then why not honor him? Why not be adopted to him?"

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP156"Yes," said I, "that is right."

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP156I was adopted to my father, and should have had my father sealed to his father, and so on back; and the duty that I want every man who presides over a temple to see performed from this day henceforth and forever, unless the Lord Almighty commands otherwise, is, let every man be adopted to his father. When a man receives the endowments, adopt him to his father; not to Wilford Woodruff, nor to any other man outside the lineage of his fathers. That is the will of God to this people. I want all men who preside over these temples in these mountains of Israel to bear this in mind. What business have I to take away the rights of the lineage of any man? What right has any man to do this? No; I say let every man be adopted to his father; and then you will do exactly what God said when he declared he would send Elijah the prophet in the last days. Elijah the prophet appeared unto Joseph Smith and told him that the day had come when this principle must be carried out. Joseph Smith did not live long enough to enter any further upon these things. His soul was wound up with this work before he was martyred for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. He told us that there must be a welding link of all dispensations and of the work of God from one generation to another. This was upon his mind more than most any other subject that was given to him.

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP156In my prayers the Lord revealed to me that it was my duty to say to all Israel to carry this principle out, and in fulfilment of that revelation I lay it before this people.

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP156I say to all men who are laboring in these temples, carry out this principle, and then we will make one step in advance of what we have had before.

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP156Myself and counselors conversed upon this and were agreed upon it, and afterwards we laid it before all the apostles who were here (two were absent—Brothers Thatcher and Lund, the latter being in England), and the Lord revealed to every one of these men—and they would bear testimony to it if they were to speak—that that was the word of the Lord to them. I never met with anything in my life in this Church that there was more unity upon than there was upon that principle. They all feel right about it, and that it is our duty. That is one principle that should be carried out from this time henceforth.

Patriarchal ChainFamily History, GenealogyAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP157"But," says one, "suppose we come along to a man who perhaps is a murderer." Well, if he is a murderer, drop him out and connect with the next man beyond him. But the Spirit of God will be with us in this matter.

Patriarchal ChainAdoption, Law ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP157We want the Latter-day Saints from this time to trace their genealogies as far as they can, and to be sealed to their fathers and mothers. Have children sealed to their parents, and run this chain through as far as you can get it. When you get to the end, let the last man be adopted to Joseph Smith, who stands at the head of the dispensation. This is the will of the Lord to this people, and I think when you come to reflect upon it you will find it to be true.—MS 56:335-339, May 28, 1894.

Patriarchal ChainSealinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP157FURTHER ON FAMILY SEALINGS. Another principle connected with this subject I want to talk about. A man has married a woman, and they have a family of children. The man lays down in death without ever hearing the gospel. His wife afterwards hears the gospel and embraces it. She comes to the temple and she wants to be sealed to her husband, who was a good man. The feeling has been to deny this and to say, "No, he was not in the Church, and you cannot be sealed to your husband." Many a woman's heart has ached because of this, and as a servant of God I have broken that chain a good while ago. I have laid before every woman this principle and let her have her choice. Why deprive a woman of being sealed to her husband because he never heard the gospel? What do any of us know with regard to him? Will he not hear the gospel and embrace it in the spirit worlds . . .

Patriarchal ChainSealings for the Deada-Woodruff, WilfordTP158There will be very few, if any, who will not accept the gospel. Jesus, while his body lay in the tomb, went and preached to the spirits in prison, who were destroyed in the days of Noah. After so long an imprisonment, in torment, they doubtless gladly embraced the gospel, and if so they will be saved in the kingdom of God. The fathers of this people will embrace the gospel. It is my duty to honor my father who begot me in the flesh. It is your duty to do the same. When you do this, the Spirit of God will be with you. And we shall continue this work, the Lord adding light to that which we have already received. I have had friends adopted to me. We all have, more or less. But I have had peculiar feelings about it, especially lately. There are men in this congregation who wish to be adopted to me. I say to them today, if they can hear me, Go and be adopted to your fathers, and save your fathers, and stand at the head of your father's house, as saviors upon Mount Zion, and God will bless you in this. This is what I want to say, and what I want carried out in our temples. I have had a great anxiety over this matter. I have had a great desire that I might live to deliver these principles to the Latter-day Saints, for they are true. They are one step forward in the work of the ministry and in the work of the endowments in these temples of our God. When you get to the last man in the lineage, as I said before, we will adopt that man to the Prophet Joseph, and then the Prophet Joseph will take care of himself with regard to where he goes.

Patriarchal Chaina-Woodruff, WilfordTP158A man may say, "I am an apostle, or I am a high priest, or I am an elder in Israel, and if I am adopted to my father, will it take any honor from me?"

Patriarchal Chaina-Woodruff, WilfordTP158I would say not. If Joseph Smith was sealed to his father, with whom many of you were acquainted, what effect will that have upon his exaltation and glory? None at all. Joseph Smith will hold the keys of this dispensation to the endless ages of eternity. It is the greatest dispensation God ever gave to man, and he was ordained before the world was to stand in the flesh and organize this work. He was martyred for the word of God and testimony of Jesus, and when he comes in the clouds of heaven he will wear a martyr's crown. Those of you who stand here—I do not care whether you are apostles or what you are—by honoring your fathers you will not take any honor from your heads; you will hold the keys of the salvation of your father's house, as Joseph Smith does. You will lose nothing by honoring your fathers and redeeming your dead. It is a glorious work. When I returned from England in 1841 and heard Joseph Smith give this revelation, that we had power to redeem our dead, one of the first things I thought was, "I have a mother in the spirit world." My father was in the flesh. I baptized and ordained him and brought him up to Zion, where he is buried. But I never saw my mother to know her. She died when I was an infant. I had power to seal my mother to my father. Was not that a satisfaction? It was to me. I have gone to work with the assistance of my friends and redeemed my father's and my mother's house. When I inquired of the Lord how I could redeem my dead, while I was in St. George, not having any of my family there, the Lord told me to call upon the Saints in St. George and let them officiate for me in that temple, and it should be acceptable unto him. Brother McAllister and the brethren and sisters there have assisted me in this work, and I felt to bless them with every feeling of my heart. This is a revelation to us. We can help one another in these matters, if we have not relatives sufficient to carry this on, and it will be acceptable unto the Lord.—MS 56:339-341, May 28, 1894.

Temple Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP160BUILDING THE MODERN TEMPLES

Temple Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP160ADMONITION IN 1877 TO COMPLETE THE TEMPLES. I want to say one thing to the Latter-day Saints, which is resting upon my mind. President Young having now passed away, his labors with us have ceased for the present. He, with his brethren, built and completed one temple at St. George, also laid the foundation for one at Manti and one at Logan, and besides a great deal of work has been done on the one in this city. He left this unfinished work for us to carry on to completion; and it is our duty to rise up and build these temples. I look upon this portion of our ministry as a mission of as much importance as preaching to the living; the dead will hear the voice of the servants of God in the spirit world, and they cannot come forth in the morning of the resurrection, unless certain ordinances are performed, for, and in their behalf, in temples built to the name of God. It takes just as much to save a dead man as a living man.—JD 19:228, September 16, 1877.

Dead, Salvation ofDeclaration of Independencea-Woodruff, WilfordTP160AN INCIDENT AT ST. GEORGE TEMPLE. I will here say that two weeks before I left St. George, the spirits of the dead gathered around me, wanting to know why we did not redeem them. Said they, "You have had the use of the Endowment House for a number of years, and yet nothing has ever been done for us. We laid the foundation of the government you now enjoy, and we never apostatized from it, but we remained true to it and were faithful to God."

Dead, Salvation ofDeclaration of Independencea-Woodruff, WilfordTP160These were the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and they waited on me for two days and two nights. I thought it very singular, that notwithstanding so much work had been done, and yet nothing had been done for them. The thought never entered my heart, from the fact, I suppose, that heretofore our minds were reaching after our more immediate friends and relatives.

Dead, Salvation ofDeclaration of Independencea-Woodruff, WilfordTP161I straightway went into the baptismal font and called upon Brother McAllister to baptize me for the signers of the Declaration of Independence, and fifty other eminent men, making one hundred in all, including John Wesley, Columbus, and others. I then baptized him for every President of the United States, except three; and when their cause is just, somebody will do the work for them.—JD 19:229, September 16, 1877.

161A STORY ABOUT THE LOGAN TEMPLE. With regard to our preaching I will say that as apostles of God and as men appointed to lead and guide Israel, we have a great many things presented to our minds that at the time appear to be beyond our comprehension. I was thinking today of a time many years ago, when President Young and several brethren of the twelve, were in Logan; it was a time when a railroad up to this region was not even dreamed of, the time when Brothers Ezra T. Benson and Peter Maughan presided here; when at a meeting President Young called upon me to talk to the people assembled. The night before, however, we had been met by a long line of children and young people, from three up to twenty years of age; they had come out to meet the prophet, and presented a fine sight. While talking to the people I felt led to speak to the children and young people; and I told them that I wanted them to remember the visit which the president was making them because the day would come when they were grown up, when they would talk to one another and say, that on such a day President Young and party visited us, and we were told then that we should see the day when a temple should be built in this place, from the top of which we would be able to survey the country around which could be occupied by ten thousand of our people; and you will say that this was told to us when Brother Benson and Brother Maughan presided here. We never thought of building a temple here at that time; it had never entered into the heart of man to do so. Brothers Benson and Maughan have been for some years now in the spirit world. Today you are engaged building a temple which will be completed and dedicated; and when this shall be done these young people will have the opportunity of going to the top of the building and will then see what I promised to you in those early days.

162I mention this to show you how things are presented to our minds and given utterance to in our public teachings about which, at the time, we have little or no idea.—JD 21:298-299, August 1, 1880.

Salt Lake Templea-Woodruff, WilfordTP162A STORY ABOUT THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE. When in the western country, many years ago, before we came to the Rocky Mountains, I had a dream. I dreamed of being in these mountains, and of seeing a large, fine-looking temple erected in one of these valleys which was built of cut granite stone. I saw that temple dedicated, and I attended the dedicatory services, and I saw a good many men that are living today in the midst of this people. When the foundation of that temple was laid I thought of my dream and a great many times since. And whenever President Young held a council of the brethren of the Twelve and talked of building the temple of adobe or brick, which was done, I would say to myself, "No, you will never do it"; because I had seen it in my dream built of some other material. I mention these things to show you that things are manifested to the Latter-day Saints sometimes which we do not know anything about, only as they are given by the Spirit of God.—JD 21:299-300, August 1, 1880.

Salt Lake Templea-Woodruff, WilfordTP162I thank God we have a temple upon this block, where the Latter-day Saints in this religion can enter and redeem their dead—their fathers and mothers and their progenitors who have gone into the spirit world without the gospel. They never heard the gospel, and no man, in time or in eternity, will ever be saved in the celestial kingdom of God without the gospel of Christ.—MS 56:660, October 15, 1894.

Temple Worka-Woodruff, WilfordTP163TEMPLE BUILDING TO CONTINUE OVER THE WORLD. This is a preparation necessary for the second advent of the Savior; and when we shall have built the temples now contemplated, we will then begin to see the necessity of building others, for in proportion to the diligence of our labors in this direction, will we comprehend the extent of the work to be done, and the present is only a beginning. When the Savior comes, a thousand years will be devoted to this work of redemption; and temples will appear all over this land of Joseph—North and South America—and also in Europe and elsewhere; and all the descendants of Shem, Ham, and Japheth, who received not the gospel in the flesh, must be officiated for in the temples of God, before the Savior can present the kingdom to the Father, saying, "It is finished."—JD 19:229-230, September 16, 1877.

See previous footnote advice as to the meaning of the statistical figure mentioned by President Woodruff.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
