Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

176Chapter 13

176Certain Church Practices

a-Woodruff, WilfordWord of WisdomTP176The Word of Wisdom

a-Woodruff, WilfordWord of WisdomTP176We have been called upon by the Lord and his servants to keep the Word of Wisdom; it is time we did it.—JD 14:35, May 6, 1870.

Word of Wisdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP176THE WORD OF WISDOM APPLIES TO ALL. The Word of Wisdom applies to Wilford Woodruff, the President of the Church, and it applies to all the leaders of Israel as well as to the members of the Church; and if there are any of these leading men who cannot refrain from using tobacco or liquor in violation of the Word of Wisdom, let them resign and others take their places. As leaders of Israel, we have no business to indulge in these things.—MS 56:737, November 19, 1894.

Word of Wisdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP176TEMPORAL SALVATION—THROUGH THE WORD OF WISDOM. With regard to the Word of Wisdom, I must say I was agreeably surprised to see how generally the people are taking hold of it. We did not see much coffee or tea, and I do not think that one in the company drank a drop of it. I rejoice in this; it is going to make the people more wealthy, it will save us a great deal of means, besides preventing our being poisoned to death, for these things are poisoned, and the Lord understood that when he gave the Word of Wisdom many years ago.—JD 12:388, May 19, 1867.

Word of Wisdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP176"APPLICABLE TO THE WEAKEST SAINT." We have been taught the Word of Wisdom. It was given to us many years ago, and the Lord said it was applicable to the weakest Saint. Very few of us have kept the Word of Wisdom; but I have no doubt that if the counsel of President Young were carried out it would save the people of this Territory a million of dollars annually. I feel that we ought to put these things into practice. We ought to unite together in all matters required of us in order to carry out the purposes of the Lord our God. The people are able to do it if they feel disposed. Why, Bishop Hardy told me here this morning that he had laid aside his tobacco; he has loved it almost ever since he was born, and if he can leave it off every man in Israel ought to be able to do it. It was said today that whisky-drinking makes fools of men; it does. Its effects are much worse than they used to be, for the liquor made nowadays contains so much strychnine and arsenic that it is enough to kill anybody, and unless those who use it do lay it aside many will die. Lay aside whisky, tobacco, tea, and coffee, and use none of them unless it be as a medicine. We can all do it, and there is not a man or woman in Israel, with any faith in this work, but is required to do so.—JD 11:370, April 7, 1867.

177TITHING

a-Woodruff, WilfordTithes and OfferingsTP177A COMMANDMENT OF GOD. Tithing is a commandment of God to the people, and should be observed.—MS 56:658, October 15, 1894.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP177TITHING—A PRINCIPLE OF SACRIFICE. President Taylor treated this forenoon upon the law of tithing. Perhaps the Latter-day Saints do not want to hear much more upon this subject, but I have felt a long time that we as a people were somewhat ignorant of that law. We have looked upon it as a matter of little consequence; we have looked upon it with a great deal of indifference whether we pay tithing or not. But the subject was clearly set forth this forenoon by president Taylor. He has no power to change this law, nor has any other man; and if we do not obey it, we can lay no claim to the promises made to those who obey it. These things are very plain and pointed. The principle of tithing has been a principle of sacrifice in almost every age of the world; in fact, it was peculiarly so among the people in ancient days, and among even the heathen nations of the earth.—JD 22:207, January 9, 1881.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP178TITHING—A MEANS OF RECEIVING THE BLESSINGS OF ACTIVE MEMBERSHIP. The law of tithing was carried out by all Israel, from the creation of the world down to the present time—that is, whenever God had a people upon the earth they observed the law of tithing. And I believe, as President Taylor has stated, that it is our duty to pay our tithes and offerings before the Lord. It is a commandment of the Lord that we should do this, and I do not feel myself called upon as a member of this Church and kingdom to require the President of this Church to attempt to change this order, or attempt to find fault with him because he does not permit young men who curse and swear, who do not pay their tithing, etc., to enter the Lord's house and there have sealed upon their heads the highest blessings that were ever given to patriarchs and prophets, who have sealed their testimony with their blood. He has told the bishops and presidents of stakes not to give recommends to young men or old men, or anybody else, who do not obey the laws of God in this respect, and I feel to back him up in this matter, for I know he will be justified before the Lord.—JD 22:207-208, January 9, 1881.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP178TITHING IS FOR THE BENEFIT OF MAN. Some of the people have looked upon the law of tithing as a kind of tax and burden laid upon them, but who is it for? Our tithing, our labor, and all that we do in the kingdom of God, who is it all for? The tithing is not to exalt the Lord, or to feed or clothe him. I want the brethren to understand this one thing, that our tithing, our labor, our works are not for the exaltation of the Almighty, but they are for us. Not but what the Lord is pleased to see us obey his commandments, because by doing this it will place us in a position that will fulfil and accomplish the object of our creation, and bring about the end designed by our coming to take tabernacles here in the flesh. Again, when we do wrong, the Lord knows we shall inherit sorrow and misery if we continue in that wrong. Then I say, brethren, let us understand this as it is, and we shall do well. In paying our tithing, in obeying every law that is given to exalt us and to do us good, it is all for our individual benefit and the benefit of our children, and it is not of any particular benefit of the Lord, only as he is pleased in the faithfulness of his children and desires to see them walk in the path which leads to salvation and eternal life.—JD 4:192-193, January 25, 1857.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP179PRACTICE TITHING AS WELL AS PREACH IT! I have felt for a good while that we required stirring up with regard to the law of tithing, and other things. The question is here: If this is the work of God, and the Lord has given us commandments, will we be blessed in obeying these commandments? The Lord holds our destiny in his hands. The earth, the riches of the earth, the crops, the herds, or flocks, our food and raiment are all the gifts of God to us.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP179Of course, we are required to practice what we preach. I believe in that doctrine. Now, I know for myself, that the Presidency of this Church pay their tithing. As chairman of the auditing committee, I know what their tithing is. The Twelve Apostles pay their tithing. Bishop Hunter and his counselors pay their tithing, as well as a great many others in this Church and kingdom. I would not preach tithing if I did not pay it. I consider it my duty to pay my tithing. I consider it is a law of God to me, and I am no poorer for obeying it. I wish my brethren and sisters to take this principle to heart. As the President has said, the Lord does not care anything about our cattle, our gold and our silver. The law of tithing is a law of God to us. Obedience is better than sacrifice.—JD 22:208-209, January 9, 1881.

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP180THINGS WE SHOULD DO

Tithes and Offeringsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP180We should pay our tithing according to the law of God. We should attend to all the duties required at our hands. We should not neglect our prayers. Men should seek to enjoy the spirit of God, and the fellowship of his Holy Spirit. We should seek to do all the good we can, so that we may feel justified when we get through.—JD 23:332, December 10, 1882.

Fastinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP180FASTING AND "HEADACHE." It was remarked this morning that some people said they could not fast because it made their head ache. Well, I can fast, and so can any other man; and if it makes my head ache by keeping the commandments of God, let it ache.—MS 56:657, October 15, 1894.

Sabbath Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP180SABBATH OBSERVANCE. We have no right to break the Sabbath. We have no right to neglect our meetings to attend to our labors. I do not believe that any man, who has ever belonged to this Church and kingdom, since its organization, has made anything by attending to his farm on the Sabbath: but if your ox falls into a pit, get him out; to work in that way is all just and right, but for us to go farming to the neglect of our meetings and other duties devolving upon us, is something we have no right to do. The Spirit of God does not like it, it withdraws itself from us, and we make no money by it. We should keep the Sabbath holy. We should attend our meetings.—JD 21:191, July 3, 1880.

Sabbath Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP181EFFECT OF CONNECTICUT BLUE LAWS ON WILFORD WOODRUFF. I was brought up under the blue laws of Connecticut, when Presbyterianism ruled throughout the state as the religion of that state; and I dared no more go out to play on a Sunday than I dared put my hand in the fire. It would have been considered an unpardonable sin. We could not attend a ball and dance; we did not dare attend a theatre, and from Saturday night, at sundown, to Monday morning, we must not laugh or smile, but we must study our catechism. This we had to do whether we were members of the Church or not. My father was not a member of any church. This early teaching had its effect upon me.—JD 11:61, January 22, 1865.

181HOW TO GO TO MEETING. Let us prepare ourselves and do our duty, and let the high priests and seventies go to their meetings, and before you go there, go to work and get the Spirit of God, that when you get there you may not freeze to death. And I want to have the people, when they come here, to get enough of the Spirit of God, that when the Presidency rise in this stand they may give us what is in their hearts. They are filled with blessings for this people. All the trouble is our eyes have been closed, we have been in a deep sleep; let us wake up and attend to our duty, and make it the first business we do.

181Go to, and if you have not the Spirit of God, make it your first business to get it, that your minds may be opened to see the things of God as they are; it is your privilege and mine, that we may be prepared for what is to come.—JD 4:149-150, December 21, 1856.

181THE SPIRIT OF UNDERSTANDING. When any of the Presidency of this Church, or of the quorum of the Twelve, or any of the elders rise in this stand to speak, this people look unto them, and expect they will enjoy the Holy Spirit sufficiently to say something that will edify them. The people almost unanimously look for this. I will say, on the other hand, that the Presidency, the Twelve, and the elders who preach in this house expect that the people will have the Spirit of the Lord, that they may come to understanding; and this is just as much required that they may comprehend what is said unto them as it is required of the brethren who speak, to teach doctrine, principle, truth, and the revelations of Jesus Christ.—JD 5:48, March 22, 1857.

Sacrament Meetingsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP182WHY WE MEET. We meet upon the Sabbath day for the purpose of partaking of the sacrament, the emblems of the Lord's body and blood which were broken and shed for us, and also to give and receive instruction as we may be led by the Spirit of God.—JD 24:236, July 20, 1883.

Instructiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP182We certainly have a great amount of teaching, of instruction, of principle, of revelation, and of the word of God, which has been given unto this people, not only that which is recorded in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, book of Doctrine and Covenants, the church history, but we have day by day, and night by night, instructions given unto us, we have a little here and a little there, a discourse today and another tonight, and we are continually receiving instructions from the servants of God. We receive instructions in our ward meetings, and almost every time a few of us meet together, we do so for the purpose of receiving the word of the Lord.—JD 4:190, January 25, 1857.

182STAKE QUARTERLY CONFERENCES. We meet with the Saints of the several stakes at the stake quarterly conferences for the purpose of giving instruction which all need in order to qualify themselves to magnify their calling as Saints of God, engaged in establishing and building up the church and kingdom of God. And I will here say, as I have often said, that all men, and all women, regardless of the position they occupy, or the office they hold, are dependent upon the Lord for his Spirit to assist them in their labors.—JD 24:50, January 27, 1883.

Courtesya-Woodruff, WilfordTP183PROPER DECORUM. I want to preach a short sermon to this congregation. To begin with, I have heard President Young and President Taylor a great many times from this stand ask the people to keep quiet until the meeting was dismissed; but as soon as the sermon ends there are a hundred of them rush for the doors. I do not like it. It pains me to see the President of the Church make this request, and the people pay no attention to it.

Courtesya-Woodruff, WilfordTP183Now, in this fast age we are passing from a polite age to a vary rude one in many respects. When I was a boy sixty-five years ago, and went to school, I never thought of passing a man whom I knew in the street, or a woman, without taking off my hat and making a bow. I never thought of saying "yes" or "no" to those that were placed over me. I was taught to say "yes, sir," and "no, sir"; but today it is "yes" and "no," "I will," "I won't," "I shall" and "I shan't." Now, when I see this rudeness amongst us, I sometimes wish that the spirit of the New England fathers was more among the people. But I do hope, brethren, sisters and friends, when a man stops talking and the choir rises to sing, that you will keep your seats. You can afford to do this as well as the President of the Church, the Twelve Apostles, or others who are sitting on this stand. You don't see us jump and run for the door the moment a speaker is done. The Lord is displeased with any such thing. I hope you will pardon me for so speaking. I felt to say that much.—JD 22:330, October 8, 1881.

1946 Bookcraft
