Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

193Chapter 15

193Church and State "What Is the Mormon Idea of Its Rule as the Kingdom of God?"

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP193FUNDAMENTAL LIMITATIONS ON BOTH CHURCH AND STATE. It is this: we hold that this Church was set up and organized by command of the Almighty; that it has the right to formulate and maintain rules of church discipline applying to its own members; that the extent of its punitive power is the excommunication of the transgressor; that it has no power to punish anyone by deprivation of life, liberty or property or personal injury in any form; that governments should not regulate the church, nor the church seek to control the state; that all men should be politically free and equal to vote as they please and to sustain what politics they please, so that they do not infringe on the rights of others.

Libertya-Woodruff, WilfordTP193THE CHURCH STRIVES FOR A PERFECT LAW OF LIBERTY. We believe this Church will prepare the way for the coming of Christ to reign as king, and that this Church will then develop into the kingdom of God, which all Christians pray will come; that the will of God may be done on earth as it is in heaven. We believe in the full and free agency of man, and that when that kingdom is established there will be perfect liberty on earth, civil, political and religious. MS 52:162 (1890).

Courts, Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP193EXCERPTS FROM THE OFFICIAL DECLARATION OF DECEMBER 12, 1889 CHURCH COURTS DO NOT EXERCISE CIVIL FUNCTIONS. We declare that no bishop's or other court in this Church claims or exercises civil or judicial functions, or the right to supersede, annul or modify a judgment of any civil court. Such courts, while established to regulate Christian conduct, are purely ecclesiastical, and their punitive powers go no further than the suspension or excommunication of members from Church fellowship.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP194THE CHURCH DOES NOT CLAIM OR EXERCISE A RIGHT TO INTERFERE WITH SOCIAL OR POLITICAL RIGHTS OR PRIVILEGES. That this Church, while offering advice for the welfare of its members in all conditions of life, does not claim or exercise a right to interfere with citizens in the free exercise of social or political rights and privileges. The ballot in this Territory is absolutely untrammeled and secret. No man's business or other secular affairs are invaded by the Church or any of its officers. Free agency and direct individual accountability to God are among the essentials of our church doctrine. All things in the Church must be done by common consent, and no officer is appointed without the vote of the body.

Constitution of the United StatesEndowmenta-Woodruff, WilfordTP194THE ENDOWMENT SUPPORTS, IS NOT HOSTILE, TO THE CONSTITUTION. We declare that there is nothing in the ceremony of the endowment, or in any doctrine, tenet, obligation or injunction of this Church, either private or public, which is hostile or intended to be hostile, to the government of the United States. On the contrary, its members are under divine commandment to revere the Constitution as a heaven-inspired instrument and obey as supreme all laws made in pursuance of its provisions.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP194THE CHURCH DOES NOT CLAIM TO BE AN INDEPENDENT TEMPORAL KINGDOM OF GOD. We also declare that this church does not claim to be an independent, temporal kingdom of God, or to be an imperium, an imperio aiming to overthrow the United States or any other civil government. It has been organized by divine revelation preparatory to the second advent of the Redeemer. It proclaims that "the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Its members are commanded of God to be subject unto the powers that be until Christ comes, whose right it is to reign.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP195Church government and civil government are distinct and separate in our theory and practice, and we regard it as part of our destiny to aid in the maintenance and perpetuity of the institutions of our country.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP195We claim no religious liberty that we are unwilling to accord to others.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP195We ask for no civil or political rights which are not granted and guaranteed to citizens in general.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP195We desire to be in harmony with the government and people of the United States as an integral part of the nation.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP195We regard all attempts to exclude aliens from naturalization, and citizens from the exercise of the elective franchise, solely because they are members of the "Mormon" Church, as impolitic, unrepublican, and dangerous encroachments upon civil and religious liberty.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP195Notwithstanding the wrongs we consider we have suffered through the improper execution of national laws, we regard those wrongs as the acts of men and not of the government; and we intend, by the help of Omnipotence, to remain firm in our fealty and steadfast in the maintenance of constitutional principle and the integrity of this republic.—MS 52:34-35, December 12, 1889. [^1]

196 "CHURCH AND STATE, AND CHURCH DISCIPLINE" [^2] To the officers and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, General Conference assembled:

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP196Dear Brethren and Sisters-Every Latter-day Saint will recognize the value of union, not only in action but in matters of faith and discipline. As to the rights and authority of the priesthood of the Son of God, it is of the highest importance that there should be no difference of opinion among the officers and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Feeling the necessity of a correct understanding of this principle, we deem it proper at this sixty-sixth anniversary of the organization of the church in these last days, to prepare and present a statement on the subject, embodying the doctrine which has always prevailed in the church, and our views upon it. We were prompted to adopt this course at the present time because of events which have happened during the late political contest. A great diversity of opinion on the subject has been expressed, and even by leading elders in the church, which latter fact has naturally led in some instances to considerable division of sentiment.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP196It is of great importance that we understand each other and that there be harmony in our teachings. It is especially important that these teachings shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations and doctrines which have been taught and which have prevailed from the beginning until the present time, having not only the sanction of undisputed usage, but the approval of faithful leaders in the church, and of him in whose name and by whose authority they act.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP197PRESIDING AUTHORITIES MAKE NO ATTEMPT TO UNITE CHURCH AND STATE. In the late exciting contest, to which reference has been made, the presiding authorities in some instances have been misunderstood. In other instances they have been misrepresented, which has led to a wrongful conception of their real views. It has been asserted too freely, and without foundation, that there has been a disposition on their part to interfere with individual liberty and to rebuke in some men a course which was applauded in others. In a word, that they have appeared to desire to assert and maintain an unjust and oppressive control over the actions of the members of the Church, and in thus doing have endeavored to effect a union of church and state. In the heat of political discussion, assertions have been made and arguments used conveying to the public mind a false idea concerning the position of the officers of the Church, and leaving the impression that there has been and was now being made an attempt to accomplish the union above referred to. Now that the excitement has passed, and calmer reason has resumed its sway, we think it prudent to set forth so that all may understand, the exact position occupied by the leading authorities of the Church.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP197In the first place we wish to state in the most positive and emphatic language that at no time has there ever been any attempt or even desire on the part of the leading authorities referred to to have the Church in any manner encroach upon the rights of the state, or to unite in any degree the functions of the one with those of the other.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP197CHURCH AND STATE DURING TERRITORIAL DAYS. Peculiar circumstances have surrounded the people of Utah. For many years a majority of them in every portion of the Territory belonged to one church, every reputable member of which was entitled to hold and did hold some ecclesiastical office. It is easy to see how, to the casual observer it might appear singular that so many officers of the church were also officers of the State; but while this was in fact the case, the distinction between the church and the state throughout those years was carefully maintained. The president of the church held for eight years the highest civil office in the community, having been appointed by the national administration governor of the Territory. The first secretary of the Territory was a prominent Church official. An apostle represented the Territory in Congress as a delegate during ten years. The members of the legislature held also offices in the Church. This was unavoidable; for the most suitable men were elected by the votes of the people, and, as we have stated, every reputable man in the entire community held some church position, the most energetic and capable holding leading positions. This is all natural and plain enough to those who consider the circumstances; but it furnished opportunity for those who were disposed to assail the people of the Territory to charge them with attempting to unite church and state. A fair investigation of the conditions will abundantly disprove the charge and show its utter falsity.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP198On behalf of the Church of which we are leading officers, we desire again to state to the members and also to the public generally, that there has not been, nor is there, the remotest desire on our part or on the part of our coreligionists to do anything looking to a union of church and state.

198FORMATION OF NATIONAL POLITICAL PARTIES IN UTAH AFTER 1890. We declare that there has never been any attempt to curtail individual liberty-the personal liberty of any of the officers or members of the church. The First Presidency and other leading officers did make certain suggestions to the people when the division on party lines took place. That movement was an entirely new departure, and it was necessary in order that the full benefit should not be lost which was hoped to result from this new political division, that people who were inexperienced should be warned against hasty and ill-considered action. In some cases they were counseled to be wise and prudent in the political steps they were about to take, and this with no idea of winning them against their will to either side. To this extent, and no further, was anything said or done upon the question, and at no time and under no circumstances was any attempt made to say to voters how they should cast their ballots. Any charge that has been made to the contrary is utterly false.

199ACCEPTANCE OF POLITICAL POSITIONS BY LEADING CHURCHMEN. Concerning officers of the Church themselves, the feeling was generally expressed in the beginning of the political division spoken of that it would be prudent for leading men not to accept of office at the hands of the political party to which they might belong. This counsel was given to men of both parties alike-not because it was thought that there was any impropriety in religious men holding civil office, not to deprive them of any of the rights of citizenship, but because of the feeling that it would be better under all the circumstances which had now risen to avoid any action that would be likely to create jealousy and ill feeling. An era of peace and good will seemed to be dawning upon the people, and it was deemed good to shun everything that could have the least tendency to prevent the consummation of this happy prospect. In many instances, however, the pressure brought to bear upon efficient and popular men by the members of the parties to which they belonged was of such a character that they had to yield to the solicitation to accept nomination to office, or subject themselves to the suspicion of bad faith in their party affiliations. In some cases they did this without consulting the authorities of the Church; but where important positions were held, and where the duties were of a responsible and exacting character, some did seek the counsel and advice of the leading Church authorities before accepting the political honors tendered them. Because some others did not seek this counsel and advice ill feeling was engendered, and undue and painful sensitiveness was stimulated; misunderstanding readily followed, and as a result the authorities of the church were accused of bad faith and made the subjects of bitter reproach. We have maintained that in the case of men who hold high positions in the Church, whose duties are well defined, and whose ecclesiastical labors are understood to be continuous and necessary, it would be an improper thing to accept political office or enter into any vocation that would distract or remove them from the religious duties resting upon them without first consulting and obtaining the approval of their associates and those who preside over them. It has been understood from the very beginning of the Church that no officer whose duties are of the character referred to, has the right to engage in any pursuit, political or otherwise, that will divide his time and remove his attention from the calling already accepted. It has been the constant practice with officers of the Church to consult-or, to use our language, to "counsel"-with their brethren concerning all questions of this kind. They have not felt that they were sacrificing their manhood in doing so, nor that they were submitting to improper dictation, nor that in soliciting and acting upon the advice of those over them, they were in any manner doing away with their individual rights and agency, nor that to any improper degree were their rights and duties as American citizens being abridged or interfered with. They realized that in accepting ecclesiastical office they assumed certain obligations; that among these was the obligation to magnify the office which they held, to attend to its duties in preference to every other labor, and to devote themselves exclusively to it with all the zeal, industry, and strength they possessed, unless released in part or for a time by those who preside over them. Our view, and it has been the view of all our predecessors, is that no officer of our Church, especially those in high standing, should take a course to violate this long-established practice. Rather than disobey it, and declare himself by his actions defiantly independent of his associates and his file leaders, it has always been held that it would be better for a man to resign the duties of his priesthood; and we entertain the same view today.

201In view of all the occurrences to which references have been made, and to the diversity of views that have arisen among the people in consequence, we feel it to be our duty to clearly define our position, so there may be no cause hereafter for dispute or controversy upon the subject:

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP201RULES PROMULGATED FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITY. First-We unanimously agree to and promulgate as a rule that should always be observed in the church and by every leading official thereof, that before accepting any position, political or otherwise, which would interfere with the proper and complete discharge of his ecclesiastical duties, and before accepting a nomination or entering into engagements to perform new duties, said official should apply to the proper authorities and learn from them whether he can, consistently with the obligations already entered into with the Church upon assuming his office, take upon himself the added duties and labors and responsibilities of the new position. To maintain proper discipline and order in the Church, we deem this absolutely necessary; and in asserting this rule, we do not consider that we are infringing in the least degree upon the individual rights of the citizen. Our position is that a man having accepted the honors and obligations of ecclesiastical office in the Church cannot properly of his own volition make those honors subordinate to or even coordinate with new ones of an entirely different character; we hold that unless he is willing to counsel in the priesthood, he should be released from all obligations associated with the latter, before accepting any new position.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP202Second-We declare that in making these requirements of ourselves and our brethren in the ministry, we do not in the least desire to dictate to them concerning their duties as American citizens, or to interfere with the affairs of the state; neither do we consider that in the remotest degree are we seeking the union of church and state. We once more here repudiate the insinuation that there is or ever has been an attempt by our leading men to trespass upon the ground occupied by the state, or that there has been or is the wish to curtail in any manner any of its functions.—MS 58:280-284, April 6, 1896.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP202STATEHOOD IN UTAH AND PRACTICAL POLITICS JOURNAL ENTRY NOVEMBER 3, 1892. [In his journal of November 3, 1892, President Woodruff wrote] I had a visit today from certain prominent politicians who were not members of the Church. They seemed anxious to sew up the mouth of the Presidency so that the latter should have nothing to say in political matters. Presidents Cannon, Smith, and I, answered them.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP202[President Woodruff further expressed his right as an American citizen to exercise his franchise in the interest of any political party with which he saw fit to ally himself. He was unwilling to concede that there could be any circumstance whatever, politically, in which he might not raise his voice for the protection of the people. He claimed also the right to warn the people against the rule of the unrighteous. The political destinies, however, of the state, he did not regard as bound up in the religious destiny of the Church. He recognized the distinction between the two; nor did he assume an unfriendly attitude toward those who did not see as he saw, politically. However, he thought it both the privilege and the duty of church men to exercise their political judgment. He never yielded to the argument that because-the political influence of a church leader was likely to be too great he should therefore not be permitted to exercise any political influence whatever.]-Cowley, 581.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP203THE FIRST PRESIDENCY AND POLITICS-A STATEMENT OF 1892. We emphatically deny that we, or either of us, authorized Mr. George F. Gibbs or any other person or persons to use our names so as to influence citizens to vote the Republican ticket, at Logan or elsewhere. If our names have been used in any such way, it has been entirely without permission from us, and we hereby condemn it as wrong and reprehensive. If we have any desire in this matter it is that the people of this territory shall study well the principles of both the great national parties, and then choose which they will join, freely, voluntarily, and honestly, from personal conviction, and then stand by it in all honor and sincerity. Each party should have the same rights, privileges and opportunities as the other. If any man claims that it is the wish of the First Presidency that a Democrat shall vote the Republican ticket, or a Republican the Democratic ticket, let all people know that he is endeavoring to deceive the public and has no authority of that kind from us. We have no disposition to direct in these matters, but proclaim that, as far as we are concerned, the members of this Church are entirely and perfectly free in all political affairs. But they should not indulge in ill-feeling or personalities. President George Q. Cannon is absent, but we are sure that if he were here he would sign this declaration with us. [^3] —DW 48:440, March 25, 1892.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP204Now, the world is terribly afraid that the Presidency of this Church shall say something to somebody about politics; and even some of the elders of Israel appear very much afraid that they will get some counsel on these things. What are they thinking about? Politics should never turn the heart of any man bearing the Holy Priesthood from his brethren or from the cause of God. Let him enjoy his politics, and vote for whom he chooses; but let all men stop throwing this filth and slime and pursuing a course wherein God himself and the angels are ashamed of them. It makes no difference to me what a man's politics is: he has a right to enjoy his own political ideas; but let this people realize that they are Latter-day Saints and are held responsible before God for the course they pursue.—DW 51:482, September 7, 1895.

204REMARKS AT HIS 90TH BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION, MARCH 1, 1897. As I can hardly expect ever to have the opportunity of addressing the people of this state and my friends in days to come, I have a few reflections upon my mind that I wish to lay before you. And I will say they are different from any of my public speeches that I have been in the habit of presenting to the people. I have consulted no man with regard to the course I should pursue in my remarks here this morning, and I do not know that I shall satisfy my friends in the remarks that I may make.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP204First, I want to say a few words upon politics. I hope that will not astonish you. I have not been in the habit of this heretofore. But I feel desirous to say a few things that are upon my mind. In the first place, there is not one item, not one sentence in the Constitution of the United States, nor in the laws of the United States, nor of the State of Utah, that deprives any citizen, of any name, nature, religion, or politics in the land from joining any political party he wishes, or voting for whomsoever he wishes. This is the right of every man without hindrance. We have been accused at times of using Church influence to guide and direct the state. This is occasionally presented to the public as our action. I feel it my right and duty to say here today that I was acquainted with Joseph Smith and associated with him from 1833 until his martyrdom. I have been acquainted with Brigham Young and associated with him for forty years of my life, at home and abroad, under many circumstances. I have also been acquainted with John Taylor and labored with him in every capacity in which he was called to act. I have also been a member of the quorum of the Twelve Apostles for upwards of fifty-six years of my life. And I have been presiding over the Church itself for a few years. I have been associated with my counselors and with the present Twelve Apostles. And I want to say upon this occasion, before God, angels, and all men that are before me, that I never in one instance knew any leader of this Church to attempt to dictate and direct the affairs of the state as a member of the Church. At the same time, when any man no matter who he is-Mormon, Jew, or Gentile-uses money or any means to hire men to vote for him, I think he steps outside of his right, and stands in a measure condemned.

Separation of Church and Statea-Woodruff, WilfordTP205I want to say so much to my friends this morning. I have officiated for twenty sessions in the Legislative Council of the Territory of Utah, and one session as a member of the House, and it did not cost me one farthing for any office I ever held in the Church, or in the State, or in the Territory. And I never asked any mortal man on the face of the earth to cast a vote for me that I have any recollection of. As an example, perhaps, I may be permitted to say, I am the father of fourteen sons, and have a number of sons-in-law, and I believe they are pretty nearly evenly divided on political party lines-Democrats and Republicans. I will give any man five dollars if, in conversing with them, he can get any one of them to say that his father ever told him whom to vote for. Some of you may try to make a little money perhaps at that. (Laughter.) I consider everybody is responsible for himself, and he has a right to vote for whom he pleases.-Cowley, 606-607.

Politicsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP206"I DO NOT CARE WHETHER A MAN IS A REPUBLICAN OR A DEMOCRAT." It is time to close this conference; but before closing I want to say a few words to the Latter-day Saints. I have attended conferences under the presidency of Joseph Smith during his lifetime, from 1833; I have attended conferences under President Brigham Young nearly forty years * * *; I have attended conferences under the presidency of John Taylor, and I have attended conferences as President of the Church myself since that period. That responsibility has rested upon me, and rests upon me today. Sixty-four years of my life have passed away as a member of this Church. I do not know that I shall ever address you again; I cannot tell anything about this; but I feel strongly impressed to say a few words to you upon principle, although it is late.

Politicsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP206I want these Latter-day Saints to lay to heart what has been said by the apostles and elders who have spoken at this conference. I want to say another thing. I prophesy, in the name of Israel's God, the day has come when the mouths of Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, and these Twelve Apostles, should not be closed because of the opinions of the children of men. There have been feelings that these men holding high position-the Twelve Apostles and Presidency-should say nothing about politics. I want to say to you here, the day has come when God Almighty requires at your hands to unite together in your temporal business, and in your politics, so far as it is wisdom. I do not care whether a man is a Republican or a Democrat. In that he is free; but it is your duty to unite in electing good men to govern and control your cities, your local affairs, and I will state that when you do not do this you are losers of the blessings of Almighty God. I want to tell you this upon this occasion. My mouth shall not be closed upon these principles. I know it is the duty of the Latter-day Saints to unite together in your local affairs, the election of men to act for you in the affairs of state. Lay aside your extremes in democracy and republicanism, as far as is wise in that matter, and in other than local matters as Latter-day Saints unite together within your party lines and appoint good men. When you do that God will bless you. You won't all be taxed to death and lose your property if you will appoint good men and pursue this course.

Politicsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP207I take the liberty, as President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, of making these remarks. No matter what the feelings of men may be towards me; I shall not stay in this country very long. But I realize very well that this people are groaning under poverty, under affliction, under taxation, and in positions that they ought not to be if they would only unite and do their duty. And this idea of a person being afraid of somebody because he is a Democrat or a Republican, it is all wrong. I feel like saying to you, as the President of the Church, and do state, that it is your duty to unite together and appoint good men to act in every capacity for the public welfare. Therefore, let us do our duty, walk uprightly before the Lord our God, and leave the consequences with him.—CR 70-71, October, 1897.

Signed by Wilford, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Brigham Young, Moses Thatcher, Francis M. Lyman, John Henry Smith, George Teasdale, Heber J. Grant, John W. Taylor, M. W. Merrill, A. H. Lund, Abraham H. Cannon, Members of the Council of the Apostles; John W. Young, D. H. Wells, Counselors.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
[^2] An epistle read in the April Conference, 1896, in Salt Lake City, which defines clearly the position of the Church in regard to the state, and also the duty of those holding prominent offices in the priesthood, not to accept positions which would interfere with the performance of the duties of their calling without first consulting with their brethren and the First Presidency. This document was signed by President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors in the First Presidency, by members of the Council of Twelve, the First Council of Seventy, the Patriarch, and Presiding Bishopric.
[^3] This document was also signed by Joseph F. Smith, "of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."
