Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

219Book Three

Some Gospel Questions

Friends of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP"Though all the powers of darkness may war against us, the Lord is our friend, and He will sustain us and give us power to build up Zion and to carry out this work until the coming of the Son of Man. Therefore let your hearts be comforted."

—WILFORD WOODRUFF, JH April 7, 1895, p. 5.

221Chapter 17

221Some Gospel Questions

Prayera-Woodruff, WilfordTP221WHY PRAY TO GOD?

Prayera-Woodruff, WilfordTP221FAITH IN PRAYER. I have more faith in prayer before the Lord than almost any other principle on earth. If we have no faith in prayer to God, we have not much in either Him or the gospel. We should pray unto the Lord, asking Him for what we want. Let the prayers of this people ascend before the Lord continually in the season thereof, and the Lord will not turn them away, but they will be heard and answered, and the kingdom and Zion of God will rise and shine, she will put on her beautiful garments and be clothed with the glory of her God, and fulfil the object of her organization here upon the earth.—JD 17:249, October 9, 1874.

Prayera-Woodruff, WilfordTP221If I have any forte it is prayer to God.—JD 15:283, January 12, 1873.

Prayera-Woodruff, WilfordTP221The heavens are full of blessings, and the Lord is willing to bestow them upon us.—JD 8:268, August 26, 1860.

Prayer, Doctrine ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP221"PRAY ALWAYS AND FAINT NOT." There is one admonition of our Savior that all the Saints of God should observe, but which, I fear, we do not as we should, and that is, to pray always and faint not. I fear, as a people, we do not pray enough in faith. We should call upon the Lord in mighty prayer, and make all our wants known unto him. For if he does not protect and deliver us and save us, no other power will. Therefore our trust is entirely in him. Therefore our prayers should ascend into the ears of our Heavenly Father day and night.—MS 48:806, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

MotherhoodPrayer, Doctrine ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP222MOTHERS SHOULD TEACH PRAYER TO THEIR CHILDREN. No mother in Israel should let a day pass over her head without teaching her children to pray. You should pray yourselves, and teach your children to do the same, and you should bring them up in this way, that when you have passed away and they take your places in bearing off the great work of God, they may have principles instilled into their minds that will sustain them in time and in eternity. I have often said it is the mother who forms the mind of the child.—JD 15:12, April 6, 1872.

Prayer, Doctrine ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP222MEN CAN CONTROL THE HEAVENS! I think sometimes that we do not fully comprehend the power that we have with God in knowing how to approach him acceptably. All that these men holding the priesthood, and all that our sisters need do, is to live near God, and call upon him, pouring out their soul's desires in behalf of Israel, and their power will be felt, and their confidence in God will he strengthened. But the blessings of heaven can only be obtained and controlled upon the principles of righteousness.—JD 24:55, January 27, 1883.

Jesus Christ, Faith ina-Woodruff, WilfordTP222LIVE BY FAITH. Brethren and sisters, you should live by faith, realizing every day that all power rests with God, and that it is through him that we are able to live in peace and enjoy plenty; that it is through him the wrath of our enemies is turned aside from time to time, and that it will be through him that the remainder of their wrath will be restrained. You should enter your secret closets and call upon the name of the Lord. Many of you have learned how to pray; then fail not to let your prayers ascend up into the ears of the God of Sabaoth; and he will hear you.—JD 24:55, January 27, 1883.

Prayer, Doctrine ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP222WHAT TO PRAY FOR. With regard to our present position I want to say that it is the duty of every Saint of God in these valleys of the mountains to let his prayers ascend into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, day and night in the season thereof, in the family circle and in private places, for the Lord to sustain his people, build up Zion and fulfil his promises.—JD 17:247, October 9, 1874.

Prayer, Doctrine ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP223There should be a great deal of praying in Israel; not public prayers alone, but every man should go into his closet and there call upon God and ask him to sustain Zion, sustain the Presidency of the Church, and the Twelve Apostles, with all men who bear the Holy Priesthood in the earth. Upon the shoulders of these men devolves the duty to go forth and warn this generation of the judgments which are to come.—DW 51:482, September 7, 1895.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP223THE JUDGMENTS OF GOD

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP223THE VOICE OF WARNING. The Lord has never sent judgments upon any generation which we have any knowledge of until he has raised up prophets and inspired men to warn the inhabitants of the earth. This is the course the Lord has dealt with all men from the days of Father Adam to the present time.—JD 22:206, January 9, 1881.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP223DIVINE JUSTICE. Did you ever know the Lord to bring his judgments upon any nation, from the days of Adam in the Garden of Eden until the present time, before he had warned them of their sins? No; the Lord has always warned the people before he has punished them for their wickedness.—JD 8:263, April 22, 1860.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP223Do I delight in the destruction of the children of men? No. Does the Lord? No. He gives them timely warning, and if they do not listen to his counsel, they must suffer the consequences of their wicked acts.—JD 2:201, February 25, 1855.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP223THE CONSEQUENCES OF SIN. The Gentile or Christian world today can no more commit sins, and be guilty of lying, stealing, blasphemy, whoredom or murder, or committing abominations, and escape the wrath of God, than could Sodom and Gomorrah, or the antediluvian world, or ancient Israel. The word of the Lord has been proclaimed against the Gentiles and all the inhabitants of the earth in the last days who commit sin, and it will as assuredly be fulfilled as in ancient days. The Lord has a controversy with this generation, and he will judge the inhabitants according to the deeds done in the body, and none can stay his hand.—MS 48:803, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP224THE LESSONS OF HISTORY. The whole history of the dealings of the Lord with man has shown the benefits and blessings of obeying the Lord and keeping his commandments. The history of the dealings of the Lord with ancient Israel shows that he blessed the righteous and cursed the wicked and brought his judgments upon them. Whenever Israel hearkened to the teachings of Moses and the prophets, they prospered, and their enemies were a prey unto them. But when they departed from the Lord and set up altars to Baal, and committed sin, the Lord forsook them, as in the case of Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Zedekiah the King.—MS 48:802, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

224THE ANALYSIS OF WORLD PROBLEMS. The Latter-day Saint, in the vision of his mind, sees displayed on the great panorama of the world all the scenes that are to transpire in the present day, while the wicked are ignorant of what is about to transpire; they do not know what is the matter; while there are cholera, whirlwinds, storms, thunder, lightning, and earthquakes in divers places, and kingdom is rising against kingdom in battle array they are ignorant of what will be the end of these matters, and the cause of their existence, because the things of God are not before their eyes. They see naturally, but do not understand. They read the scriptures but do not look for the fulfillment of the words of the prophets, and they do not understand what those things mean when they are fulfilled before their eyes. Did they understand the scriptures they could see and understand what is the matter in the world.—JD 2:199, February 25, 1855.

Signs of the True Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP225A MARVELOUS AGE. At the present day, darkness covers the earth and gross darkness the minds of the people; nevertheless they are living in an age of the world more fraught with interest to the human family than any preceding age or generation since the creation. There is no hundred years, no thousand years, no two thousand years since God made this world and placed Adam in the Garden of Eden when there was as much prophecy, revelation, visions, and word of the Lord, and promises of God to be fulfilled as there is in the generation in which you and I live.—JD 14:3, January 1, 1871.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP225A DAY OF DARKNESS—WARNING. I need not stop to tell you that we live in a day of darkness, wickedness, unbelief, and transgressions of every kind; I need not tell you this; the heavens know it, the earth knows it, the devils know it, all men know it who are acquainted with the human family in the day and age in which we live.—JD 22:206, January 9, 1881.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP225No man can contemplate the truth concerning the nations of the earth without sorrow, when he sees the wailing, the mourning, and death, that will come in consequence of judgments, plagues, and war. It has already begun, and it will continue to multiply and increase until the scene is ended, and wound up.—JD 2:201, February 25, 1855.

Scriptures, Study ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP225KNOWING THE FUTURE. If you want to know what is coming to pass, read the revelations of God in the Bible, in the Book of Mormon and in the book of Doctrine and Covenants.—MS 56:227, April 9, 1894.

Last Days, Prophecies AboutFashiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP226UNPLEASANT AND PLEASANT PROPHECIES. There are some prophecies pertaining to these latter days that are unpleasant to contemplate. President Young has been calling upon the daughters of Zion day after day, now, for years, to lay aside these Babylonish fashions. I have been reading the third chapter of Isaiah, and I have been hoping, all the days of my ministry, that the sayings contained in that chapter would never apply to the daughters of Zion in our day; but I believe they will, and inasmuch as they will not listen to President Young and to the prophets, apostles and elders of Israel with regard to throwing off these nonsensical things, I hope they will hasten the lengthening out of their skirts and drag them in the streets; that they will increase their round tires like the moon, increase their hoops, and their headbands, increase their Grecian bends at once and carry it out until they get through with it, so that we can turn to the Lord as a people. Some of the daughters of Zion do not seem willing to forsake the fashions of Babylon. I to such would say hasten it, and let the woe that is threatened on this account come, that we may get through with it, then we can go on and build up the Zion of God on the earth. But in spite of the follies that some among us delight in, we are going to build up Zion. We are going to fill these mountains with the cities and people of God. The weapons formed against Zion will be broken, and the nations of the Gentiles will visit her and their kings will come to the brightness of her rising. I often think when I see gentlemen and ladies sitting in our tabernacles, who have come over this great highway that has been cast up, whether they realize that they are fulfilling the prophecies of Isaiah. I think this many times in my own mind. I am satisfied that they do not realize it, but they are fulfilling the revelations of God. The Gentiles are coming to the light of Zion and kings to the brightness of her rising. All these things have been spoken of and will be fulfilled; and by and by, when we are sanctified and made perfect, when we are chastised and humbled before the Lord, when we have got our eyes opened, and our hearts set upon building up the kingdom of God, then will we return and rebuild the waste places of Zion. We have got this to fulfil in our day and generation. Then think not, ye elders of Israel, ye sons and daughters of Zion, that we are going to live after the order of Babylon always. We are not. We shall be chastised and afflicted, and shall feel the chastening rod of the Almighty, unless we serve the Lord our God, and build up his kingdom, for he has given us all power; yes, all power is given into our hands to perform this work.—JD 16:271, October 8, 1873.

Watchmena-Woodruff, WilfordTP227JUDGMENT IS NEAR AT HAND. The Lord said to Ezekiel, "I have made thee a watchman unto the House of Israel." "When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul." This is precisely our condition today. As apostles, seventies, high priests and elders, we and all men who bear any portion of the Holy Priesthood, are watchmen upon the walls of Zion and messengers to all the inhabitants of the earth, and all of us will be held responsible if we do not improve our times and lift the warning voice, as far as we have opportunity, and warn this generation of the judgments of God which await them.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP228I know the judgments of God are very nigh unto the door of this nation, and this generation, and they will overtake the world before it is prepared for that time. Even the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, and he will come as a thief in the night. Who is prepared to abide the day of his coming? It is our duty to labor and reap. Then every man should be diligent in that sphere in which he is called to act, that his garments may be clean from the blood of all men.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP228I do not believe there was ever a generation of men who inhabited the earth who were more wicked, or who were practicing greater abominations, or who were sinning against greater light and knowledge, or who had a greater flood of judgments proclaimed against them by the word of the Lord, than the generation in which we live. Therefore, as Saints of the living God, who hear the Holy Priesthood, we shall be under condemnation if we do not lift up the warning voice against the evils and abominations which exist, so far as we have opportunity.—MS 48:803-804, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

United States of Americaa-Woodruff, WilfordTP228THE AMERICAN NATION NOT TO ESCAPE WORLD DISORDERS. When I contemplate the condition of our nation, and see that wickedness and abominations are increasing, so much so that the whole heavens groan and weep over the abominations of this nation and the nations of the earth, I ask myself the question, can the American nation escape? The answer comes, No; its destruction, as well as the destruction of the world, is sure; [^1] just as sure as the Lord cut off and destroyed the two great and prosperous nations that once inhabited this continent of North and South America, because of their wickedness, so will he them destroy, and sooner or later they will reap the fruits of their own wicked acts, and be numbered among the past.

United States of Americaa-Woodruff, WilfordTP229I cannot help it; I would to God they would repent, that their eyes might be opened to see their condition; but the devil has power over them; he rules the children of men, he holds Babylon in his own hand, and leads the people whithersoever he will. There are changes awaiting us, they are even nigh at our very doors, and I know it by the revelations of Jesus Christ; I know it by the visions of heaven; I know it by the administrations of angels, and I know it by the inspiration of heaven, that is given to all men who seek the Lord; and the hand of God will not stay these things. We have no time to lose.—JD 21:301, August 1, 1880.

United States of Americaa-Woodruff, WilfordTP229What our nation sows that it will also reap, and what it measures to others will be meted back to it heaped up, pressed down, and running over. I have peculiar feelings in reflecting upon the condition of our own nation.—JD 23:132, May 14, 1882.

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP229CALAMITIES MAY BE AVOIDED BY THE POWER OF THE GOSPEL. I should not try to speak to this congregation tonight, as I have spoken twice before today; but there are duties resting upon me that I must attend to. And I want to ask this congregation a question: When I have the vision of the night opened continually before my eyes, and can see the mighty judgments that are about to be poured out upon this world, when I know these things are true, and are at the door of Jew and Gentile; while I know they are true and while I am holding this position before God and this world, can I withhold my voice from lifting up a warning to this people, and to the nations of the earth? I may never meet with this people again; I cannot tell how that may be. But while I live and see these things continually before my eyes I shall raise my warning voice. Now, the question I wanted to ask you is this: We have millions of people on this earth, and over them all there hangs a cloud of darkness almost entirely upon their shoulders. Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our door? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and in safety. Read the scriptures and the revelations. They will tell you about all these things. Great changes are at our doors. The next twenty years will see mighty changes among the nations of the earth. [^2] You will live to see these things, whether I do or not. I have felt oppressed with the weight of these matters, and I felt I must speak of them here. It's by the power of the gospel that we shall escape.-YWJ 5:512-513 ("From the notable discourse delivered to the temple workers' excursion, Brigham City, June 24, 1894").

Judgments of Goda-Woodruff, WilfordTP231I want to see the Latter-day Saints live their religion, keep their faith and do their duty, and trust in God. And if men persecute you for the sake of your religion, what can you do? You can go to God, and make your wants known to him; and that is our duty as Latter-day Saints. And as to our nation, they, as well as we, are in the hands of God; and I have nothing to say about them. God will deal with them; and what they sow they will reap, and he will deal with us upon the same principle.—JD 23:81-2, March 26, 1882.

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP231Some General Questions

Agencya-Woodruff, WilfordTP231SOCIAL AND NATIONAL "FREE AGENCY." I have been reflecting since sitting in the stand here, where are our brethren to whom we have listened for years and years? Where is President Young? Where is Brother Kimball? Where are Orson and Parley P. Pratt? Where is George A. Smith? Where is President John Taylor? And where are all those other apostles who have passed away? They are in the spirit world, mingling with the gods, connected with all the patriarchs and prophets who ever lived on the earth. You may ask the question: Why is it, then, that God, with the Savior, with father Adam, with Noah, with Enoch, with the ancient patriarchs and prophets and with all the apostles who have lived in this day and generation, counseling together on the other side of the veil, do not have power to turn away this persecution that Brother Cannon has been speaking of? Jesus told his disciples that if he were to pray to the Father, he would give him a legion of angels who would come to defend him; but, he said, the will of the Father would not in that way be fulfilled. So I say to you. If many things that we might desire in our hearts should be fulfilled, the work of the Lord would fail in being consummated. We should remember that this generation, like all other generations, have their own agencies. The nation in the midst of which we dwell today has its agency. The nations of the earth all have their agency. All sects and parties have; in fact, all the human family. And the God of heaven will hold them responsible. He will hold us responsible, according to the course we pursue. If we work and fight against God, and the kingdom of God, we have to meet that in days to come.—MS 51:210-211 (1889).

232"THE HEREAFTER." There is a long time hereafter.—JD 22:210, January 9, 1881.

Children, Salvation ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP232THE REDEMPTION OF INFANTS. With regard to redemption, Paul said: All the children of Adam are redeemed from the fail by the atoning blood of Jesus, and all infants are redeemed as well as other people. There is no infant or child that has died before arriving at the years of accountability, but what is redeemed, and is therefore entirely beyond the torments of hell, to use a secretarian term. And any doctrine, such as the sprinkling of infants or any religious rite for little children, is of no effect whatever neither in this world nor in the world to come. It is a man-made doctrine, and therefore not ordained of God; and I will defy any man to find in any of the records of divine truth any ordinance instituted for the salvation of little innocent children; it would be unnecessary on the face of it, and the only thing that can be found is where Jesus took the little ones in his arms and blessed them, which is and would be perfectly right to do according to the order of God. But the sprinkling of infants or the doctrine that infants go to hell under any circumstances, is a doctrine ordained of man and not of God, and is therefore of no avail and entirely wrong and displeasing in the sight of God. So much about the infants. I will say again they are redeemed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and when they die, whether of Christian, Pagan, or Jewish parentage, their spirits are taken home to God who gave them, and never go to suffer torments of any kind.—JD 23:126, May 14, 1882.

Israel, Election ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP233THE SEED OF ISRAEL. We are of the seed of Ephraim, and of Abraham, and of Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, and these are the instruments that God has kept in the spirit world to come forth in these latter days to take hold of this kingdom and build it up.—JD 22:233, June 26, 1881.

Fall of Adam and Evea-Woodruff, WilfordTP233ADAM AND EVE. The world, more or less, has found a great deal of fault with Mother Eve and with Father Adam, because of the fall of man; what I have to say with regard to it, I express as my own opinion. Adam and Eve came to this world to perform exactly the part that they acted in the Garden of Eden; and I will say, they were ordained of God to do what they did, and it was therefore expected that they would eat of the forbidden fruit in order that man might know both good and evil by passing through this school of experience which this life affords us. That is all I want to say about Father Adam and Mother Eve. Adam fell that man might be, and men are that they might have joy; and some have found fault with that.—JD 23:125, May 14, 1882.

Enoch, City ofEnochAbrahama-Woodruff, WilfordTP233ABRAHAM AND ENOCH. God has raised up at different ages certain men to do a certain work, as he raised up father Abraham. He was a noble spirit, we are told, before he left the realms of glory to come and tabernacle in the flesh. He had the spirit of the Gods with him when he was born; and he was faithful to God, and he had confidence in him; and whatever God required at his hands, he performed. So with Enoch. He stood at the head of the dispensation in which he lived. He, in the course of time, some 350 years, built and perfected the city called Zion. He, however, met with all kinds of opposition from the people among whom he labored; but the power of God was manifested to such an extent that his enemies stood and trembled through fear; and through that power he was enabled to perform the mighty work which he and his people did; it was not because the devil and his party were any more kindly disposed towards the Saints of God, but because they could not help themselves; and in the wisdom of God, Enoch and his people and their city were taken away from the earth.—JD 24:53, January 27, 1883.

Enoch, City ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP234THE CITY OF ENOCH. Reference has been made to the city of Enoch. Enoch stayed as long as he could in this world; and through his labors a people were sanctified who, with himself and their city were taken away from the earth because of their righteousness. The people of God in no generation have been able to dwell upon the earth only so long as they were able to finish their mission; the wicked living contemporaneously with them have warred against them and have conquered and overcome them in a great measure, until many have had to seal their testimony with their blood.—JD 22:232, June 26, 1881.

Scriptures, to Come Fortha-Woodruff, WilfordTP234UNTRANSLATED PLATES. Perhaps when the remainder of the plates, which were delivered to the Prophet Joseph, and which he was commanded not to translate come forth, we may learn many more things pertaining to our labor on the earth which we do not know now. But be this as it may, all this internal work is left for the Holy Ghost to reveal to the living oracles, as they guide, lead, dictate, and direct the people day by day.—JD 14:33, May 6, 1870.

Martyrsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP235THE PASSING OF MARTYRDOM

Martyrsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP235God has called a class of men and women who, with the exception of a few, have been permitted to live out their days and die a natural death. It is true that Joseph Smith, who laid the foundation of this work, and others, have had to seal their testimony with their blood; and if I were to tell what I think about it, I would say it was ordained of God that our Prophet and head should be sacrificed in the manner that he was, as much as it was ordained of God that Jesus Christ should be sacrificed in the way that he was; and that for two purposes—in order that his testimony might remain in force upon all the world from the hour of his death, to rise up and condemn this generation who reject the gospel of salvation. With the exception of a few, it has been designed, I believe, that the prophets and apostles of this dispensation should not have to seal their testimony with their blood, but that they should live until they finish their missions on the earth, bearing their testimony to the truth of the work, and building up the kingdom of God; and then they will gather up their feet and sleep with the fathers, surrounded by their children and friends.—JD 22:232-233, June 26, 1881.

Godheada-Woodruff, WilfordTP235A FINAL WORD. Before I sit down I want to say a word to the elders of Israel on another subject. I am called an old man; I guess I am. I was thinking just now, in speaking of the apostles and prophets that were with Joseph Smith when he made his last speech, I am the only man living that was with him at that time. The rest are in the spirit world. How much longer I shall talk to this people I do not know; but I want to say this to all Israel: Cease troubling yourselves about who God is; who Adam is, who Christ is, who Jehovah is. For heaven's sake, let these things alone. Why trouble yourselves about these things? God has revealed himself, and when the 121st section of the Doctrine and Covenants is fulfilled, whether there be one God or many gods they will be revealed to the children of men, as well as all thrones and dominions, principalities, and powers. Then why trouble yourselves about these things? God is God. Christ is Christ. The Holy Ghost is the Holy Ghost. That should be enough for you and me to know. If we want to know any more, wait till we get where God is in person. I say this because we are troubled every little while with inquiries from elders anxious to know who God is, who Christ is, and who Adam is. I say to the elders of Israel, stop this. Humble yourselves before the Lord; seek for light, for truth, and for a knowledge of the common things of the kingdom of God.—MS 57:355-356, April 7, 1895.

President Woodruff, of course, recognized the conditional nature of such prophecy, and that the doctrines of free agent and repentance afford means for escaping such destruction, providing they are used.

In almost twenty years to the day, the Archduke Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated, June 28, 1914, initiating the first World War.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
[^2] An epistle read in the April Conference, 1896, in Salt Lake City, which defines clearly the position of the Church in regard to the state, and also the duty of those holding prominent offices in the priesthood, not to accept positions which would interfere with the performance of the duties of their calling without first consulting with their brethren and the First Presidency. This document was signed by President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors in the First Presidency, by members of the Council of Twelve, the First Council of Seventy, the Patriarch, and Presiding Bishopric.
