Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

237Chapter 18

237The Warfare between Good and Evil The Forces of Evil

Lucifera-Woodruff, WilfordTP237LUCIFER AT WORK. The world has sought our overthrow from the beginning, and the devil does not like us very well. Lucifer, the Son of Morning, does not like the idea of revelation to the Saints of God, and he has inspired the hearts of a great many men, since the gospel was restored to the earth, to make war against us. But not one of them has made anything out of it yet-neither glory, immortality, eternal life, nor money. No man or people ever did make anything by fighting against God in the past, and no man or people will ever made anything by taking that course in the future.—JD 15:280, January 12, 1873.

Satana-Woodruff, WilfordTP237Wickedness is in the earth, and Satan has great power over the hearts of men, and he seeks to destroy them, and he seeks to destroy this people, and lead away the elders of Israel and when he overcomes a man that has made a covenant with God, who has been baptized in this church and kingdom, he gains a greater victory over him than over one who never made any profession.—JD 2:198, February 25, 1855.

SatanDevil, Angels ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP237THE LABORS OF THE DEVIL. This arch enemy of God and man, called the devil, the "Son of the Morning," who dwells here on the earth, is a personage of great power; he has great influence and knowledge. He understands that if this kingdom, which he rebelled against in heaven, prevails on the earth, there will be no dominion here for him. He has great influence over the children of men; he labors continually to destroy the works of God in heaven, and he had to be cast out. He is here, mighty among the children of men. There is a vast number of fallen spirits, cast out with him, here on the earth. They do not die and disappear; they have not bodies only as they enter the tabernacles of men. They have not organized bodies, and are not to be seen with the sight of the eye. But there are many evil spirits amongst us, and they labor to overthrow the church and kingdom of God. There never was a prophet in any age of the world but what the devil was continually at his elbow. This was the case with Jesus himself. The devil followed him continually trying to draw him from his purposes and to prevent him carrying out the great word of God. You see this manifested when he took Jesus on to the loftiest pinnacle of the temple and showed him all the glory of the world, telling him that he would give him all this if he would fall down and worship him. The poor devil did not own a foot of land nor anything else! The earth was made by and belonged to the Lord and was his footstool. Yet the devil offered that to Jesus which was not his own. Jesus said unto him, "Get thee behind me, Satan."

Satana-Woodruff, WilfordTP238This same character was with the disciples as well as with their master. He is with the Latter-day Saints; and he or his emissaries are with all men trying to lead them astray. He rules in the hearts of the inhabitants of the earth. They are governed and guided by him far more than by the power of God. This is strange, still it is true. See the wickedness in the world. See the abominations with which the earth is deluged, causing it to groan under the burden. Where does this evil come from? From the works of the devil. Everything that leads to good is from God, while everything that leads to evil is from the devil. Here are the two powers.—JD 13:163, December 12, 1869.

Good and Evila-Woodruff, WilfordTP239THE WARFARE BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL There was always a war between light and darkness, God and the devil, Saint and sinner, correct principles and false doctrines. We ourselves have a warfare with the evil propensities of our nature: we have already had to meet a warfare outwardly. In some instances there has been a physical contest, and our enemies have sought our destruction from the beginning. That warfare will continue until Satan is bound and iniquity swept from the earth. We need not suppose that we shall have peace in this conflict, for there will be no peace to the righteous until he reigns whose right it is to reign.—JD 8:264, April 22, 1860.

Good and Evila-Woodruff, WilfordTP239These two principles do exist, good and evil, God and the Devil. Whatever leads to good and to do good is of God. Whatever leads to evil and to do evil is of the devil. God has labored from the creation of man to lead him to keep the celestial law, that he may inherit a celestial glory and partake of eternal life, the greatest of all the gifts of God to man; while the devil, with all the fallen angels, has labored from the creation to lead man astray, to lead him down to the perdition of ungodly men, that he may have dominion over him.—MS 48:801, Epistle to the Saints Abroad, October 26, 1886.

Devil, Angels ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP239SPIRITUAL WARFARE. Brother George Q. Cannon touched upon a very important principle this forenoon-a principle which has often rested upon my mind; that is, with regard to the spirits that surround us. He said that one third of the hosts of heaven were cast out because of their rebellion. I suppose we may say that at least one hundred thousand millions were cast down from heaven to earth. Where are they? Some are in Salt Lake, some in New York, some in Amsterdam, some in Constantinople, some in Jerusalem; in fact, they are in every city and hamlet wherein the inhabitants of the earth dwell, and especially where there are any Latter-day Saints. And whether there are one hundred or not to every man, woman, and child, there are enough of them, at least, to labor for our overthrow. I say to my counselors, to the apostles, to the seventies, the high priests, the bishops, and all men who bear the Holy Priesthood, do you suppose these devils are around us without trying to do something? Are they asleep? Have they not a work to perform? I say to my brethren who bear the priesthood, we have got a mighty warfare to wage with these spirits. We cannot escape it. What will they do to you? They will try to make us do anything and everything that is not right. These devils would be very glad to make me and my brethren think we are great men, smarter than anyone else; to divide us one against the other, and to cause us to seek to confess our brother's sins instead of our own. We should, therefore, watch ourselves well. I should do this; my counselors and the apostles should; we all should. And unless we are united together, as has been said before, we are not the Lord's.—MS 51:354 (1889).

Christianitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP240CHRISTIANITY HAS TO OVERCOME EVIL. One of the brethren was speaking here about the views entertained by some in the world who regard Christianity and the work of God as a failure. I will say that the work of the Lord has never been a failure and it never will. His purposes have to be accomplished in the earth. There is one thing true with regard to the history and travels of the Saints of God in every age of the world-they have had to pass through trials, tribulations and persecutions, and have had to contend with opposition, and this will always be their fate until the power of evil is overcome.—JD 17:254, October 9, 1874.

Oppositiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP241THERE ARE MORE FOR US THAN AGAINST US. It is for us to wake up to a sense of our duty, and call upon the Lord in humility, and live near to him; and our eyes will be opened, as in the case of the young man the servant of the ancient prophet Elisha, and we will see that there are more for us than against us; and that the element of opposition tends only to hasten the fulfillment of the purposes of God.—JD 24:56, January 27, 1883.

LuciferDevil, Angels ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP241The devil did not make this earth. It never belonged to him, and never will; but Lucifer was cast down to the earth with the third part of the hosts of heaven, and they have dwelt here until today. They remain here yet; and they have had their effect upon the hearts and minds and lives of the children of men for nearly six thousand years-from the time that man was cast out of the Garden of Eden into the cold and dreary world.—JD 11:243, October 22, 1865.

Satana-Woodruff, WilfordTP241I know that the devil seeks to overthrow this people, and it seems that the powers of darkness have to a great extent prevailed in their attempts to control the hearts of the children of men. For many generations the powers of darkness have had almost universal sway; but I thank God that I have lived to see the day when the kingdom of God has been set up on the earth, and that it is no more to be thrown down forever. Men with wicked hearts may seek to pull down the cause of truth, but all their efforts will be in vain, for the blessing of the Almighty is upon his Saints, the inspiration of the heavens is upon his servants, and they will overcome the powers of temptation and of the adversary.—JD 8:270, August 26, 1860.

Trutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP241"TRUTH IS MIGHTY AND WILL PREVAIL." There is a proverb or saying which I have heard a good many times in my life, and which I think bears a great deal of weight, and that is, "truth is mighty and will prevail." I think this has been manifested in every capacity in which truth has been used, whether applied temporally or spiritually; whether applied to the world or to the kingdom of God. I think that in every age of the world, truth, whether it has been popular or unpopular, has proved itself, in the end of its labor, to prevail in all cases.—JD 25:4, January 6, 1884.

1946 Bookcraft
