Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

251Chapter 20

251The Second Coming of Christ The Millennial Reign

AngelsSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP251SIGNS OF THE TIMES. What are the signs of the times? Do the Latter-day Saints comprehend them? This is a fast age. The Lord is going to cut his work short in righteousness. Read these revelations, for they contain the history of what is going to pass in the earth. The Lord said to Joseph in the beginning of this Church:

AngelsSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP251Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields;

AngelsSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP251But the Lord saith unto them, pluck not up the tares while the blade is yet tender (for verily your faith is weak), lest you destroy the wheat also.

AngelsSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP251Therefore let the wheat and the tares grow together until the harvest is fully ripe; then ye shall first gather out the wheat from among the tares, and after the gathering of the wheat, behold and lo, the tares are bound in bundles, and the field remaineth to be burned. [^1]

AngelsSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP251What is the matter with the world today? What has created this change that we see coming over the world? Why these terrible earthquakes, tornadoes, and judgments? What is the meaning of all these mighty events that are taking place? The meaning is, these angels that have been held for many years in the temple of our God have got their liberty to go out and commence their mission and their work in the earth, and they are here today in the earth. I feel bold in saying this to the Latter-day Saints. There is a meaning in these judgments. The word of the Lord cannot fall unfulfilled. If you want to know what is coming to pass, read the revelations of St. John, read the Book of Mormon and the book of Doctrine and Covenants, and these things are at our doors.—MS 56:643, October 8, 1894.

Angelsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP252THE ANGELS SPOKEN OF HAVE BEGUN THEIR MISSION. I want to bear testimony to this congregation, and to the heavens and the earth, that the day is come when those angels are privileged to go forth and commence their work. They are laboring in the United States of America; they are laboring among the nations of the earth; and they will continue. These things are at our doors, and neither you nor I can hinder them. We need not marvel or wonder at anything that is transpiring in the earth.—MS 58:738, October 4, 1896.

Signs of the TimesMurmuringa-Woodruff, WilfordTP252I want the Latter-day Saints to stop murmuring and complaining at the providence of God. Trust in God. Do your duty. Remember your prayers. Get faith in the Lord, and take hold and build up Zion. All will be right. The Lord is going to visit his people, and he is going to cut his work short in righteousness, lest no flesh should be saved. I say to you, watch the signs of the times, and prepare yourselves for that which is to come.—MS 53:796-797 (1891).

Millenniuma-Woodruff, WilfordTP252THE MILLENNIAL DAWN-A STATEMENT IN 1875. The Millennium is dawning upon the world, we are at the end of the six thousand years, and the great day of rest, the Millennium of which the Lord has spoken, will soon dawn, and the Savior will come in the clouds of heaven to reign over his people on the earth one thousand years.—JD 18:113, September 12, 1875.

Millenniuma-Woodruff, WilfordTP252"WE ARE LIVING AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE MILLENNIUM." We are living at the commencement of the Millennium, and near the close of the 6,000th year of the world's history. Tremendous events await this generation. You can read an account of them in the revelations of St. John; the opening of the seals; the blowing of the trumpets; the pouring out of the plagues; the judgments of God which will overtake the wicked when Great Babylon comes in remembrance before God, and when the sword that is bathed in heaven shall fall on Idumea, or the world who shall be able to abide these things? Here we are living in the midst of these tremendous events.—JD 25:10, January 6, 1884.

Jesus Christ, Second Coming ofSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP253THE SECOND COMING AT HAND. The signs of heaven and earth all indicate the near coming of the Son of Man. You read the 9th, 10th and 11th chapters of the last Book of Nephi, and see what the Lord has said will take place in this generation, when the gospel of Christ has again been offered to the inhabitants of the earth. The Lord did not reveal the day of the coming of the Son of Man, but he revealed the generation. That generation is upon us. The signs of heaven and earth predict the fulfillment of these things, and they will come to pass.—JD 21:195, July 3, 1880.

Last Days, Prophecies AboutJesus Christ, Second Coming ofSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP253SIGNS OF THE SECOND COMING. I do not know that any people on the earth, except the Latter-day Saints, are looking for this great event. There may be exceptions, there may be men who believe in the second coming of Christ. The people called Millerites, believe in the second coming of the Savior, and they have set a great many days when it should take place. But he did not come, and he never will come until the revelations of God are fulfilled and a people are prepared for his coming. He will never come until the Jews are gathered home and have rebuilt their temple and city, and the Gentiles, have gone up there to battle against them. He will never come until his Saints have built up Zion, and have fulfilled the revelations which have been spoken concerning it. He will never come until the Gentiles throughout the whole Christian world have been warned by the inspired elders of Israel. They are called to thrust in the sickle and reap, for the harvest is ripe and the time has come, which is referred to in this revelation, when the Lord commands the elders to go forth and warn the world for the last time, and call upon the inhabitants of the earth to repent.—JD 18:111, September 12, 1875.

Jesus Christ, Second Coming ofParablesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP254ON THE PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS. The parable of the ten virgins is intended to represent the second coming of the Son of man, the coming of the bridegroom to meet the bride, the church, the Lamb's wife, in the last days; and I expect that the Savior was about right when he said, in reference to the members of the Church, that five of them were wise and five were foolish; for when the Lord of heaven comes in power and great glory to reward every man according to the deeds done in the body, if he finds one half of those professing to be members of his Church prepared for salvation, it will be as many as can be expected, judging by the course that many are pursuing.—JD 18:110, September 12, 1875.

First and LastSigns of the Timesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP254THE GENERATION OF CHRIST'S COMING. No man knows the day or the hour when Christ will come, yet the generation has been pointed out by Jesus himself. He told his disciples when they passed by the temple as they walked out of Jerusalem that that generation should not pass away before not one stone of that magnificent temple should be left standing upon another and the Jews should be scattered among the nations; and history tells how remarkably that prediction was fulfilled. Moses and the prophets also prophesied of this as well as Jesus. The Savior, when speaking to his disciples of his second coming and the establishment of his kingdom on the earth, said the Jews should be scattered and trodden under foot until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. But, said he, when you see light breaking forth among the Gentiles, referring to the preaching of his gospel amongst them; when you see salvation offered to the Gentiles, and the Jews-the seed of Israel-passed by, the last first and the first last; when you see this you may know that the time of my second coming is at hand as surely as you know that summer is nigh when the fig tree puts forth its leaves; and when these things commence that generation shall not pass away until all are fulfilled.

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Woodruff, WilfordTP255WE ARE LIVING IN THE GENERATION OF CHRIST'S COMING. We are living in the dispensation and generation to which Jesus referred-the time appointed by God for the last six thousand years, through the mouths of all the prophets and inspired men who have lived and left their sayings on record, in which his Zion should be built up and continue upon the earth. These prophecies will have their fulfillment before the world; and all who will not repent will be engulfed in the destructions which are in store for the wicked. If men do not cease from their murders, whoredoms, and all the wickedness and abominations which fill the black catalogue of the crimes of the world, judgment will overtake them; and whether we are believed or not, these sayings are true, and I bear my testimony as a servant of God and as an elder in Israel to the truth of the events which are going to follow very fast on each other.—JD 14:5, January 1, 1871.

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Woodruff, WilfordTP255A PROPHETIC OPINION IN 1889. Many of these young men and maidens that are here today will, in my opinion, if they are faithful, stand in the flesh when Christ comes in the clouds of heaven. These young people from the Sabbath schools and from the Mutual Improvement Associations, will stand in the flesh while the judgments of the Almighty sweep the nations of the earth as with a besom [^2] of destruction, in fulfillment of the revelations of God, and they will be the very people whom God will bless and sustain. Therefore, I say, our young men cannot begin too quickly to qualify themselves by treasuring up wisdom and calling upon God and getting the Holy Priesthood; for they have got to stand in holy places while these judgments are poured out upon the earth.—MS 51:595-596 (1889).

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Woodruff, WilfordTP256THE IMPORTANCE OF CONDUCT. Zion is not going to be moved out of her place. The Lord will plead with her strong ones, and if she sins he will chastise her until she is purified before the Lord.

Last Days, Prophecies Abouta-Woodruff, WilfordTP256I do not pretend to tell how much sorrow you or I are going to meet with before the coming of the Son of Man. That will depend upon our conduct.—MS 51:547 (1889).

257Book Four

Doctrine and Covenants 86:5-7.

A besom is a kind of broom.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
[^2] An epistle read in the April Conference, 1896, in Salt Lake City, which defines clearly the position of the Church in regard to the state, and also the duty of those holding prominent offices in the priesthood, not to accept positions which would interfere with the performance of the duties of their calling without first consulting with their brethren and the First Presidency. This document was signed by President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors in the First Presidency, by members of the Council of Twelve, the First Council of Seventy, the Patriarch, and Presiding Bishopric.
