Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

Life's Experiences

"We are making history. The travels and experience of the Latter-day Saints have been as interesting as the history of any people in any dispensation since the world began."—WILFORD WOODRUFF, JD 19:134, October 13, 1877.

259Chapter 21

259Insights to Happiness Mankind's Quest

Man's Search for Happinessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP259THE AGE-OLD SEARCH. Mankind in all ages search for happiness; they desire social and domestic peace; and when they think of the vast future, they desire to participate in the blessings that are spoken of as pertaining to that state of existence; but they know not how to obtain them, except a servant of God comes along and points out the way of life.—JD 9:163, December 1, 1861.

Man's Search for Happinessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP259HOW TO OBTAIN HAPPINESS. Ask any people, nations, kingdoms, or generations of men the question, and they will tell you they are seeking for happiness, but how are they seeking for it? Take the greatest portion of mankind as an example, and how are they seeking for happiness? By serving the devil as fast as they can, and almost the last being or thing that the children of men worship, and the last being whose laws they want to keep are the laws of the God of heaven. They will not worship God nor honor his name, nor keep his laws, but blaspheme his name, from day to day, and nearly all the world are seeking for happiness by committing sins, breaking the law of God, and blaspheming his name and rejecting the only source whence happiness flows.

Man's Search for Happinessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP259If we really understood that we could not obtain happiness by walking in the paths of sin and breaking the laws of God, we should then see the folly of it, every man and every woman would see that to obtain happiness we should go to work and perform the works of righteousness, and do the will of our Father in heaven, for we shall receive at his hand all the happiness, blessing, glory, salvation, exaltation, and eternal lives, that we ever do receive either in time or eternity.—JD 4:192, January 25, 1857.

260"WE SHOULD LIVE IN SUCH A MANNER THAT THE SPIRIT AND BLESSING OF GOD MAY ATTEND US." We have but a little time to spend on earth even though we live to be a hundred years of age, and we have no time to waste. We should live in such a manner that the Spirit and blessing of God may attend us; and then when we cease our labors here we shall pass hence to continue them in the same cause of salvation and redemption, and all will be well with us.—JD 23:83, March 26, 1882.

Knowledgea-Woodruff, WilfordTP260LIVE UP TO THE KNOWLEDGE YOU POSSESS. Put your trust in God and rely on his promises, living up to the light and knowledge you possess; and all will be well with you whether living or dying.—JD 24:56, January 27, 1883.

Self-Controla-Woodruff, WilfordTP260SELF-CONTROL. I consider that it is one of the greatest victories for a man to gain, to learn how to control himself. Show me a man who does control himself and I will show you a safe man; for a man who has prepared himself by this principle is on the road to salvation. A man who is prepared to lay all that he hath upon the altar, and his life with it, for the gospel's sake and the kingdom of God, is in the right way. But the moment that we teach a doctrine that we do not practice we show our weakness. The moment a man or a woman becomes angry he or she shows a great weakness, and so it is with any of us when we do anything wrong.—JD 4:98, October 6, 1856.

Integritya-Woodruff, WilfordTP260INTEGRITY. To me the principle of integrity is one of the greatest blessings we can possibly possess. He who proves true to himself or his brethren, to his friends and his God, will have the evidence within him that he is accepted; he will have the confidence of his God and of his friends. It is a great and a glorious principle; it is something that gives you that assurance in your friends that you can trust your property, your life, your all in the hands of your brethren.—JD 8:266, April 22, 1860.

SaintsCharactera-Woodruff, WilfordTP261THE CHARACTER OF A SAINT. You will find, my brethren and sisters, there are but a very few comparatively, either male or female, who have had independence of mind enough, as well as honesty of heart sufficient to receive the gospel of Christ. It takes independence of mind, honesty of heart, faith in God, and firmness of character to live the life of a Latter-day Saint.—JD 22:349, January 29, 1882.

261ON BORROWING TROUBLE. The troubles of the children of men are very numerous, but a great many of them are borrowed. I believe two thirds of the troubles of men are borrowed. It appears to be a natural gift, or it seems natural to us to borrow trouble; and it is a good deal so with our blessings. We look forward to some future time when we are going to enjoy great and glorious blessings, but our blessings are at the present time. This is the time that we should enjoy the blessings that God has given us. We should rejoice today, and be happy today, and feel to thank the Lord for the blessings that he has put into our hands; and as to borrowing troubles, we should let them all pass; for it is sufficient for us to pass through troubles and trials when they are upon us; and if we pursue this course, we may escape a great many imaginary, trying, and perplexing scenes.—JD 6:140-141, December 27, 1857.

Eternal Lifea-Woodruff, WilfordTP261ETERNAL LIFE: THE GREATEST GIFT OF GOD. Remember, my brethren, the greatest gift that God can bestow upon us is eternal life, and it is worth more than all the houses and lands or the gold and the silver upon the earth. For by and by we will go to the grave, and that puts an end to worldly possessions, as far as our using them is concerned. The grave finds a home for all flesh, and no man can take his houses and lands, his gold and silver, or anything else of a worldly character, with him. We brought none of these things with us when we came from our previous state. As Bishop Hunter says, babies are born without shoes and stockings.—JD 22:234, June 26, 1881.

Consequencesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP262I feel to say to the Latter-day Saints everywhere, brethren and sisters, do good and you will reap good; what you sow you will also reap.—JD 23:131-132, May 14, 1882.

Consequencesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP262AN ADMONITION. Brethren and sisters, seek after God; call upon him in your secret places, and do not turn away from righteousness and truth; there is nothing to be gained by doing that, but everything to lose.—JD 22:236, June 26, 1881.

Celestial Lawa-Woodruff, WilfordTP262IT IS PROFITABLE TO ABIDE THE CELESTIAL LAW. I always have said and believed, and I believe today, that it will pay you and me and all the sons and all the daughters of Adam to abide the celestial law, for celestial glory is worth all we possess. If it calls for every dollar we own and our lives in the bargain, if we obtain an entrance into the celestial kingdom of God, it will amply repay us.

Celestial Lawa-Woodruff, WilfordTP262The Latter-day Saints have started out for celestial glory, and if we can only manage to be faithful enough to obtain an inheritance in the kingdom, where God and Christ dwell, we shall rejoice through the endless ages of eternity.—JD 17:250, October 9, 1874.

263With regard to the law of God, it is all right. We can well afford to keep it and trust in him.—JD 22:235, June 26, 1881.

Celestial Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP263It is impossible, however, for the Saints of God to inherit a celestial kingdom without their being tried as to whether they will abide in the covenants of the Lord or not.—JD 23:328, December 10, 1882.

Celestial Kingdoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP263Any man who undertakes to serve God has to round up his shoulders and meet it, and any man who will not trust in God and abide in his cause even unto death is not worthy of a place in the celestial kingdom.—JD 17:245, October 9, 1874.

Chasteninga-Woodruff, WilfordTP263THE LORD'S DETERMINED PURPOSE. It matters not what the minds and feelings of men are, the Lord is determined to raise up a people that will worship him; and if he had a whip, and scourge, and should drive us through a whole generation, he will chastise us until we are willing to submit to righteousness and truth, or until we are like clay in the hands of the potter. The chastisements we have had from time to time have been for our good, and are essential to learn wisdom and carry us through a school of experience we never could have passed through without. I hope, then, that we may learn from the experience we have had to be faithful and humble, and be passive in the hands of God, and do his commandments.—JD 2:198, February 25, 1855.

263THE LORD'S OVERSIGHT. The Lord has been watching over us from the hour of our birth.—JD 22:233, June 26, 1881.

Timea-Woodruff, WilfordTP263TIME IS SHORT. Brethren and sisters, we are living in a fast age, and we have no time to waste. This is a time when the Lord is going to cut his work short in righteousness.—MS 51:596 (1889).

Worshipa-Woodruff, WilfordTP263We cannot go to reap our crops and worship the devil one day, and then the next go into the tabernacle or temple of the Lord and worship him. That is not our religion; it does not admit of this. We cannot feel justified in such conduct; but if we live our religion, the blessings of Almighty God will be with us, and he will multiply them upon our heads.—JD 8:272, August 26, 1860.

Faultfindinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP264FAULT FINDING. I want to say to the brethren and to the sisters, let us cease finding fault one with another; let us not say that this man or this woman does wrong, this family does wrong, this person or the other sets a bad example; let us realize that we ourselves are held responsible for what we do.

Faultfindinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP264It will do me no good if I apostatize because somebody's family follows the fashions of Babylon, or because some man or woman or some set of men and women do wrong. Let us cease this kind of work, and all of us look to ourselves. It will do me no good if I apostatize because I think someone else does not do right. We should lay this aside. There is too much of it in the Zion of God today, and has been a good while, finding fault with this, that, and the other, instead of looking at home.

Homea-Woodruff, WilfordTP264"LET US ALL LOOK AT HOME." Let us all look at home, and each one try to govern his own family and set his own house in order, and do that which is required of us, realizing that each one is held responsible before the Lord for his or her individual actions only.—JD 16:272, October 8, 1873.

1946 Bookcraft
