Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

265Chapter 22

265Thoughts for Youth

265Advice to Young People

YouthHonoring Father and Mothera-Woodruff, WilfordTP265TO THE RISING GENERATION. I wish to say, with regard to the rising generation—the sons and daughters of the Latter-day Saints—that they should take the counsel of their fathers; they should honor their parents, and honor God, and receive such counsel as is given unto them by wise men. I think many times that our children do not comprehend what lies before them. Their fathers are passing away. Yet this kingdom has got to remain on the earth until the coming of the Son of Man. This work has got to follow their fathers; it has got to rest upon the sons and daughters of Zion.—MS 51:355 (1889).

Honoring Father and MotherYoutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP265ADVICE TO YOUNG PEOPLE GATHERED AT A MAY WALK (May 1, 1857). I feel to exhort and counsel you, my young friends, to listen to the voice of God and obey it while young, as Samuel did, that you may be great, good, and useful, and the beloved of the Lord and your parents and by all good men. Obey your parents and honor them, for by doing this you will obtain those great blessings which God has promised you . . .

Youtha-Woodruff, WilfordTP265. . . You are now laying a foundation in the bloom and beauty of youth and in the morning of your days to step forth upon the stage of life to act a conspicuous part in the midst of the most important dispensation and generation in which man has ever lived. And I can say in truth and safety that the result of your future lives, the influence which you will exert among man, and finally your eternal destiny for time and eternity, will in a great measure depend upon the foundation which you lay in the days of your youth, the manner in which you store your mind and cultivate while young.

Honoring Father and MotherYoutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP266Therefore neither you nor your parents can be too careful to see that your young and fruitful minds are fed and stored with good principles. You want to learn that which is true—when you learn anything about God, Jesus Christ, the angels, the Holy Ghost, the gospel, the way to be saved, your duty to your parents, brethren, sisters, or to any of your fellow men, or any history, art or science, I say when you learn any of those things you want to learn that which is true, so that when you get those things riveted in your mind and planted in your heart, and you trust to it in future life and lean upon it for support, that it may not fail you like a broken reed.

Youtha-Woodruff, WilfordTP266It is one of the greatest blessings that God ever bestowed upon children that they have had parents who were in possession of true principles in relation to their Heavenly Father, salvation, eternal life, and were qualified and capable of teaching and traditionating their children in the same that they may be qualified to fulfil the object of their creation; while on the other hand, it is one of the greatest calamities that can befall a nation or people to be overwhelmed with false views in relation to themselves, their Creator, their salvation; and should the children of that people ever be taught the truth they would have to say as one of the prophets said the children of the Gentiles would say as they were gathered to Zion in the last days, that their "fathers had inherited lies and vanity and things wherein there is no profit."—JH 1-2, May 1, 1857.

Honoring Father and Mothera-Woodruff, WilfordTP266APPRECIATION AND LOVE FOR PARENTS. Love your fathers and mothers, appreciate and enjoy their society while you are with them, for you will soon enough be called to part with them, and if you live to see that day you will see the time when you will fully appreciate their society and know the worth of their counsel.—JH 2, May 1, 1857.

Honoring Father and Mothera-Woodruff, WilfordTP267HOW YOUNG PEOPLE MAY BLESS FAMILY LIFE. Obey your parents in all things and comfort their hearts, for you have the power to do this. When they are weary and pressed with the cares of life, seek to ease their burdens and smile upon them in their hours of sorrow and you will cast a charm of joy and peace around them which they cannot obtain from any other source.

Youtha-Woodruff, WilfordTP267Be kind to your brothers and sisters and all with whom you associate; kind words and good manners will cost you nothing and will add greatly to the happiness of those around you. Be true to yourselves by doing right in all things, by improving well your time and talents, by being wise, virtuous, and good. Be true to your God by keeping his commandments and doing his will, for he holds your destiny and the destiny of your parents and of all men in his own hands and he will reward all according to their works, whether they be good or evil, and all will be amply paid for doing well.—JH 2, May 1, 1857.

Honoring Father and MotherYoutha-Woodruff, WilfordTP267Be happy, be contented, enjoy the days of your youth, enjoy your peaceful homes, enjoy the society of your parents, brothers, and sisters while you have an opportunity, for the days of your youth will soon be gone. Manhood will be upon you with all of its attendant cares and responsibilities.—JH 2, May 1, 1857.

Educationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP267PROPER EDUCATION: THE BEST LEGACY PARENTS CAN LEAVE TO THEIR CHILDREN. Our children should not be neglected; they should receive a proper education in both spiritual and temporal things. That is the best legacy any parents can leave to their children. We should teach them to pray, and instil into their minds while young every correct principle. Ninety-nine out of every hundred children who are taught by their parents the principles of honesty and integrity, truth and virtue, will observe them through life. Such principles will exalt any people or nation who make them the rule of their conduct. Show me a mother who prays, who has passed through the trials of life by prayer, who has trusted in the Lord God of Israel in her trials and difficulties, and her children will follow in the same path. These things will not forsake them when they come to act in the kingdom of God . . .

Childrena-Woodruff, WilfordTP268. . . Our children should be prepared to build up the kingdom of God. Then qualify them in the ways of childhood for the great duties they will be called upon to perform.—JD 15:12, April 6, 1872.

Children, Salvation ofChildrena-Woodruff, WilfordTP268We want to save our children, and to have them partake of all the blessings that encircle the sanctified—to have them receive the blessings of their parents who have been faithful to the fulness of the gospel. We do not want them to go through all the routine of false doctrines and erroneous systems that we have had to wade through in our generation.—JD 8:272, August 26, 1860.

Salvation, Plan ofEducationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP268I once read a man's view of education—he was not a Mormon, but a man of the world—who said, "No man is fully educated unless he can tell where he came from, why he is here, and where he is going." That being the case, I thought there were few fully educated in the world. No man can tell where he came from unless it is revealed to him. We have had these things revealed to us in the Bible, Book of Mormon, and book of Doctrine and Covenants. We have thus come to the knowledge that we had an existence before we came here, and that we had a probation before we came here. We are now upon our second estate, and our eternal destiny depends upon the few years we spend in the flesh. We are placed here that it may be seen which law we will keep. Our Heavenly Father has placed before us the laws celestial, telestial, and terrestrial. If any man will obey the celestial law, he will be preserved by that law; all the glory, power and exaltation, belonging to that law, will be given to him.—JD 22:209, January 9, 1881.

Learninga-Woodruff, WilfordTP269HOW TO LEARN. There is one thing I wish particularly to impress upon your minds, and that is, the importance of improving your time while young in treasuring up knowledge and learning those things which will be useful to you in after life. I know from experience, and so do most parents, that the child cannot appreciate the worth of true intelligence, the importance of improving their time in storing up useful knowledge while they are young, as they will when they come to act upon the stage of life, become fathers and mothers, and feel the full force of the responsibilities of training up children. . . Do not be discouraged because you cannot learn all at once; learn one thing at a time, learn it well, and treasure it up, then learn another truth and treasure that up, and in a few years you will have a great store of useful knowledge which will not only be a great blessing to yourselves and your children, but to your fellow men.—JH 2, May 1, 1857.

Motherhooda-Woodruff, WilfordTP269THE INFLUENCE OF THE MOTHER. I consider that the mother has a greater influence over her posterity than any other person can have. And the question has arisen some time: "When does this education begin?" Our prophets have said, "When the spirit life from God enters into the tabernacle." The condition of the mother at that time will have its effect upon the fruit of her womb; and from the birth of the child, and all through life, the teachings and the example of the mother govern and control, in a great measure, that child, and her influence is felt by it through time and eternity.—MS 51: 593 (1889).

Parentsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP270A STUDY AND A WORK THAT SHOULD NOT BE LAID ASIDE. I have long been satisfied that the Devil was making great exertions to drive a wedge in between parents and children—trying to inspire and instil into the minds of the sons and daughters of the Saints those corrupting notions that will prevent them from following the footsteps of their fathers and mothers: but this cannot be done! The sons and daughters of this people, if we do our duty, will be held by the strength and in the name of Israel's God.

Parentsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP270I have looked upon this matter a great deal, and I have concluded that there never was a generation of the people upon whose shoulders rested greater responsibilities than rest upon this people and then must rest upon their sons and daughters. If this be true, how important it is that we should be wise fathers and mothers, and that we should act wisely in instilling into their youthful minds all those principles that will lead them to that which is just, and to carry out in their lives the principles of righteousness and truth. Many of our children have not had experience in the world; they know nothing of the scenes and corruptions that are among the wicked; they do not realize their present positions, nor the blessings conferred upon them by their parents having obeyed the fulness of the gospel.

Parentsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP270We who have gained experience see the darkness and abominations that are in the hearts of men; but our children, not being able to contrast the evil with the good, cannot see and realize the blessings they enjoy in being under the influence of teachers in Israel. I do not refer to their parents alone, but those who lead and govern in the midst of Israel.

Parentsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP270I have felt for a long time, and I think I have realized to some extent that the duties resting upon us are very great, and that we ought to strive to improve in wisdom and knowledge and in the principles of government, in order that we may know how to be fathers, mothers, and saviors, and learn how to be counselors and how to preside, not only in our own family circles, but wherever we may be called to act. It is a great thing to know how to act so as to gain the feelings and affections of our families, that will lead them in the path wherein they may be saved. This is a study and a work that should not be laid aside by parents, nor by the elders in Israel.—JD 8:271, August 26, 1860.

Marriage, WivesMarriage, Husbandsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP271THE DUTY TO MARRY—ADVICE TO THE YOUNG PEOPLE OF 1875. Another word of the Lord to me is that, it is the duty of these young men here in the land of Zion to take the daughters of Zion to wife, and prepare tabernacles for the spirits of men, which are the children of our father in heaven. They are waiting for tabernacles, they are ordained to come here, and they ought to be born in the land of Zion instead of Babylon. This is the duty of the young men in Zion; and when the daughters of Zion are asked by the young men to join with them in marriage, instead of asking—"Has this man a fine brick house, a span of fine horses and a fine carriage?" they should ask—"Is he a man of God? Has he the Spirit of God with him? Is he a Latter-day Saint? Does he pray? Has he got the Spirit upon him to qualify him to build up the kingdom?" If he has that, never mind the carriage and brick house, take hold and unite yourselves together according to the law of God.—JD 18:129-130, September 12, 1875.

Marriage, HusbandsYoung Mena-Woodruff, WilfordTP271FURTHER ADVICE IN 1889. There is a great destiny awaiting our young men. Therefore they ought to be temperate; not drink whisky, not chew or smoke tobacco, and not mingle with the drunken. And it is the duty of those who are not married to take these daughters of Zion to wife, when they arrive at a proper age. There are no better women on the face of the earth than those that dwell in these mountains of Israel. If there is any virtue anywhere, it exists among the women that live in Zion. The same with the men. Our young ladies are virtuous; their mothers are virtuous; and their fathers are virtuous. There may be exceptions; but the Lord has gathered together a people who are virtuous. My feelings are that every young man in Israel should get married when he arrives at a proper age. It does not cost any man more to provide these girls with food and clothing after they are married than it does before. It does not cost more for yourselves. But you are then prepared to begin to gather some means around you. Do not wait until you have about ten thousand dollars and have fine horses and carriages. You will get them just as quickly after you are married, and possibly quicker, than you will before.

Marriagea-Woodruff, WilfordTP272It is our duty to get married at the proper time. It is the law of God. Therefore I would like to see you young men take these daughters of Zion to wife.—MS 51:595 (1889).

Revelationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP272FUTURE OF ZION'S YOUTH—A REVELATION. One subject more I want to name, and that is with regard to our future. I will tell you what the Lord has revealed to me. You talk of revelation. I have had a good many revelations. We are not particularly required to write all the revelations given to us. Joseph Smith wrote revelations in his day and we have them to read, and they will all be fulfilled to the letter. There has been a good deal said about the rising generation of the Saints. I will tell you what will come to pass.

Young Mena-Woodruff, WilfordTP272My sons, the sons of my counselors, the sons of these apostles, and the sons of this people will rise up by the power of God and they will take this kingdom and bear it off. You need make no mistake about this matter. They are the element that God has ordained, the same as he ordained us, to do His work. Our posterity will not forsake the Lord, nor their fathers, nor their mothers, nor the work in which they are engaged. Too many of them, it is true, have been led astray; too many of them have been found where they should not be; but the bulk of the sons of this people will remain true and faithful to this work.—DW 45:548, October 9, 1892.

Young Mena-Woodruff, WilfordTP273We are appointed to a certain work, and when we get through, our sons will take it and bear it off. Zion will arise, and the glory of God will rest upon her. She will have power in the earth, and the day is at hand when, as Joseph Smith said, thousands of the great men of the earth will come to Zion to behold the glory thereof.—DW 45:548, October 9, 1892.

273A PRAYER. I pray that we may magnify our calling and overcome the world, the flesh and the devil, and inherit eternal life, for Christ's sake.—JD 22:210, January 9, 1881.

1946 Bookcraft
