Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

274Chapter 23

274Some Personal Philosophy His Public Ministry

274THOUGHTS ON LENGTH OF LIFE. I want to live as long as I can do good; but not an hour longer than I can live in fellowship with the Holy Spirit, with my Father in heaven, my Savior, and with the faithful Latter-day Saints. To live any longer than this, would be torment and misery to me. When my work is done I am ready to go; but I want to do what is required of me.—JD 13:327, September 5, 1869.

274PERSONAL REFLECTIONS. I marvel sometimes, when I reflect, why I am alive. I was going to say that there is not a man living scarcely that I was acquainted with in Kirtland. A whole quorum of apostles has been taken into the spirit world. But for some reason the Lord has preserved my life until the present day. And I sincerely desire, in the remaining days I have to spend here, that I may do what little good I can. I wish to magnify my calling; I wish to do my duty; I wish to know the mind and will of God, and try to do it. I pray not only that these blessings may be given to me, but to all the elders of Israel and the Latter-day Saints, which may God grant, for Christ's sake.—MS 51:212 (1889).

274The only marvel I have had all my life has been that the Lord ever chose me for anything, especially as an apostle and as president. But that is his own business; it was not mine.—MS 57:739, October 6, 1895.

Humilitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP274PERSONAL HUMILITY. When I look upon the ten thousand faces of Latter-day Saints before me the present time; and when I contemplate what God hath wrought in establishing this people in the midst of these mountain valleys; and when I bring myself face to face with the wonderful age we live in, and sense the mighty responsibilities that rest upon us, as watchmen upon the walls of Zion, and as watchmen to this generation—when I contemplate these things, if any man under heaven feels his weakness, it is Wilford Woodruff, MS 51:786 (1889).

Humilitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP275I am entirely dependent upon the Lord. I always have been during my life, and in my travels and pilgrimages, preaching the gospel of Christ to my fellow men. It does not make any difference what age a man is in preaching the gospel, whether he is twenty-five, ninety, or five hundred years of age, if he is only inspired by the spirit and power of God.—MS 57:337. April 7, 1895.

Humilitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP275A HUMBLE TESTIMONY AS CHURCH PRESIDENT. I am thankful before the Lord for the blessings that I have enjoyed in this conference and for the testimonies I have heard from these apostles. They speak as men having authority, inspired by the Spirit of God, and they speak the truth. Many of our friends that have labored with us have passed away. We ourselves shall pass away in our time. I may say that if it had not been for the prayers of these thousands of Latter-day Saints, I today should have been mingling with my brethren in the spirit world. I know that I have been preserved by the prayers of my brethren and sisters, and I am still with you. I feel very weak, and hardly qualified to magnify my calling as an apostle, as the leader of the people of Israel; in fact, no man Is, only as moved upon by the power of God. What little time I may stay here I hope my heart will not be set on the riches of this world, but on doing the will of God and uniting with my brethren in bearing off the great work and responsibility resting upon us. If we will do this, all will be right.—MS 56:228-229, April 9, 1894.

Humilitya-Woodruff, WilfordTP276TEACHABLENESS. I have never seen the day or the hour that I was not susceptible of being taught by my brethren, neither have I ever seen the time that I thought I knew all the principles of the gospel; and I can truly say that I feel as much edified today in contemplating the things of God as ever I did in any hour of my life.—JD 8:261, April 22, 1860.

276AN AMBITION REALIZED. I prayed many an hour when a boy that the Lord would let me live to see a prophet or an apostle, or some man who could teach me that gospel which I read of in the New Testament. I have lived to see that day, and I thank God for it. I have tried to do what good I could in my weak way. I have tried to go into these temples and redeem my father's house. With the assistance of my friends I have been able to do this. When I go to the other side of the veil and meet with them, I think I shall be satisfied, and I think they will. They will find that these principles are true, and so will all denominations when they come in the presence of God. They will learn then, if not before, that this is the work of God.—MS 56:660, October 15, 1894.

Teaching with the Spirita-Woodruff, WilfordTP276ON PREACHING. I made a covenant with the Lord, years ago, that whatever he would impress me to say, I would preach to the people. If we are not able to speak to your edification, it is not because there are not truth and knowledge, principles and laws sufficient within the pale of this Church, and connected with the work in which we are engaged.—JD 24:50-5, January 27, 1883.

Teaching with the Spirita-Woodruff, WilfordTP276In my public teaching I never permit my mind to follow in any channel except that which the Spirit dictates to me, and this is the position we all occupy when we meet with the Saints, or when we go forth to preach the gospel. As Jesus told his apostles, take no thought what ye shall say, it is told us, take no thought what we shall say; but we treasure up in our minds words of wisdom by the blessing of God and studying the best books.—JD 15-275, January 12, 1873.

Teaching with the Spirita-Woodruff, WilfordTP277I have never seen a day since I have been a member of this Church, that I have felt that any man was qualified to teach saint or sinner, Jew or Gentile, the inhabitants of the earth abroad or at home, only as he was moved upon by the power of God.—JD 24:236, July 20, 1883.

277AT GENERAL CONFERENCE. We have had a great many plain truths presented before this conference, and if we will observe the counsels that have been given here we shall be led to salvation.—JD 16:33, April 7, 1873.

Worldlinessa-Woodruff, WilfordTP277WILFORD WOODRUFF'S ATTITUDE. I do not feel that I am justified in setting my heart upon the things of this world to the neglect of any duty that God requires at my hands.—JD 21:282, July 3, 1880.

277I thank the Lord my God that my ears have been saluted with the sound of the gospel, and that I have had the privilege of reading the revelations of God to us, and I know that, as an individual, I am held responsible for my duty to him.—JD 19:297, April 6, 1878.

Rejoicinga-Woodruff, WilfordTP277"I REJOICE!" I rejoice in the gospel of the Son of God, as he has revealed it in this our day; I rejoice in the organization of the Church and kingdom of God, and in the revelations of heaven. I read them with a great deal of interest, for I know they are true; and, therefore, I look forward with assurance to their fulfillment in the earth.—JD 23:83, March 26, 1882.

Trialsa-Woodruff, WilfordTP277PERSONAL TRIALS. I have never had any trials in this Church with regard to my faith. My trials have been of another nature.—DW 38:389, March 3, 1889.

278THE COST OF SIN. I have never committed a sin in this church and kingdom, but what it has cost me a thousand times more than it was worth.—JD 21:284, July 3, 1880.

278CONCENTRATION OF EFFORT. I look upon the cause of God and the mission that he has given each of us connected with it, as requiring the whole attention, the might, mind and strength of each one of us, in order to magnify our calling and accomplish the work committed to our hands.—JD 24:51, January 27, 1883.

PerseveranceDeterminationa-Woodruff, WilfordTP278SOME POINTS OF VIEW THE POWER OF DETERMINATION AND FAITH. In any and every age of the world when God has called or commanded a man or a people to perform a certain work, they through determination and perseverance, and faith in him, have been enabled to accomplish it; and I do not know of a single instance wherein anything ennobling or exalting has been gained when his command has been shunned or wilfully disobeyed.—JD 22:145, April 3, 1881.

Consequencesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP278SOME VALUES WITH WHICH TO WEIGH THE PROBLEMS OF CHOICE. It is better for us to fall in defense of truth, than to deny the words of God, and go to hell. It is better to suffer stripes for the testimony of Christ, than to suffer and fall by our sins and transgressions, and then to have to suffer afterwards. I would rather seal my testimony with my blood, and lay my body to rest in the grave, and have my spirit go to the other side of the veil, to enjoy a long eternity of light, truth, blessings, and knowledge which the Lord will bestow upon every man who keeps his law, than to spend a few short years of earthly pleasure, and he deprived of those blessings, and the society of my friends and brethren behind the veil.—JD 2:199, February 25, 1855.

Wealtha-Woodruff, WilfordTP279FLEETING RICHES. All the knowledge that we can accumulate from experience and observation, and from the revelations of God to man, goes to show that the riches of this world are fleeting and transitory, while he that has eternal life abiding in him is rich indeed.—JD 22:234, June 26, 1881.

279THE HAND OF GOD HAS BEEN MANIFESTED. If the hand of God has not been manifested in behalf of this people, I do not know where to look for it. This kingdom will stand, God will plead with her strong ones, but Zion will not be moved out of her place.—JD 22:235-236, June 26, 1881.

279INTEREST IN GOD'S WORK TO INCREASE. When I see the world making warfare against the Zion and people of God because they have borne record and testimony of his work on the earth I can tell pretty well what the end will be; I can see it. We are living in a time when the work of God is going to increase in interest every day until it is wound up.—JD 14:5, January 1, 1871.

Apostatesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP279CHARACTERISTICS OF APOSTATES. There are two things which have always followed apostates in every age of the world, and especially in our day. In the early days of the Church, in Kirtland, as soon as men apostatized from the church and kingdom of God, they immediately began to fear their fellow men, and to fancy their lives were in danger. Another peculiarity common to apostates was that they desired to kill those who had been their benefactors. This was the case with the Higbees, Laws, and others with regard to the Prophet Joseph, when they turned against him, they sought with all their powers to take away his life. Not only were they afraid of their own lives, but they sought to take his, and they eventually succeeded, and woe is their doom. What would they not give in exchange for their souls? But no matter, they cannot redeem them. This spirit also accompanies the apostates. What are they afraid of? There is something they do not understand or comprehend; they walk in the dark, and by and by they will unite with the wicked and try to overthrow the very work they have been trying to build up.—JD 13:168, December 12, 1869.

Oppositiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP280NEW MOVEMENTS BRING OPPOSITION. The moment that you take in hand any new operation in the kingdom of God, that moment you have to renew your warfare, and the Saints will find that wherein they undertake any new enterprise and are sent to the nations of the earth, the devil will be up against them. Look how he raged when the Prophet Joseph Smith commenced preaching upon this continent, and then again when we went from this country to Europe, it seemed as if all hell was let loose. As soon as Brothers Kimball and Hyde arrived in England, all the devils in Europe, or in England, at any rate, were let loose upon them, and it was precisely the same in London when the brethren went there; and I will say still further, it has been so in every place.—JD 4:96, October 6, 1856.

Study, Learninga-Woodruff, WilfordTP280THE STUDY OF THE GOSPEL. When a boy begins his education at school he begins at the first rudiments, and continues to progress step by step. It is so with the student in the study of the everlasting gospel. There were not many principles revealed to us when we first received it, but they were developed to us as fast as we were capable of making use of them.

Study, Learninga-Woodruff, WilfordTP280I well remember the first sermon I heard. My conviction was that I had learned more about God and the things of his kingdom than I had learned in all my previous life. I believed the gospel then, and I not only believe it now, but I know it to be true. Since then I have received much valuable instruction through the revelations of God that have been made manifest; and I have never yet heard a principle set forth, but I have been able to see beauty and glory connected with it.—JD 8:265, April 22, 1860.

281THE CONTEMPLATION OF ETERNITY. How fast we pass away! Where is brother Heber, whom we used to see so often in our midst here and in the Endowment House? In the spirit world. Brothers Willard, Joseph, Hyrum, David Patten, Jedediah, Parley Pratt, and Brother Benson among the rest have gone. We shall all go pretty soon, we shall not remain a great while. Our labors in this life are short, and we shall soon pass to the other side of the veil. Our children, the rising generation, will possess the kingdom; on them the labor of rolling on the work of God will rest, until the kingdom and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven will be given to the Saints of the Most High, and they will possess it for ever and ever, and the meek will inherit the earth. Let us be diligent, let us be faithful; let us labor while it is called today, that we may be counted worthy to receive a reward that will satisfy us in the end.—JD 13:169, December 12, 1869.

Church, Truthfulness ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP281ANOTHER TESTIMONY. I feel to bear my testimony to this work. It is the work of God. Joseph Smith was appointed by the Lord before he was born as much as Jeremiah was. The Lord told Jeremiah "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations." He was commanded to warn the inhabitants of Jerusalem of their wickedness. He felt it a hard task, but ultimately he did as he was commanded. So I say with regard to Joseph Smith, he received his appointment from before the foundation of the world, and he came forth in the due time of the Lord to establish this work on the earth. And so it is the case with tens of thousands of the elders of Israel. The Lord Almighty has conferred upon you the Holy Priesthood and made you the instrument in His hands to build up this kingdom. Do we contemplate these things as fully as we ought? Do we realize that the eyes of all the heavenly hosts are over us? Then let us do our duty. Let us keep the commandments of God, let us be faithful to the end, so that when we go into the spirit world and look back upon our history we may be satisfied. The Lord Almighty has set his hand to establish his kingdom never more to be thrown down or given to another people, and, therefore, all the powers of earth and hell combined will never be able to stay the progress of this work. The Lord has said he will break in pieces every weapon that is raised against Zion, and the nations of the earth, the kings and emperors, presidents and governors have got to learn this fact. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. It is a fearful thing to shed the blood of the Lord's anointed. It has cost the Jews eighteen hundred years of persecution, and this generation have also a bill to pay in this respect.

Church, Truthfulness ofa-Woodruff, WilfordTP282I bear my testimony to these things. The Bible, the Book of Mormon, the book of Doctrine and Covenants contain the words of eternal life unto this generation, and they will rise in judgment against those who reject them.

282May God bless this people and help us to magnify our callings, for Jesus' sake. Amen.—JD 22:334-335, October 8, 1881.

1946 Bookcraft
