Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

301Chapter 25

301Anecdotes and Reminiscences The Growth of Enlightenment in America

301When I was a small boy we had just emerged from under the blue laws of Connecticut—to greater freedom of thought and action. The ducking-stool and other forms of punishment akin to it had been laid aside. Women were no longer hanged or burned at the stake as witches. Greater religious liberty was enjoyed. Women were allowed to kiss their children, husbands, their wives, on the Sabbath day, without being punished for it. If a boy took an ear of corn from the field, although even then he might be punished for it, he was not in danger of being sold as a slave, as in former days. The improved condition of things had just been brought about when I came into the world. But greater and more wonderful changes have been accomplished since that time. In my boyhood every acre of grain was cut with a sickle in New England. The first advance made in that direction was when the hand cradle came into use. The reaper and the binder were never dreamed of in those days. If such things had been brought into the wheat fields then, the people of the land would have almost thought the millennium had come. And there has been rapid advancement in almost every department of life.—MS 59:444 (1897).

Apostasy of Early Christian Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP301THE STORY OF ROBERT MASON> When I was a boy, there was an old man who used to visit at my father's house; his name was Robert Mason, and I heard teachings from him from the time that I was eight years old and upwards, and they were teachings that I shall ever remember, and he taught my father's household many important truths concerning the church and kingdom of God, and told them many things in relation to the prophets and the things that were coming upon the earth, but his teachings were received by but few, they were unpopular with the Christian world, but nearly all who did receive his teachings have joined the Latter-day Saints. Prophets were not popular in that day any more than now, and I have often thought of many things which the old man taught me in the days of my youth since I received the fulness of the gospel and became a member of the church of Christ.

Apostasy of Early Christian Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP302He said, "When you read the Bible do you ever think that what you read there is going to be fulfilled? The teachers of the day," said he, "spiritualize the Bible, but when you read in the Bible about the dreams, visions, revelations and predictions of Ezekiel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, or any other of the prophets or apostles, relative to the gathering of Israel and the building up of Zion, where they say that Israel shall be gathered upon litters, swift beasts and dromedaries, you may understand that it means just what it says, and that it will be fulfilled upon the earth in the last days. And when you read of men laying hands upon the sick and healing them, and casting out devils and working miracles in the name of Jesus Christ, it means what it says." And he further said, "The church of Christ and kingdom of God is not upon the earth, but it has been taken from the children of men through unbelief, and because they have taken away from the gospel some of its most sacred ordinances, and have instituted in their stead forms and ceremonies without the power of God, and have turned from the truth unto fables, but," said he, "it will soon be restored again unto the children of men upon the earth, with its ancient gifts and powers, for the scriptures cannot be fulfilled without it; I shall not live to see it, but," said he to me, "you will live to see that day, and you will become a conspicuous actor in that kingdom, and when you see that day, then that which the prophets have spoken will be fulfilled."

Apostasy of Early Christian Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP303And as Brother Van Cott said about his father and grandfathers, that they did not join any church, it was so with me; I did not join any church, believing that the church of Christ in its true organization did not exist upon the earth, but when the principles of the everlasting gospel were first proclaimed unto me, I believed it with all my heart, and was baptized the first sermon I heard, for the Spirit of God bore testimony to me in power that it was true.

Apostasy of Early Christian Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP303And I believe that I should never have joined any church had I not heard some men preach who had the Holy Priesthood. But when I heard the fulness of the gospel, I was greatly blessed in receiving it, and was filled with joy unspeakable, and I have never been sorry, but I have rejoiced all the day long, and when I saw that train of handcarts, I thought of the teaching and words of the old prophet Mason, for he came the nearest to being a true prophet of God in his predictions and works of any man I ever saw, until I saw men administering in the Holy Priesthood.

Apostasy of Early Christian Churcha-Woodruff, WilfordTP303He also cast out devils in the name of Jesus Christ, by the laying on of hands and the prayer of faith. "But," said he, "I have no right to administer in the ordinances of the gospel, neither has any man unless he receives it by revelation from God out of heaven, as did the ancients. But if my family or friends are sick, I have the right to lay hands upon them, and pray for them in the name of Jesus Christ, and if we can get faith to be healed, it is our privilege"; and I will here say that many were healed through his faith and prayers, and that, too, within my knowledge. And when that first handcart company came into the city, I, indeed, thought of the old prophet, for if they did not come with litters it was as near as possible to itÂ�. —JD 4:99-100, October 6, 1856.

304ZERA PULSIPHER'S SERMON The first sermon that I ever heard in this Church was in 1833, by old father Zera Pulsipher, who died in the south, after having lived to be considerably over eighty years old. That sermon was what I had prayed for from my childhood. When I heard it I had a testimony for myself that it was true. I received it with every sentiment of my heart. He preached in a schoolhouse upon a farm that we owned in Oswego County, New York. He opened the door for any remarks to be made. The house was crowded. The first thing I knew I stood on top of a bench before the people, not knowing what I got up for. But I said to my neighbors and friends, "I want you to be careful what you say as touching these men (there were two of them) and their testimony, for they are servants of God, and they have testified unto us the truth-principles that I have been looking for from my childhood."

304I went forth and was baptized. I was ordained a teacher. I was always sorry that I was not a deacon first, for I had a desire to bear the priesthood in its various degrees, as far as I was worthy. I had had a desire for years, not only to hear the gospel, but to have the privilege and power of preaching it to my fellow men. I was a miller by trade, and I spent many a midnight hour in the mill calling upon the Lord for light and truth, and praying that I might hear the gospel of Christ, and be able to teach it to my fellow men. I rejoiced in it when I did receive it.—MS 53:627 (1891).

Zion's Campa-Woodruff, WilfordTP305EXPLANATION OF ZION'S CAMP. When the members of Zion's Camp were called, many of us had never beheld other's faces; we were strangers to each other and many had never seen the prophet. We had been scattered abroad, like corn sifted in a sieve, throughout the nation. We were young men, and were called upon in that early day to go up and redeem Zion, and what we had to do we had to do by faith. We assembled together from the various states at Kirtland and went up to redeem Zion, in fulfilment of the commandment of God unto us. God accepted our works as He did the works of Abraham. We accomplished a great deal, though apostates and unbelievers many times asked the question, "What have you done?" We gained an experience that we never could have gained in any other way. We had the privilege of beholding the face of the prophet, and we had the privilege of traveling a thousand miles with him, and seeing the workings of the Spirit of God with him, and the revelations of Jesus Christ unto him and the fulfilment of those revelations. And he gathered some two hundred elders from throughout the nation in that early day and sent us broadcast into the world to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ. Had I not gone up with Zion's Camp I should not have been here today, and I presume that would have been the case with many others in this Territory. By going there we were thrust into the vineyard to preach the gospel, and the Lord accepted our labors. And in all our labors and persecutions, with lives often at stake, we have had to work and live by faith.—JD 13:158, December 12, 1869.

Zion's Campa-Woodruff, WilfordTP305UNDERTAKING MEMBERSHIP IN ZION'S CAMP. I was called to take my life in my hands and go up to Missouri, and a little handful of us went up to redeem our brethren. We certainly had to go by faith. My neighbors called upon and pleaded with me not to go. Said they:

Zion's Campa-Woodruff, WilfordTP306"Do not go, if you do you will lose your life."

Zion's Campa-Woodruff, WilfordTP306I said to them: "If I know that I should have a ball put through my heart the first step I took in the state of Missouri I would go."

Zion's Campa-Woodruff, WilfordTP306I went, and I did not get shot, neither did any of the rest of us, but we fulfilled the commandment of God. That is the way I felt in those days with regard to the work of God, and that is the way I feel today. I am after salvation and eternal life, and I do not want anything to stand between me and that which I am in pursuit of.—JD 17:246, October 9, 1874.

306AN INCIDENT IN KENTUCKY This puts me in mind of a circumstance that happened when I was preaching in Kentucky. I preached upon the first principles of the gospel, and at the close of my discourse I gave the privilege for anyone to ask questions or to make remarks, if they felt so disposed. A gentleman arose, and I noticed that a great many of the congregation began to laugh; and I afterwards learned that the gentleman was an infidel, and hence the congregation were disposed to make fun of him. He said, "I will not detain you long, but I wish to state to this large congregation that Mr. Woodruff has taught me more this evening than I ever learned in my whole life before. From my boyhood I have been searching into religion; and when I have asked a minister in relation to the way of life, he would point me to the way he was walking himself; then I would ask another and he would point out a different way; and I might have asked a hundred, and they would all have pointed out a different road, and they would tell me that I must be born again. I observed men who were said to be born again, and one class of men who were said to be born again would take one way, and another would take quite a different road; and I always marveled at this, for I did not see any sense men taking different roads to lead to the kingdom of heaven. But now this man, Mr. Woodruff, has told me the truth, and shown me the reason they took so many different roads after they were born again; and the reason is, because they were all born BLIND."

307This in reality is the case, for many of us have been born again according to the traditions of our fathers; but those that keep the celestial law and obey the principles of the gospel of Christ, you never find them taking different roads. There is but one right road, and it is a straightforward one; and the principles and rules that govern you in that path are simple and easy to be understood. This is the path for us to walk in, and I consider that we are greatly blessed in having learned the true way and in being delivered from that yoke of bondage that has chained us down with error, false doctrine, and false teachers.

307This I count one of the greatest blessings that God has given to the children of men, to have the plain truth pointed out to them.—JD 6:140, December 27, 1857.

307GOOD COMPANY When I visited Fox Islands the first time, I went to the house of Mr. Newton, a Baptist minister; and I stayed with him. But first I went to his church and heard him preach, and when he got through I wanted to bear record of the gospel, for I had a message to that people, and I appointed a meeting for four o'clock in the afternoon, and I preached the gospel to them, and Mr. Newton took me to his home and I gave him the Book of Mormon and the book of Doctrine and Covenants, and for ten days that man walked about his room until midnight trying to decide what he should do. The Spirit of the Lord bore record to him that my testimony was true, and he felt that if he obeyed the gospel which I had proclaimed unto him he would lose his good name and honor among men, but that if he did not receive it, he would be damned. Finally he rejected it, and the consequence was that he became a vagabond, and a miserable outcast. I baptized all his flock who owned any portion of the meeting house, and if he had embraced the gospel and been gathered with them he would have been here and saved in the kingdom of God, instead of the vagabond that he has since become. I merely mention this to show how the minds of some men are acted upon by the tidings of the gospel. Some of them feel that it would be a great reproach to obey that gospel and to keep the commandments of God. Bless your souls, we who obey the gospel of Christ are all in good company. Whenever you are persecuted for righteousness sake, said Jesus, rejoice and be exceeding glad for so persecuted they the prophets and apostles which were before you.—JD 18:36, June 24, 1875.

308JESUS' COLLEGE DIPLOMA I was once preaching to a large assembly in Collinsville, Connecticut; when I got through, a young clergyman came forward, and asked me if I had received any diploma from college. I answered him, "No."

308"Do you know," said he, "that a man who has not received a college diploma has no right to preach?"

308"No, sir," I said, "I do not know it."

308"Well, sir," he said, "that is the case."

308I then asked him to inform me how it was that Jesus preached, without receiving a college diploma?"—JD 18:219, August 13, 1876.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP309THE MISSION OF THE TWELVE TO ENGLAND The whole of that mission to England, from the beginning to the end, placed the apostles in such a position that they had to walk by faith from first to last. The Lord gave a revelation, with date, day, month, and year, when they were to go up to lay the cornerstone in Caldwell county, Far West, Missouri. When that revelation was given, all was peace and quietude, comparatively, in that land. But when the time came for the twelve apostles to fulfil that revelation, the Saints had all been driven out by the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, and it was as much as a man's life was worth, especially one of the twelve, to be found in that state; and when the day came on which we were commanded by the Lord in that revelation to go up and lay the cornerstone of that temple, and there take the parting hand with the Saints, to cross the waters to preach the gospel in England, the inhabitants of Missouri had sworn that if all the revelations of "old Joe Smith" were fulfilled, that one should not be, because it had a day and date to it.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP309President Young asked the twelve who were with him-"What shall we do with regard to the fulfilment of this revelation?" He wanted to know their feelings. Father Smith, the patriarch, said the Lord would take the will for the deed; others said the Lord could not expect the twelve apostles to go up and sacrifice their lives to fulfil that revelation; but the Spirit of the Lord rested upon the twelve, and they said-"The Lord God has spoken, and we will fulfil that revelation and commandment"; and that was the feeling of President Young and of those who were with him. We went through that state, and we laid that cornerstone. George A. Smith and myself were ordained to the apostleship on that cornerstone upon that day. We returned in safety, and not a dog shed our blood.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP310As soon as we got home we prepared ourselves to go on our mission to England, and, as President Young has said, the devil undertook to kill us. I have myself been in Tennessee and Kentucky for two or three years, where, in the fall, there was not enough well persons to take care of the sick during the ague months, and yet I never had the ague in my life until called to go upon that mission to England. There was not one solitary soul in the quorum of the twelve but what the devil undertook to destroy; and, as was said yesterday, when Brother Taylor and myself, the two first of the quorum ready for the trip, were on hand to start, I was shaking with the ague, and I had it every other day, and on my well day, when I did not have it, my wife had it. I got up and laid my hands upon her and blessed her, and blessed my child, having only one at the time, and I started across the river, and that man who sits behind me today, the President of the Church and kingdom of God upon the earth, paddled me across the Missouri river in a canoe, and that is the way I landed in Nauvoo. I lay down on a side of sole leather by the old post office, and I did not know where to go, and I was not able to stand on my feet, and I lay down there. By and by the Prophet came along and said he-"Brother Woodruff, you are going on your mission?"

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP310"Yes," I said, "but I feel more like a subject for the dissecting room than for a mission."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP310He reproved me for what I said and told me to get up and go. Brother Taylor, the only member of the quorum of the twelve who was well, and I traveled together, and on the way he fell to the ground as though he had been knocked on the head with an axe. Old Father Coulton was carrying us, and Brother Taylor fell twice in that way, taken with the bilious fever, and no man in that quorum could boast that he went on that mission without feeling the hand of the destroyer, for it was laid upon us all. I had the shaking ague, and lay on my back in a wagon, and was rolled over stumps and stones, until it seemed as if my life would be shaken out of me. I left Brother Taylor behind, by his advice, for said he, "We are both sick, and if you stay you can't do anything here"; so old Father Coulton carried me along in his wagon until I got to Buffalo, New York.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP311From there I traveled alone to Farmington, Connecticut, my native place, and I stayed there fifteen days at my father's house, coughing and shaking every day. My father never expected that I should leave my bed, and my stepmother did not expect that I should ever get better. A message came from an uncle of mine, who had just died, and his last words were-"I want you to send for friend Wilford, I want him to come and preach my funeral sermon."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP311My father said—"You can't go and preach that sermon, for you can't sit up in your bed."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP311Said I-"Never mind, get up your horse and wagon"; and he did so, and I got into it, and rode over that morning in a chilly wind, and the hour that my ague was coming on I got before a big blazing fire and preached the funeral sermon of my friend, and the ague left me from that day, and I went back and went on my way rejoicing.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP312In process of time Brother Taylor came along and he and I crossed the ocean together, and arrived in England, and here I want to make a little statement of my experience in those days concerning circumstances that took place with me. When Brother Brigham left home he told me that all his family had was one barrel of rotten flour. Two hundred cents would have bought every pound of provision I left with my family when I left home. But we left our wives, for we had the commandment of God upon us, and we were either going to obey it, or die trying. That was the spirit of the elders of Israel; and I blessed my wife and child and left them in the hands of God, and to the tender mercies of our noble bishops, and those who were acquainted with them know how it was in those days. However, I went on my way, and I want to speak of one little circumstance. I had with me an old cloak which I got in Tennessee when traveling with Brother Smoot over forty years ago. It had once been a dandy cloak, and had on keg buttons, and when new had a good deal of trimming and fancy work about it; but it was then pretty well threadbare and worn out. I wore it in Kirtland and I carried it to England with me; and when I was called by revelation to go to John Benbow's and preach the gospel I wore that cloak. I went there and found over six hundred people, called United Brethren, and among them were eighty-three preachers, and they, as a people, were in the gospel net. Before embracing the doctrine of the United Brethren, Sister Benbow had been what is called a "lady" in England, and she had worn her silks and satins. But after obeying the doctrine of this religious body she cut up and burned and destroyed her silks and satins and wore the plainest calicoes she could get, because she thought that was religion. When I went there to preach she looked at me with this old cloak with the keg buttons on, and the Spirit of the Lord bore testimony to me that religion, so far as she was concerned, had a good deal of tradition about it, and that her faith could be tried by the coat a man wore; and as Paul said, if eating meat offended his brethren, he would never eat any more, so I thought a good deal, and one morning I went out and cut off the buttons from my old cloak, and never had a button on it afterwards. By doing this and some other things, which some perhaps would call foolish, I, through the blessing of God and with the assistance of Brother Young, George A. Smith, and Willard Richards, caught the whole flock and baptized every soul except one solitary person into the church and kingdom of God. Many of them are here in this room today, and some of them have passed away. I mention this just to show our position. We traveled without purse and scrip, and we preached without money and without price. Why? Because the God of heaven had called upon us to go forth and warn the world.—JD 18:122-125, September 12, 1875.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313FAITH OF THE HEREFORDSHIRE CONVERTS. Out of that 1800 which we baptized in Herefordshire in seven months, I hardly know one that has turned against this Church. There has been less apostasy out of that branch of the church and kingdom of God than out of the same number from any part of the world that I am acquainted with.—JD 15:345, February 23, 1873.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313CAPTAIN RUSSELL'S INSURANCE I am a good deal of the opinion of old Captain Russell, who was an extensive shipbuilder, and paid thousands of dollars yearly to the Gentiles as insurance fees. After he embraced "Mormonism," he began to reflect, "Here am I paying thousands of dollars yearly to the Gentiles to insure my ships, and I have to trust to the God of heaven after all to save my ships from sinking, and to prosper me in all my undertakings; this is not right." So he went to Liverpool, where the insurance office was, to settle his insurance bills and close up his business with the firm.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313The gentlemen of the firm asked him when he had got through, saying, "Have we not treated you well, Mr. Russell?"

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313"Yes, I have no fault to find with you."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313"What, then, is your object in pursuing this course? We have done business with you a good many years; we want to know if you are going to change your insurance office?"

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313"I am."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP313"Will you tell us where you are going to have your business done in the future?"

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314"Yes, I am going to have it done in heaven, for the insurance offices do not control the winds, the elements are not obedient to them, and I have been paying ten thousand dollars a year for insuring a few ships, and I have to trust in the Lord anyhow, so in the future I shall pay my insurance fee into the Lord's treasury."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314The gentlemen of the office thought he was cracked or beside himself, for I tell you trusting in the Lord in these days is an unpopular business with the world. But the Saints have to trust in the Lord, and we might as well begin and seek this kingdom and the interest of it, and the righteousness of it, and build it up first as last.—JD 4:228, February 22, 1857.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314GOSPEL GIFTS Several years ago I met a man and woman here in the street. The woman said, "Do you know me?"

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314I said, "I do not."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314"Do you know this man that is with me?"

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314"No, I do not."

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314"Why," said she, "you laid hands on this boy in Herefordshire fifty years ago. He was dumb-never spoke a word till you laid hands upon him and blessed him; and he has spoken ever since.

Missions of the Twelve to the British Islesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP314We have no business to claim to be Saints of the living God unless we have the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and if we have that, these gifts will be with us. You know this as well as I do. Joseph Smith had the whole spirit and power of this resting upon him while he lived. He taught these principles to us, and they have been realized, and will be until this scene is wound up. The work shows for itself.—MS 58:741, October 4, 1896.

Temperancea-Woodruff, WilfordTP315CYRUS AND TEMPERANCE Now I have thought many times that some of those ancient kings that were raised up had, in some respects, more regard for the carrying out of some of these principles and laws, than even the Latter-day Saints have in our day. I will take as an example Cyrus, on account of his temperance. He was one of the kings of the Medes and Persians. I believe his father was a Persian and his mother a Mede. To trace the life of Cyrus from his birth to his death, whether he knew it or not, it looked as though he lived by inspiration in all his movements. He began with that temperance and virtue which would sustain any Christian country or any Christian king. And even when he was sent in his youth to his grandfather, the king of the Medes, he showed that he had been carefully brought up, and he followed his early training in a great measure throughout his life; while as king or leader of the Median armies, he conquered nearly the whole world-in fact I do not know that he ever lost a battle. His grandfather was living in luxury, and when young Cyrus was sent to him he offered to serve him as a butler-only he didn't do as butlers sometimes do-that is, taste the wine before putting it on the table. Cyrus, when offered wine, said, "I am afraid it is poison."

Temperancea-Woodruff, WilfordTP315"You are afraid it is poison? What makes you think it poison?"

Temperancea-Woodruff, WilfordTP315"Why, because I have seen it make you and some of the princes act very strange, you would stagger and act very curious."

Temperancea-Woodruff, WilfordTP315He followed this principle of temperance during his whole life. Before a battle he offered sacrifices to the Gods; when he finished a battle and had a victory he did the same thing. I have been struck in reading his history with the course he took in this matter. He would never enter into revelry or debauchery over the nations he had conquered. He taught such principles until the day of his death. Before he died he told those by whom he was surrounded, that he did not want his body put into a gold coffin or a silver coffin; he simply desired his body to be laid in the dust and covered with the earth. Many of these principles followed him, and I have thought many of them were worthy, in many respects, the attention of men who have the gospel of Jesus Christ.—JD 22:207, January 9, 1881.

1946 Bookcraft
