Wilford Woodruff, G. Homer Durham, Discourses of Wilford Woodruff (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1946)

317Chapter 26

317Incidents in the Founding of Utah We Are Making History

317We are making history. The travels and experience of the Latter-day Saints have been as interesting as the history of any people in any dispensation since the world began.—JD 17:248, October 9, 1874.

Church Growtha-Woodruff, WilfordTP317GROWTH OF THE CHURCH. This work is progressing, and it will continue to advance. I have seen the time when you could get the whole church into this room when there were a few high priests, no apostles or seventies, and only a few elders.—JD 19:134, October 13, 1877.

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP317JULY 24, 1847.-I brought President Young in my carriage into the valley of Salt Lake. He was sick, and he asked me to turn my carriage so that he could get sight of the valley. I did so. He cast his eyes over the valley and looked for some little time. When he got through, he said, "Brother Woodruff, drive on. Here is our home. This is the place God has pointed out for us to plant our feet. I have seen this place before." He began to recover right from that time.

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP317Well, we camped there, and we visited around some. President Young said, "Now, brethren, go where you please; go north, go south, go to any part of the country, and when you come back you will say this is the place." Men came from California, among them Brannan, who urged us strongly to go to California, saying that it was such a fine country, and we were there in a barren desert. But President Young said, "This is our home. Here we shall build the temple of God and the city of our God." I think this has been plainly fulfilled. The inspiration of the Lord was with President Young all through his life, and the result of it is manifest. I traveled with him in the first settling of this country.—MS 54:590-591 (1892).

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP318WILFORD WOODRUFF'S FIRST "24TH." I arrived at the camp at 11:30. It was a little northeast of where the Knutsford hotel now stands. I had in my carriage one bushel of potatoes, and I covenanted that I would not eat nor drink until the potatoes were planted in the earth. I fulfilled the covenant, getting some of the brethren to help me, and soon had my potatoes planted. Other brethren also planted some, and from these few came all our Utah potatoes until the railroad was built.—MS 59:445 (1897).

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP318Gentlemen of the Irrigation Congress: I feel myself very thankful that I have lived in the flesh long enough in this Territory to behold the faces of such a congregation of gentlemen as I see here today. It is not my purpose to occupy your time or attention in arguing, or talking, of conversing particularly upon the subjects, or at least those principles for which you have assembled; but what I will say will be a few words concerning our arrival here, and upon the experience in irrigation. Fifty-one years ago, the 24th of last July, I entered this valley with one hundred and forty-three emigrants, [^1] or in other words, pioneers. We were led by President Young. This country, upon our arrival, was called the Great American Desert, and certainly, as far as we could see, it did not discredit its name in the least. There was no mark of the Anglo-Saxon race, no mark of the white man-everything was barren, dry, and desolate.

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP319We pitched our camp a little distance to the southeast from here about 11 o'clock in the day. We had a desire to try the soil, to know what it would produce. Of course all this company-nearly the whole of us-were born and raised in the New England states-Vermont, Maine, Massachusetts, Connecticut-had no experience in irrigation. We pitched our camp, put some teams onto our ploughs (we brought our ploughs with us), and undertook to plough the earth, but we found neither wood nor iron was strong enough to make furrows here in this soil. It was like stone. We had to turn water on it. When we came to put our teams upon the ground again they sank down to their bellies in mud. We had to wait until the land dried enough to hold up our teams. We put in our crops and we stayed here one month. During that time President Young laid out this city, as you see it today, in the midst of sagebrush, with not a house within a hundred miles of us. We built a fort around ten acres, three sides of adobe, walls eighteen feet high, and one side with logs out of the canyon. We then returned to the Missouri and some two thousand men came later. President Cannon here was one of the company that came in after us.

319Now what I wish to say is this: You gentlemen come here today; you see the city, you go through the country. Here are a thousand miles, I might say, through these mountains, filled with cities, towns, villages, gardens, and orchards and the produce of the earth that sustains the people. Without this water this irrigation for which you have met here today, this country would be as barren as it was in 1847, as we found it. Irrigation is what you have met to discuss. Whatever you decide upon in this matter, and unite upon, will, I am sure, prove a great blessing, not only to Utah, but to every state and territory where these arid lands are found. We have had to learn by experience, and all that we have obtained in these mountains has been by irrigation. There are portions yet which have not been irrigated, and as one gentleman said here, if you can make two drops of water where there was one, or two spears of grass where there was one, you are a benefactor to mankind. I say, God bless you in your deliberations.-Address to the Irrigation Congress, September 16, 1891.

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP320CONQUERING THE DESERT. If those who are now so anxious to obtain the homes we have made, had seen Utah as we saw it, they would never have desired a habitation here, but they would have got out of it as soon as they could. It was barren, desolate, abounding with grasshoppers, crickets, coyotes, and wolves, and these things seemed to be the only natural productions of the soil. We went to work by faith, not much by sight, to cultivate the earth. We broke almost all the ploughs we had the first day. We had to let streams of water out to moisten the earth, and by experience we had to learn to raise anything.—JD 15:79, April 8, 1872.

Pioneer Daya-Woodruff, WilfordTP320I came here on the 24th of July, 1847, with a little handful of men as pioneers. What did we find? A barren desert, as barren as the desert Sahara. No mark of the white man here. No outward sign that a white man could live here. How has this desert been made to blossom as the rose? Why this body of people from almost every nation? I will tell you. We carried the gospel to Europe, the islands of the sea, and the different nations of the earth; we offered them the gospel, and a class of men and women-two of a family, and sometimes a dozen of a city-received our testimony, and when we laid hands upon them they received the Holy Ghost. That Holy Ghost has remained with them: it has instructed them and inspired their hearts, and today you see Utah as it is. If the Lord Almighty had not backed up the testimony of the elders of Israel as he has done, Utah today would have been as when we found it thirty-six years ago.—JD 24:242, July 20, 1883.

321THE WISDOM OF UTAH'S FOUNDERS-A CONTRIBUTION TO AMERICAN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT. If we had not cultivated the earth, but had turned our attention to mining, we should not only have starved to death ourselves, but thousands of strangers, who have passed through, would have shared the same fate. Utah Territory has been the great highway to California, Nevada, and all the western states and territories, and they have all looked, in a measure, to Utah for their bread. Nobody but Latter-day Saints would have lived here and endured the trials and afflictions that we endured in the beginning; none others would have stayed and fought the crickets one year, as we had to do year after year. Any people but the Latter-day Saints would have left this country long ago. Not only so, on account of the things I have already named, but I will here say that no other people could have lived here-no, they would have knocked each other's brains out on account of the little water they would have had in their irrigating operations. When men saw their crops and trees withering and perishing for the want of water, the selfishness so general in the world would have worked up to such an extent that they would have killed one another, and hence I say that none but Latter-day Saints would have stood it; but they, by the training and experience they had before received, were prepared for the hardships and trials they had to encounter in this country.—JD 15:79-80, April 8, 1872.

Brigham Younga-Woodruff, WilfordTP322BRIGHAM YOUNG. When the Prophet Joseph was taken away, President Young occupied his place. He held the keys of the kingdom of God. It was for him to have association with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and to lead Israel. You know what he has done. It is before you. He has filled these mountains of Israel with cities and towns and villages. He performed a great work. God was with him. He was true and faithful. He was one of the first quorum of apostles. He never varied; he never shrank from duty. He stood by the Prophet Joseph while he lived. He stood by the kingdom of God and by the Lord as long as he lived himself.—MS 52:594 (1890).

Brigham Younga-Woodruff, WilfordTP322The man who led us here was Brigham Young. He was a prophet, seer, and revelator. He was never destitute of revelation from the day that I first knew him until his body was laid in the tomb. He was a great man-a man of God. We see the result of his work here. He was our architect, so to speak. He fulfilled his mission in a great and wonderful manner, and when he laid his body down he went to mingle with his brethren and the gods.—MS 56:227-228, April 9, 1894.

322BRIGHAM'S ANSWER TO SAM BRANNAN. President Young was inspired to come here, and he was inspired to work after he got here, and when Samuel Brannan, who took the ship Brooklyn from New York to San Francisco, loaded with Latter-day Saints, came to this barren country and met with the pioneers, he looked upon the desolation and barrenness, and tried with all the power he had to persuade President Young not to stop here, but to go on to California. I heard President Young give his answer to Samuel Brannan in the following language, striking his cane into the soil: "No, sir; I am going to stop right here. I am going to build a city here. I am going to build a temple here, and I am going to build a country here." And by the help of God he lived to see all this fulfilled.—MS 59:444-445 (1897).

Handcart Companiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP323CONTEMPORARY COMMENTS ON THE HANDCART MOVEMENT I am satisfied, and have been for some length of time, that the Lord would open some way of relief for the poor Saints, it would require all the Saints that are upon the earth with their means. I was going to say that it would require all the means in the world to bring the poor in the way they have been gathering. There must be a change in the way of the gathering, in order to save them from the calamities and the scourges that are coming upon the wicked nations of the earth. It would require more gold than all the Saints possess upon the earth, to gather the Saints unto Zion from all nations in the way they have been gathering, but now the handcart operation has been introduced to this people, it will bring five here where one has been brought heretofore. [^2]—JD 4:96, October 6, 1856.

Handcart Companiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP323THE NOBILITY OF THE HANDCART PIONEERS. When I first met the train of handcarts my heart was full, the scene was overwhelming. Our hearts were swollen, as Brother Kimball said, till they felt as though they were as big as a two-bushel basket.

Handcart Companiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP323Was it sorrow that produced this? No, but joy; and why so? Because it looked as if the very floodgates of deliverance were opened, and as if we could say to the starving millions, "Come home to Zion, and improve the opportunity that is now open, and renew your covenants, reform yourselves in your lives and conduct."—JD 4:94, October 6, 1856.

Handcart Companiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP324When I saw Brother Ellsworth come into this city covered with dust and drawing a handcart, I felt that he had gained greater honor than the riches of this world could bestow, and he looked better to me than he would have done had he been clothed with the most costly apparel that human ingenuity can produce; he looked better, I say, to me, than a man adorned with jewels and finery of every description. The honor any man can obtain by his faithfulness in this cause and kingdom is worth far more than all the honors and riches of the world.

Handcart Companiesa-Woodruff, WilfordTP324Do I look upon these brethren and sisters that come in with handcarts with any less degree of respect than I should if they had come with horses, with dromedaries, with mules and swift beasts? No, I do not; but I feel that they have accomplished a good work in thus coming to Zion, in the way the Presidency have pointed out.—JD 4:95-96, October 6, 1856.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP324DISCOURSES DURING THE "REFORMATION" OF 1856 I want now to say a few words upon the subject of our reformation. The Presidency have called upon us to reform our ways, to renew our covenants, and to commence to live the lives of Saints. I take this liberty because I have the opportunity of speaking to you. I say then that they have called upon us to put on the whole armor, to reform our conduct. Men having authority have called upon us to forsake our wickedness and our follies, and I may here say that the Presidency have preached to the people in this territory, not only for the last month, but for the last year, and I have thought that it was a good deal like throwing a ball against a rock, it did not penetrate but bounded back, but they have told us that we were asleep as a people, and we have been told of the condition that we are in by the prophets of God, and as Brother Grant has said, we may take the Church as a body with the priesthood, with but few exceptions, and we have been asleep. What! Should the apostles of Jesus Christ go to sleep, men who ought to have their minds upon nothing else but the kingdom of God? No, they should not, they should not be asleep, but they have not always felt as they should feel.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP325You may take the twelve, and the seventies, and high priests, and all the other quorums, except the First Presidency, and they have been more or less asleep. I believe the First Presidency have been awake or they would not have known that we were asleep, and they now think that it is time for us to awake and arise from our slumbers, and I feel so, too.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP325I will tell you how I feel about it; men bearing the priesthood of God, it is a solemn truth, and you know it as well as I do, that almost all the male members in this land bear the Holy Priesthood of the Most High, and yet at the same time we have had more stealing, more lying, more swearing in one year than there should have been in a thousand; we have had more stealing here in Utah than has been for our credit, and when you have taken up that you may also take up every other sin and pile them up together and what is our condition before God? Why, we have violated our covenants which we made at the waters of baptism. What is the use, then, of our saying that we have been righteous, that we have been holy, when we have actually been in a sound sleep, when we have been so much out of the way? It is no use whatever, and the time of sifting and purifying the Saints has come, and for one I am willing to put on the garment, and keep it on, until we burn out all the evil that exists.—JD 4:97, October 6, 1856

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP325A CALL TO REFORM. We are called upon to wake up and reform, and it makes me feel curious when I go into the high priests' meeting, and see not one half of them there when a meeting is held to prepare them to wake up the peopleÂ�.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP326We have been called upon, some of us, as missionaries to the people of this city, to wake them up. We shall be among you, brethren, and we do not intend to let you sleep. Brother Orson Hyde is with us today; he has had a dream which refers to the wheat and the thrashing floor. I am glad Brother Hyde is with us, and I want to say to you, Brother Hyde, in the name of the Lord, wake up and rise up in the midst of your brethren the twelve, and lead them forth into the field of labor, and we will stand by you; if you will lead the twelve, Brother Hyde, in the spirit and power of your calling as an apostle of Jesus Christ, you will see your brethren by your side; we will back you up, and step forth and help to bear that mighty load which has rested upon the Presidency of the Church like a mountain, and nearly crushed them to the ground. As a quorum we have got to more fully obtain the spirit and power of our apostleship and take more upon ourselves the care and burden of the Church and kingdom of God than we have done.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP326The Twelve Apostles have got to rise up and magnify their calling, or they will be removed out of their place. The high priests, the seventies, the bishops, and every quorum of the church and kingdom of God have got to do the same, or they also will be removed; we cannot sleep any longer with the priesthood of Almighty God resting upon us, and the work that is required at our hands.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP326WE CANNOT SLEEP . . . Let the twelve apostles, and the seventy apostles, and high priest apostles, and all other apostles rise up and keep pace with the work of the Lord God, for we have not time to sleep. What is man's life good for, or his words or work good for when he stands in the way of men's salvation, exaltation, and glory? They are of no use at all.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP326As an individual, I am determined to wake up and do my duty, God being my helper. I want to see Brother Hyde, who is the president of the twelve, walk into all these quorums and attend their meetings, and we will back him up; I want him to lift up his voice like a trumpet and go to winnowing the wheat; it is for the twelve to rise up and carry off the load. The seventies have got to walk up in their place and do their duty. I know God requires this at our hands. The law of God, the Holy Priesthood, and the holy anointing and washing, and everything else that is holy requires it at our hands. I know this.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP327It is necessary to reform. The question may be asked, what is the matter? Why, we are asleep; if the eyes of any man or woman is opened as they should be, they could see the things of God as they are in one moment; they would see there is a necessity of waking up and doing something. Here is a great and mighty dispensation committed into the hands of this people for the living and the dead; the candle of the Lord God is placed in these mountains like a city that is set on a hill that cannot be hid; the work is on your shoulders, ye priests of the Most High God!-on you rests the salvation of this generation, and the Lord will require this stewardship at your hands.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP327The Lord has given you the keys of the priesthood with all the blessings pertaining to it-as great and as mighty a work as ever was committed to any man on the earth, and that, too, in the midst of the last dispensation and fulness of times. The Lord requires us to prepare this generation, both Jew and Gentile, either for salvation or damnation through the proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the administering of the ordinances of the house of God, and we go to sleep! The apostles go to sleep-the seventies go to sleep-the elders of Israel close their eyes to slumber, and we the only people God has on the earth, upon whose shoulders he has laid the responsibility of performing this great and mighty work!

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP327Do you wonder that prophets get up here and chastise, and draw the sword of justice and hold it over our heads? I do not. I wonder that our children at the fireside do not rise up and prophesy, with a voice like thunder and in flames of fire, unto their fathers and mothers, and unto the people of Israel. I know that the counsels we have had here through the mouths of the prophets of God are just and true. I know that the warning voice that has been heard in this stand, and the call that has been made on this floor is necessary; and I do hope and pray God that we, as missionaries, will listen to it. I want my brother missionaries in the first place to wake up, and get aroused with the mantle of salvation and Spirit of God ourselves, and get our own armor bright. It has been justly remarked here that we have got to labor ourselves until we get the Spirit of God, and then we can walk out among the people and correct them; but if we as seventies, as high priests, and apostles, and elders bearing the priesthood, if we are resolved to set our hearts upon things of this earth, without being engaged in the interest of the kingdom of God, what can we expect of the people? Not anything.—JD 4:146-148, December 21, 1856.

Reformation (LDS) of 1856-1857a-Woodruff, WilfordTP328A COMMENT ON THE "REFORMATION." We frequently hear remarks made about the reformation being over, and about their having got through with it in this place or in that place, but the amount of it is there never will be any end to the reformation, or in other words there will never be any end to our advancement, there will be no end to our improvement nor to our increase, neither in time nor in all eternity.—JD 4:190, January 25, 1857.

Religious Freedoma-Woodruff, WilfordTP328WHEN METHODISM CAME TO SALT LAKE CITY When our Methodist friends came to this city, erected their tent and held their big camp meeting, what was the course pursued by the Latter-day Saints? The President of the Church, the Twelve Apostles and citizens with their wives and children gave them a congregation of many thousands, and we sat in their tent and listened to them while they abused us just as much as they pleased. We believe in giving every man the privilege of saying what he pleases, we have always been willing to let every man express his sentiments here among us. We are not afraid of them. If we have not the truth, that is what we are after, we want it.—JD 17:194, October 7, 1874.

Dress StandardsFashiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP329LIFE IN 1875 DRESS SHOULD BE COMELY AND COMFORTABLE. Before I close my remarks, I want to say a few words to our sisters and daughters in Zion, for I feel that there are some words of the Lord to them. This is a time that the daughters of Zion should hearken to the words of the prophet of God, who has been set to lead us. I feel that it is time, forty years after they were organized, that the Female Relief Societies should labor with all their might to carry out the object of their organization by the Prophet Joseph Smith. You may ask, "What was the object of that organization?" I will say that in organizing these societies there were several objects in view, some of which I will refer to before I get through. President Young has been calling upon you, as one branch of the land of Zion, to take hold and help to build it up. He desires that the sisters here in the land of Zion should govern and control the fashions of Zion. Instead of heaping to yourselves and imitating the fashions that have adorned Babylon, you should have independence enough to form your own; and those which are not comely and comfortable should be laid aside. I, myself, do not think it has been pleasing in the sight of God, to see the manner in which the mothers and daughters in Zion, for years past, have been ready to adorn themselves with every fashion that Babylon has contrived and invented. I need not mention all these things, but I will mention two or three. For instance, how is it with regard to the headdress of the ladies? The Lord has given to women generally a fine head of hair, which, we are told in the scriptures, is the glory of the woman; and she should let the hair given unto her adorn her head without adding any foreign substance, as is now done, in order to imitate and follow after the fashions of the world. Again, just as quick as the daughters of Babylon extend their crinolines until they cannot move in a space less than six or eight feet wide, in a coach, assembly room, or anywhere else, why the daughters of Zion must follow the same uncomely fashion. But a fashion the reverse of this is now adopted, and at the present time the daughters of Babylon wear their elastics so tight that they have not room left for locomotion when walking in the streets; and, of course, the daughters of Zion must practice the same. And now, see one of them, dressed in the height of fashion, crossing the street, and a runaway team comes thundering along. What a position she is in. Why, the only way she can save her life is to lie down and roll across the street like a saw log!

Dress StandardsFashiona-Woodruff, WilfordTP330All these fashions are uncomely and should be laid aside. The daughters of Zion should do better than to trail silks and satins in the mud when walking in the street. The Female Relief Societies should lay hold of and regulate these things, and introduce fashions that are comely and comfortable; it is their duty to do it.—JD 18:128-129, September 12, 1875.

ONE "GOOD EFFECT" OF THE EDMUNDS—TUCKER ACT [^3] "LEARNING TO THINK AND ACT FOR OURSELVES." God has a purpose to accomplish in permitting the treatment which we have received. Whatever the result to others . . ., to us it cannot be anything but profitable and beneficial, if we receive it in the right spirit and bear it patiently. One good effect is apparent. The Latter-day Saints are compelled, perhaps to a greater extent than ever before, to think and act for themselves, and not to depend so much upon others to lead them. MS 309, April 6, 1888.

There were one hundred forty-three men, three women, and two children-a total of one hundred forty-eight.

The handcart experiment was subsequently replaced by other low-cost and economic but superior means of emigration.

The Edmunds-Tucker Act, the high water mark of anti-Mormon legislation, was enacted by the U. S. Congress in 1887, dissolving the Church and its corporate life and confiscating its property; an action which the Supreme Court of the United States upheld May 19, 1890.

1946 Bookcraft

---
Notas:
[^1] * Formerly published: Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, (Joseph Fielding Smith, Editor) The Discourses of Brigham Young, (John A. Widtsoe, Editor) The Gospel Kingdom, John Taylor, (G. Homer Durham, Editor) Gospel Doctrine, Joseph F. Smith, (John A. Widtsoe and others, Editors) Gospel Standards, Heber J. Grant, (G. Homer Durham, Richard L. Evans, and John A. Widtsoe, Editors)
[^2] An epistle read in the April Conference, 1896, in Salt Lake City, which defines clearly the position of the Church in regard to the state, and also the duty of those holding prominent offices in the priesthood, not to accept positions which would interfere with the performance of the duties of their calling without first consulting with their brethren and the First Presidency. This document was signed by President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors in the First Presidency, by members of the Council of Twelve, the First Council of Seventy, the Patriarch, and Presiding Bishopric.
[^3] This document was also signed by Joseph F. Smith, "of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."
