Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

Introduction

What Successful Parents Are Doing

"My parents help me understand the importance of morality. They always know where I go on dates, who I'm with, and when I'll be home. No going to a girl's house unless her family is home." (Teenage boy.)

I remember walking home from the chapel the night I was called as a bishop. I could see the twinkling lights in the windows of the homes in our ward, and I was overwhelmed with the heavy responsibilities that were now mine. As I struggled under the weight of my new calling, I recalled the promise that the stake president had made to me. He had promised I would receive the help I would need to assist ward members in their spiritual and personal growth. He called this help the mantle of a bishop and told me that it came to all bishops as they worked to fulfill their responsibilities and sought the help of the Lord. The promised help did come, and many times I was inspired to say and do things that changed lives for the better. When I was released seven years later, I felt a definite loss of this mantle and realized that much of any success I had enjoyed came from this help I had received.

Most of us hold a responsibility much more important than the calling of a bishop. This responsibility is our calling as parents. And as parents, we, too, can have a mantle—extra help from the Lord—to help us teach our children better than any other person or organization. President Spencer W. Kimball said it this way: "Parents should not leave the training of children to others. There seems to be a growing tendency to shift this responsibility from the home to outside influences such as the school and the church, and of greater concern, to various child-care agencies and institutions. Important as these outward influences may be, they never can adequately take the place of the influence of the mother and the father. Constant training, constant vigilance, companionship, and being watchmen of our own children are necessary in order to keep our homes intact and to bless our children in the Lord's own way." ("Fortify Your Homes Against Evil," Ensign, May 1979, p. 5.)

Righteous, caring, and involved parents can have an enormous influence for good on their children. A Church study indicates that "the factor that has by far the greatest effect on the private religious life of our youth and upon their achievement of the desired outcomes is home religious observance. . . . The home and family influence is much more significant than that exercised by peer groups or by program participation. In fact, the influence of the home, whether it be positive or negative, is overwhelming." (Dean L. Larsen, Regional Representatives Seminar, April 1, 1983.)

Parents need to be especially vigilant in teaching their children to be morally clean. We cannot afford to leave this important responsibility to others or to chance.

Many parents are already effectively teaching moral cleanliness. But when some of them were asked to share their ideas, most had a difficult time identifying what they were doing, and some even felt that they were not doing much at all. Many of their teenagers felt otherwise, however, and when asked how their parents helped them stay morally clean, they shared many interesting and worthwhile insights. Here are a few of their responses:

Another interesting source of information is a study on teenage pregnancy that was directed by the Utah State Office of Education, which commissioned Utah State University to conduct a study comparing sexually active and sexually non-active teenagers in the areas of family relationships, school success, values, and religious background. The results indicate some of the factors that help young people stay morally clean. According to the study, morally clean teenagers:

The responses of the teenagers and the results of this study indicate some of the things parents are doing to help their children stay morally clean. The rest of this book will emphasize how we can teach these things to our children.

Each chapter contains ideas that have proven successful in many Latter-day Saint homes and powerful quotations from the General Authorities of the Church. As we learn and practice these ideas and teachings, we will be better able to help our children remain clean and pure and receive the blessings that come from living the law of chastity.
