Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

1

Establishing Spiritual Commitments

"My parents stress temple marriage and the goals that we must have in order to get there. They teach the goals so that they are part of our lives. " (Teenage girl.)

When I was five years old, my dad, who was a first-class army cook at the time, made a big pot of homemade vegetable soup. As I smelled it cooking, I decided that I didn't like it even though I hadn't tasted it. When we sat down, I refused to eat the soup, saying that I wanted something else. My father told me that I would not get anything else to eat until I had eaten my soup. I made up my mind that I would never eat that soup—and I got nothing for supper.

When I got up the next morning, my mother made my favorite breakfast and told me that as soon as I ate my soup I could have some. I got nothing for breakfast—or lunch. When dinnertime rolled around, I was mighty hungry, and my mother made a beautiful banana cream pie for dessert. When we sat down to eat, that same ugly bowl of vegetable soup was placed in front of me. Although my dad had been very patient with me up to this time, when I told him that I would starve to death before I ate that vegetable soup, he decided it was time for action. He said I had two choices: I could eat the soup or I could get a spanking and eat the soup. "Either way," he said, "you will eat that soup!"

I chose plan B, which was to get spanked and then eat the soup. After my spanking, I decided that maybe I would try the soup. I took one bite and spit it onto the kitchen floor. My dad took me into the next room, spanked me for spitting, and explained to me that if I spit again, he would spank me again. With this kind of creative reasoning going on, I decided that I would eat my soup. And I did—about three spoonfuls, with help from my dad.

I then got to eat a delicious supper and to have a huge piece of banana cream pie. I have always liked banana cream pie, but it was years before I ate vegetable soup again. Now I eat it all the time because I want to.

It is always easier to get a person to do something if he wants to do it. If we really want our children to keep high dating standards and stay morally clean, we need to help them want to do so as much as we want them to. This will never happen unless they share some of the spiritual insights that we feel. Until then, we may face the same uphill battle that my father faced with the vegetable soup. But once our children establish their own strong spiritual commitments, the battle is two-thirds won.

The Church recently completed a study among young men twelve to eighteen years old. The study attempted to determine what factors have the greatest influence upon the worthiness of a young man to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, serve a mission, and marry in the temple.

The study considered the importance of public and private religious behavior in the lives of young men. Public religious performance is participation in meetings and activities. Private religious behavior deals with experiences not measured on correlated reports, such as personal scripture study and private prayer. The study reported the following:

"The involvement of young men in public religious performance is much heavier than it is in the private religious experiences in their lives. This discrepancy between public religious performance and the involvement in private religious experience is of tremendous importance in determining whether or not the youth achieve the desired outcomes in their lives. The study among young men disclosed that private religious behavior is much more powerful in this regard than is public performance. This finding tells us something of great importance about where we should be placing emphasis. If we communicate to our young people that their participation in meetings and activities is the most essential part of their religious lives, and they do not feel of our constant concern for the influences that work in their private religious experience, then we will not be as effective as we should be in helping them achieve the ultimate objectives. It would appear from the findings in the recent study that our youth are presently under the general impression that what matters most is their participation in the public religious performances. If this is true to any degree, we have a reason for bringing this emphasis into better balance. This is one of the things we can do to make a difference in the outcomes." (Dean L. Larsen, Regional Representatives Seminar, April 1, 1983.)

One thing, then, that will help us help our children stay morally clean is to emphasize their personal spiritual growth. As they grow spiritually they will be more inclined to keep the right moral standards and make correct decisions. As Elder Larsen indicates, spiritual growth deals with more than just church attendance: "Every effort should be made to encourage the young men and young women to attend seminary, Sunday School, Aaronic Priesthood quorum meetings and activities, and Young Women's classes. But keep in mind that such attendance is not an end in itself. Activity in these programs is no guarantee of movement toward the most important goals. It must be supportive of what happens at home and [of] the personal influence of adult leaders whose relationship to the young people can be of such great importance." (Ibid.)

The study found that the most powerful factors in helping young men live worthily, advance in the priesthood, serve missions, and marry in the temple were:

To strengthen our children, we can emphasize the importance of the scriptures in our own lives and make them one of our family priorities. The study found that "if a young person lives in a home situation where there is regular family prayer, regular family study of the gospel and the scriptures, and agreement on basic values, the likelihood of his going on a mission and being married in the temple is greatly enhanced." Example is so important in all phases of spiritual growth.

Here are a few comments from teenagers on how their parents taught them through example the importance of chastity:

We need to encourage our children to become involved in personal scripture study and help them to have meaningful personal prayers. Here are a few ways to do this:

All of these ideas are intended to help children want to stay morally clean. No motivation is stronger than a personal testimony that comes from study, prayer, and living the gospel. Once our children have a testimony of the gospel and its moral standards, they will want to work with us to establish guidelines to help them stay morally clean.
