Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

2

Teaching Modesty and the Sanctity of the Body

"They have taught me from the time I was little that my body is a temple and that I should always keep it modest and clean." (Teenage girl.)

Most of us have reverent feelings when we discuss or enter one of the temples. Most young people share these same feelings, and we can use these feelings to teach them that the most important temple is their own body. They can come to understand that when they swear, attend inappropriate entertainment, dress immodestly, or neck and pet, they are doing these things in a holy temple—their body. There are three great principles to help teach the sanctity of the body: (1) The body is a temple, (2) we can dedicate ourselves, and (3) modesty is important.

The Body Is a Temple

Doctrine and Covenants 93:35 and 1 Corinthians 3:16-17 are excellent passages that teach that the body is a temple. We can ask our children to list the things that they feel would be inappropriate to do in a temple. Then we can read these two scriptural passages and discuss the fact that our bodies are actually more important and eternal temples than any building made of brick or stone. Finally, we can have our children see how many things on their list would be wrong to do in their bodies. They will find that nearly all of the things that they listed as wrong to do in a "building" temple are also wrong to do in a "body" temple. This exercise can establish powerful guidelines for future behavior. We might want to conclude our discussion with the following quotation:

Your spirit, which is a child of God and lives eternally, will possess your present body forever. What kind of a body or temple do you want your spirit to live in throughout the eternities of time? When the time of resurrection comes, you cannot take out of the grave a different body than the one placed in it. . . .

Our bodies are temples of God. We should not think of entering one of the temples of our God and desecrating His holy house. The temple of the body which houses a spirit child of God is far more important to Him than brick or mortar, for has he not said that his work and glory is to bring to pass the immortality and the Eternal Life of man? (Delbert L. Stapley, How to Resist Temptation [Salt Lake City, Utah: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1974], pp. 20, 21-22.)

We Can Dedicate Ourselves

We had the special opportunity of attending the dedication of the Jordan River Temple with our children. Our two boys, even though they were fairly young, sat quietly for four hours without saying one word. They were very impressed with the sacredness of the temple.

When temples and chapels are dedicated, they are turned over to the Lord for his purposes. Through our day-to-day living, we can do the same with our bodies. We might teach this principle to our children by describing a building dedication that we have attended and then asking them what it means to dedicate a building to the Lord. We could than suggest that we can do something similar with our personal temples—our bodies. We can promise the Lord that we will keep our bodies clean and pure and dedicate our time and talents to the Lord. By keeping our bodies clean they become, like temples of stone, places where the Lord's Spirit can dwell. At the dedication of the Spanish Fork Seminary building on August 29, 1962, Elder Boyd K. Packer said:

In dedicating a building, we present it officially as our gift to the Lord. . . . We are then under serious responsibility to maintain the building as beautiful and appealing as it can be made. We are under responsibility to have a spirit here in the building that is completely worthy of the ownership of the building; and we are under the necessity of maintaining order among the students in such a way that there will be no disrespect either in conduct, thought, or action toward the purpose for which this building was erected.

We can draw at least three ideas from this quotation to help teach our children. We can dedicate ourselves to the Lord by:

Modesty Is Important

We should start while our children are young to teach them the importance of modesty. This will help them to realize that their body is special and sacred. One thing we can do is avoid dressing our children in halter tops, immodest swimsuits, sunsuits, and other apparel that is inappropriate for an adult to wear. If our children never start dressing immodestly, they will never have to change bad habits.

Some of the specific styles of dress that we should avoid have been discussed in the New Era:

As we teach our children that they should always keep their bodies properly covered, we should also teach them that modesty goes much deeper than just the clothes they wear. President N. Eldon Tanner has said, "Modesty in dress is a quality of mind and heart, born of respect for oneself, one's fellowmen, and the creator of us all. Modesty reflects an attitude of humility, decency and propriety. Consistent with these principles and guided by the Holy Spirit, let parents, teachers, and youth discuss the particulars of dress, grooming, and personal appearance." ("Friend to Friend," The Friend, June 1971, p. 3.)

Modesty reflects the way we feel about the Lord and ourselves. As we teach our children the gospel and help them gain their own testimonies, their desire to dress modestly will increase. An excellent example of this principle was a young man we will call Chuck. At age nineteen, Chuck had done just about everything wrong that a nineteen-year-old was capable of doing, and he looked and dressed the part. He had, among other things, the wildest hair imaginable, and his clothing was extremely casual and dirty. One day, Chuck went in to see his bishop and told him that he wanted to change and become active in the Church. He started to attend his meetings, and as he grew spiritually, an interesting thing happened: his appearance and dress started to improve. One Sunday morning when he attended church, it was difficult to recognize him. He had cut off about twenty pounds of hair and was wearing a suit and tie.

His bishop congratulated him on his appearance. Chuck told the bishop that he had felt uncomfortable about his dress and hair and had decided to clean up and look like a representative of the Lord.

About six weeks later, he made another dramatic change by showing up with a missionary haircut and a smile from ear to ear. He was going to baptize a friend and didn't feel comfortable about using the priesthood if he didn't look his best. The Spirit was teaching Chuck how he should look and dress.

We can teach our children that every one of us has a perfect guide to fashion and style. It is not Paris, fashion magazines, or peers, but the Holy Ghost. Our children need to know that the Lord cares more about modesty and good grooming than he does about fashion, and that it's not the name on our shoes or jeans that counts but how we wear and carry the name of the Lord. We can teach them the importance of listening to the Holy Ghost and asking the Lord what is appropriate to wear.

Following are comments from teenagers explaining what their parents have done to help them dress modestly and feel that their bodies are sacred:
