Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

3

Teaching About Sex and Its Sanctity

"I just kind of figured things out as I went along. My cousin told me most of it in a kind of silly way. Once my dad asked me if I knew, and I told him yes. He said nothing else, but I always wished that he would have told me himself " (Teenage boy.)

Teenagers have indicated that less than 10 percent of them were taught the facts of life by their parents. The rest of them learned about this sacred power of procreation from other sources. These included:

Elder Mark E. Petersen indicated the real problem with such teaching when he said that "the proper teaching of sex requires also the teaching of complete chastity . . . to do otherwise is nothing less than suicidal." (Conference Report, April 5, 1969, p. 63.)

Parents Can Teach It Best

Sex education really does belong in the home where it can be taught in a sensitive and proper way throughout the growing years of our children. Elder Petersen taught, "Sex education belongs in the home, where parents can teach chastity in a spiritual environment as they reveal the facts of life to their children. There, in all plainness, the youngsters can be taught that procreation is a part of the creative work of God and that, therefore, the act of replenishing the earth must be kept on the high plane of personal purity that God provides, free from all forms of perversion. Unskilled parents can learn to teach their children properly. In fact, God commands it, and who are we to disobey?" (Conference Report, April 1969, p. 64; italics added.)

Terrance and Marvia Drake explain why parents can teach their children about reproduction and chastity better than anyone else:

There are several reasons parents are best suited to teach their children about sexuality. The first is availability. No other person spends more time with a child than the child's mother and father. Thus, parents can teach when questions first come up. No other people share with children the intimacy of such events as bath time, potty training, menstruation, and so on. Prepared parents sensitive to the process of teaching about sexuality are far superior to a schoolteacher exposed to children for only a few hours in a formal setting.

Also, parents share with their children common values and love and concern. Sexuality cannot and should not be separated from morality. No one is better qualified to teach chastity, self-control, and moral conduct than parents. As parents answer their children's earliest questions about sexuality or childbirth, they can emphasize the sacred nature of reproduction and the body. (Terrance S. Drake, M.D., and Marvia Brown Drake, Teaching Your Child about Sex [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983], p. 5.)

Most bookstores have many aids to help parents teach this critical and sensitive subject, although these should be used only with great care, as some do not agree with our values. The greatest aid of all is the Holy Ghost. If we prepare ourselves and seek the Spirit, we will know when the times are right for teaching and what to say

As a father recently contemplated teaching one of his sons, he found himself very nervous, but their talk was much easier and more rewarding than he had expected. He had prepared himself and prayed for a good opportunity to talk to his son. One day, when they were alone, his son asked a question that was the perfect lead-in to a discussion. Because the father was prepared, they had a good talk together. Since that day, they have had many other worthwhile discussions on the subject.

As our children mature, we should have several personal discussions with them, not just one. In fact, teaching about sex and morality is a process that begins when our children are young and continues until they leave home. Some things, such as necking, petting, masturbation, and homosexuality, are sensitive areas, but each needs to be discussed at the appropriate time. Through study, planning, and prayer, we can prepare ourselves with the information that we will need. When common sense and the Spirit indicate that the time is right, we will then be able to fulfill this important and rewarding responsibility.

Following are comments from teenagers who responded to these questions: "Did your parents teach you the facts of life? If yes, what did they do that was helpful and effective? If no, where did you learn the facts of life?"
