Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

4

Developing Communication

"My parents have made it so we can talk to them like they're our best friends, and they've shown that they really care about us." (Teenage girl.)

The relationship between parents and teenagers is critical. Studies show that a good father-daughter relationship is one of the leading contributors to moral cleanliness. Many girls that have become pregnant out of wedlock have sought companionship with a boy because they did not receive the love and affection that they needed from their fathers. A good relationship begins long before adolescence but must especially be nurtured through the teen years. These do not need to be years of isolation and conflict between parents and teens; they can be rewarding and enjoyable for both. Here are some suggestions for making them that way.

Have Fun Together

Start while your children are young to hold family home evening. Make it enjoyable and learn to do things together. Develop a tradition of Sundays and Mondays together as a family. If we plan enjoyable activities, our teenagers will continue to want to do things with our families. These activities do not need to be complicated or expensive. Here are some Sunday afternoon activities that most families will enjoy.

Develop Similar Interests

We should develop hobbies teenagers might enjoy, such as tennis, basketball, crafts, carpentry, camping, fishing, stamp collecting, cooking, or music. With a little thought and research, we can find many interests to share with our children throughout their teenage years.

Show Support

We should support our children in their school, Church, and community activities and compliment them on their achievements. When we attend sports events, music recitals, or other activities in which our children participate, we should look for positive things to say even if our child is not a first-string player or star of the activity. Here are some examples of things to say:

Hold Personal Interviews

Fathers should hold personal interviews monthly with each child. We should pick a good day, such as Fast Sunday, and hold them regularly, being sure to include things our children want to discuss. In these interviews, we can find out some of the things that are bothering them and informally interview them about how they are living the gospel. These are good times to bear our testimonies to our children and have them bear theirs. We can find out how they feel about the gospel, their Church leaders and teachers, friends, school, and other members of the family. If the father cannot or will not hold these interviews, they could be held by the mother.

We need to be careful to keep our questions and comments positive and friendly. This is a time to build closeness, not a time to discipline. Here are some questions that might get interviews started on a positive note:

Notice that these questions give us an opportunity to move into a gospel or family discussion where we can talk about personal things without prying or sounding like we are conducting a criminal investigation.

The following two quotations from young people demonstrate two problems that we need to avoid during these interviews:

I have a pretty good level of communication with my parents. We don't often argue, but when we do, we settle our differences fairly easily. But there's one thing I never talk to my parents about. When I do something wrong, I'd like to be able to go to my parents and say "Look, I've done this and I'm really sorry I did. What can I do to repair the damage?"

But I can't do that. I'm so afraid I'll disappoint my parents' faith in me, and I end up getting a new, long version of an old lecture instead of the advice and sympathy I need. So I go to a friend or a teacher and ask their advice, and then try to settle it on my own. And I usually come out OK. But I really wish I had enough faith in myself and in my parents' trust to admit my errors to them. If I were sure my parents could love and respect me, in spite of mistakes, I'd he even more confident that my Father in Heaven could do the same." (Fifteen-year-old girl, "Parents, Are You Listening?" Ensign, Feb. 1971, p. 54.)

I often found it difficult to talk over problems with my father, but this was not always the case. For there was no problem when we saw eye to eye on the solution. But the problem arose when I knew that the answer that my father would give me would be in opposition to my own views. It would anger him if I decided to act on my own decision, if it opposed his. For this reason I would only consult with him about a problem if I knew we would both be thinking along the same lines. (Twenty-year-old boy, Ibid., p. 56.)

Be a Good Example

Teenagers notice a phony in a hurry. We need to be careful about asking them to do something that we are not willing to do. We should not expect their language, choice of entertainment, or Church activity to be on a higher plain than our own.

Interact with Your Children

Being home is not enough. Sitting together watching television will not accomplish what we desire. We need to interact with our children. A study completed in 1975 turned up some very interesting information about fathers:

"The study found that those fathers who were at home had the same effect on their children as those fathers who were gone in the service, dead, or divorced—unless they were interacting with the children. In other words, if a father isn't talking with his children, working with them, playing with them, listening to them—according to this research, he does not really influence them." ("Fathers—Present and Absent," Ensign, June 1980, p. 11; see D. Russell Crane, "Father Absence and Male Sex-Role Development," Family Perspective, Winter 1978, pp. 35-40.)

This interaction should be positive. The relationship we are seeking is built through trust and friendship, not criticism and doubt.

Establish Proper Roles

Our children need to see proper male and female roles in their parents. If they have strong, loving, understanding, religious parents, they will tend to look for these traits in those whom they date and marry. Probably the realization that their parents really love each other is one of the greatest gifts parents can ever give their children.

Use Authority Properly

We should try to show our children common courtesy and respect. The Lord has told us the principles we should follow in all our relationships:

No power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and meekness, and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul without hypocrisy, and without guile—reproving betimes [i.e., early] with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy; that he may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death. (D&C 121:41-44.)

When we follow this counsel, we develop mutual respect, trust, and love that cannot be developed in any other way.

Express Love

We can look for ways to express and demonstrate our love for our children. It doesn't mean much if we love our children but they don't know it. Our relationship is strengthened when we demonstrate our love by both our words and our actions. And as we build our children, we also build our relationship with them. Here are some examples of how a parent might verbally express love:

Spend the Time

Many busy parents stress the importance of spending "quality time" with children. But spending lots of quality time is also very important. President Spencer W. Kimball has suggested the following:

We all realize that communication is a two-way street, and that youth often build their own barriers. But are parents charting their course right in this matter? Mothers, are you so busy with social life, with clubs, with working out of the home, or with housework, that you have no time to sit down and talk to your little girls and tell them the things they should know when they are nine, and ten, and eleven, and older? Can you be frank and loving to them so that they in turn can be frank in giving you their confidences?

And you fathers, are you so busy making a living, playing golf, bowling, hunting, that you do not have time to talk to your boys and hold them close to you and win their confidence? Or do you brush them off, so that they dare not come and talk about these things with you? (The Miracle of Forgiveness [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1969], p. 258.)

Listen

One of the most important things we can ever do is just take the time to listen to our children. Dr. Brent Barlow told an interesting story in the Deseret News about communicating with children:

Recently Brian, who is a seventh grader, told me that something was bothering him and he wanted to talk to me alone. We agreed to do it that evening and all during the day I was proud that one of my sons would confide in me during a father-and-son talk.

Later that night, after everyone else had gone to bed, Brian and I met for our talk. "It has been on my mind for some time now and I wanted to ask you a question." I leaned back in my chair and tried to look fatherly. "And what is your question, Brian?"

"I've been wondering," he began, "if you stood on your head and ate a sandwich, would the food go up or down?" I thanked Brian for confiding in me and after a few moments of silence I told him that I did not know the answer. But true to my training in family counseling, I suggested that perhaps we could seek the answer together.

Brian asked if one of us could do an experiment and I said perhaps so. He then said he was tired and wanted to go to bed. If I did decide to stand on my head and eat a sandwich, he said to let him know in the morning. (Deseret News, December 15, 1983, p. C2.)

Many times our children will want to talk with us about things that we feel are not very important, as in this story. But because Dr. Barlow listened and showed interest, his son is more apt to talk with him about more serious things as they come along. Many children actually start out a serious discussion with a light question. If we show interest and really listen, they then follow up with what is really bothering them. It is important to listen not only with our ears but with our bodies also. Eye contact, facial expressions, and other body language help build confidence that we really are interested. Our communication as a family will greatly increase as we concentrate on talking less and listening more. Following are comments from teenagers about how their parents help them feel that they can talk to them about personal problems:
