Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

5

Dealing with Early and Steady Dating

"My parents helped me not date until I was sixteen, and they encourage me to double date until I'm eighteen. They expect me to tell them where I am going and when I'll be home, and then to be home on time." (Teenage boy.)

A few years ago a meeting was held with a person who was working with LDS teenagers who had become unwed mothers. He led a very enlightening discussion and one of the questions asked of him was "What had he found to be some of the leading causes of immorality in the lives of the young women that he had worked with?" He said that the three major causes of immorality that he had come in contact with were early dating, steady dating, and a poor relationship between the girl and her father. This seems to correlate with the minimum standards that President Kimball gave when he said:

"Any dating or pairing off in social contacts should be postponed until at least the age of 16 or older, and even then there should still be much judgment used in selections and in the seriousness. Young people should still limit the close contacts for several years, since the boy will be going on his mission when he is 19 years old.

Dating and especially steady dating in the early teens is most hazardous. It distorts the whole picture of life . . . I hope fervently that I am making clear the position of the Lord and his church on these . . . practices." ("President Kimball Speaks Out on Morality," New Era, Nov. 1980, p. 42.)

As parents, we do need to consider the seriousness of early and steady dating. This is especially true with the immorality that faces young people today. Specific dating guidelines give teenagers time to prepare themselves emotionally and spiritually before they are placed in difficult moral situations that take a lot of self-control and maturity. President Kimball has indicated the good effect that keeping these standards could have on the youth of the Church: "It is my considered feeling, having had some experience in interviewing youth, that the change of this one pattern of social activities of our youth would immediately eliminate a majority of the sins of our young folks; would preclude numerous early, forced marriages; would greatly reduce school dropouts; and would be most influential in bringing a great majority of our young men and women to the holy marriage altar at the temple—clean, sweet, full of faith to become the worthy parents of the next generation. ("Save the Youth of Zion," Improvement Era, Sept. 1965, p. 806.)

Because early and steady dating is so widespread and acceptable, even among some Church members, it is not always easy to help our children maintain these standards. Here are some ideas that may be helpful.

Start Young

It is very important that we discuss dating standards while our children are young and before they become emotionally involved with a person of the opposite sex. The difficulty of overcoming emotional involvement is illustrated by the story of a company that wanted to market rattlesnake meat. They knew of the negative feelings that most people would have toward rattlesnake meat. In order to overcome this emotional involvement, they decided to have a special banquet and invite community leaders and their wives. They did not indicate what the main course was going to be—just that they were establishing a new industry in the community and wanted to get the support of community leaders.

Because the community wanted to encourage new industry, a large group turned out for the special banquet. Naturally, the main course was rattlesnake, and it made quite a hit with the guests. They loved it, and most of them were very curious about what it could be. One guest said that it tasted like pork; another diagnosed it as some kind of chicken.

Just before dessert was served, one of the hosts asked for everyone's attention. He said that they were going to market the delicious meat that had just been served and he hoped that everyone would support their company in its new endeavor. He then announced that they had all just eaten and thoroughly enjoyed rattlesnake meat.

The whole crowd went into an uproar, and the company personnel felt lucky just to get away with their lives. Some of the guests even looked into the possibility of suing the company for feeding them rattlesnake meat under false pretenses.

The story demonstrates how difficult it is to teach people once they are emotionally involved. It underscores the importance of teaching our children dating and moral standards while they are young. President Kimball has suggested that parents "chart and guide the course of their children's lives in the early years. Then there will be none of the intimacies that spell sin and ruin." (The Miracle of Forgiveness, p. 257.)

Many families play lots of review games, and by the time their children are five or six years old the parents are asking them questions like "How old do you need to be before you date?" and "When should you consider going steady?" Through constant review from the time they are young, we can help our children make the decision to keep the dating standards of the Church.

As our children grow older, and before emotional involvement sets in, we may want to do and teach some of the following things:

Use Real-Life Situations

As friends and acquaintances of our children are forced into early marriages, in a kind and nonjudgmental manner we can help our children see that they don't want to get into the same situation. We can point out the relationship between early and steady dating and the present situation of their friends. Many teenagers say that this approach is very effective.

This approach can be damaging if not used properly, but when used with sensitivity and the guidance of the Spirit, it can be very effective. We need to make sure that we do not criticize, condemn, or stand in judgment of others. Our children need to feel the love and compassion that we have for their friends and feel our concern that they don't suffer the same problems.

One teenage girl had a close friend who became a wife and a mother at age fourteen. As the girl's parents discussed the situation with her, their hearts went out to her friend, and they discussed how her early and steady dating had led to her present situation.

During their conversation, the daughter asked, "Dad, why didn't her parents tell her that she couldn't date?" She added, "You know, kids don't always know what is best for them."

This discussion about dating standards helped the daughter become more firm in her desire to follow the counsel of the prophets.

Use Positive Peer Pressure

In recent surveys, teenagers were asked who they felt had the most influence in their lives; their most frequent answer was friends. Being accepted by their peers is the number-one concern of many teenagers.

Because early and steady dating is accepted and in many places expected, this pressure from friends becomes a real challenge that parents need to deal with. One comment I have heard over and over again from young people is, "I'm the only one who is not dating before I'm sixteen!" What the teenager is really saying is "I don't know another person who is trying to keep these dating standards, and I feel all alone."

We can help our children know of other teenagers who have the same goals and standards as they do. If we don't know of any, we can check with Church leaders, seminary teachers, parents, friends, and other young people. Then when our children say, "I am the only one who isn't dating yet!" we can say, "What about Bill, and Sally, and Fred, and Mary, and Mark?" If some of these teenagers live in other areas, our children might enjoy writing to them about their common goals and interests.

One step better would be for our children and some of their friends to make a pact with each other that they will keep Church dating standards and support each other in their goals.

Last year in our community we started an organization called P.A.L.S. (People Against Low Standards). In order to join P.A.L.S. a teenager needed to be willing to not date until age sixteen, not steady date, not indulge in parking or other inappropriate dating activities, and have clean language. The organization started with forty young people signing up; within three months it had grown to over eighty members. Many of these young people wanted to keep Church dating standards and were looking for a way they could do so and still be accepted by their peers. We should never underestimate the power of peer influence.

If Everything Else Fails, Kindly Say No!

President Kimball has taught, "Young parents should chart a course in their home and family life which will give the children firm but loving guidance and not let the children rule in the home." (Miracle of Forgiveness, p. 256.)

The ideal would be to be able to teach our children correct dating principles and then let them govern themselves. But after we have taught our children and they still want to engage in early or steady dating, we need to kindly and lovingly but firmly say no. Most children will not rebel if we have established a warm and loving relationship with them. It may even be better for them to rebel a little and suffer a guilty conscience than to have our permission to do something that is contrary to the counsel of the Church. If we lovingly and kindly say no, there will come a time when most of our children will thank us for our leadership.

One bishop noticed a trend with those who had suffered serious moral difficulties. He said without exception they had all engaged in early dating, steady dating, frequent steady dating, and staying out late at night on their dates.

I will always be grateful to the father of a girl who lived in my ward when I was younger. When I was sixteen, with the help of a friend, I got up enough courage to ask this girl for a date. Her name was Cindy. My friend dialed her number for me. Cindy answered the phone, and I asked her if she would like to go to the movie with me. At first she didn't say anything; then she said that, if I would wait a minute, she would ask her dad.

I could hear their voices in the background but I couldn't hear what they were saying. Finally Cindy's father came to the phone. He said, "Allan, don't you know that you aren't supposed to date until you're sixteen?" I told him that I was sixteen. He said that his daughter wasn't sixteen and wanted to know why I was asking her out. I really didn't have a good answer, but it didn't matter because he started to talk again. He said, "Why don't you call back in two years and we'll talk about it."

Since that day I have thought a lot about what Cindy's father said. He really loved his daughter and wanted what was best for her. It is the same with our Heavenly Father. He cares for us and our children enough that he has given guidelines to ensure our safety and happiness.
