Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

6

Establishing Dating Standards

"I should be home at eleven-thirty. I should make sure I always have a quarter, and if something happens I am to call home. If my date wants to do something immoral, I'm to tell him to call my dad. If my dad says it's okay, then it's okay. (My dad is very strong in the Church.)" (Teenage girl.)

Teenagers want to be clean and pure. They want to marry in the temple. Most of them know what is best for them—at least until they become emotionally involved. This was indicated recently when seminary students were asked two interesting questions. The first question was, "If you were a parent and had a fifteen-year-old son or daughter, what would you do to ensure that he or she stayed morally clean?" Here are the most frequent responses:

The second question was, "Your future mate is probably dating someone right now. How do you want him or her to handle the dating years?" The students gave very conservative answers, and almost all of them gave the same answers:

I want my future mate during his or her dating years to:

These answers demonstrate that most teenagers really do know what is best for them. But they need our help. As a matter of fact, although they don't always act like it, they want our help. They face some temptations that are stronger and more subtle than they are prepared to handle. We need to work with our teenagers in establishing rules and guidelines that will help them stay morally clean. The rules we establish need to be reasonable ones that really do fulfill a needed purpose. Here are some rules that young people indicated have helped them:

As we establish our own family rules, we should discuss them with our children and try to share with them the reasons for each rule. They may not totally understand or agree, but they can feel our concern and know that we are establishing the rules to help them reach their spiritual goals.

Sometimes rules can give our children an excuse to use with their friends and on dates that will help them save face and still do what is right. One girl has arranged a signal with her mother, and when she doesn't want to go somewhere, she flashes this signal. If a boy calls on the phone and she doesn't want to date him, her mother will yell out, "You're not going anywhere—you've been gone too much already!" The boy thinks the mother is a real dragon, but the girl is off the hook. If her friends come by and ask her to go someplace questionable, she flashes the signal and her mother steps in.

Established rules can also give our children a good excuse for avoiding bad situations. They can say that their parents have a rule that they must be in by eleven o'clock or that they are not allowed to date until they are sixteen. This allows them to save face with their friends and helps them avoid the powerful influence of social pressure.

Although some teenagers argue about dating guidelines, indications are that most teenagers appreciate them, even if they don't always show it.

The following responses from teenagers can give us numerous ideas for worthwhile dating guidelines. Notice how positive the teenagers are about their family rules. You can almost feel their gratitude as they share their feelings. They are responding to the question "What are some of the dating guidelines your parents have established that have helped you stay morally clean?"
