Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

7

Helping in the Choice of Friends

"If my parents feel that I am associating with the wrong people, they ask me to spend less time with those people and more time with others that are more suitable. They let me know that they trust me but don't always trust my friends. " (Teenage boy.)

While our children are young we should teach them to choose friends who will help them live the gospel. This will later help them select suitable dating companions. Trying to help children select good friends is a sensitive matter and must be handled with patience and understanding, not ultimatums and commands. Following are some ideas for helping children choose good friends.

Teach Children What a Good Friend Is

Our children could more easily choose good friends if they knew what a good friend is. Elder Marvin J. Ashton teaches that good friends care enough for us that they want to make us better: "There seems to be a misunderstanding on the part of some men today as to what it means to be a friend. Acts of a friend should result in self-improvement, better attitudes, self-reliance, comfort, consolation, self-respect, and better welfare. Certainly the word friend is misused if it is identified with a person who contributes to our delinquency, misery, and heartaches. When we make a man feel he is wanted, his whole attitude changes. Cur friendship will be recognizable if our actions and attitudes result in improvement and independence." (Conference Report, Oct. 1972, p. 32.)

Once our children learn that a good friend is one who tries to make them better, they are in a position to make wise decisions concerning their friends. The following checklist can be used to help evaluate friends.

Help Children Avoid Bad Friends

Children need to understand that it is not because they are too good for people that we want them to be selective. It is because they may not be strong enough to do the things that are right when they are with certain friends. Elder Neal A. Maxwell put it this way: "Do not company with fornicators—not because you are too good for them but, as Lewis wrote, because you are not good enough. Remember that bad situations can wear down even good people. Joseph had both good sense and good legs in fleeing from Potiphar's wife." ("The Stern but Sweet Seventh Commandment," New Era, June 1979, p. 42.)

We need to let our children know that the Church asks us all to avoid those who would be a bad influence. Young people are not the only ones who can be swayed by friends. Few people of any age are strong enough to associate with poor company and not compromise their beliefs. Here are some examples that we might share with our children:

Our children may feel better about being asked to evaluate their own friends as they come to realize that all of us are striving to do the same thing.

Build Friendships at Home

Almost all of us need to feel accepted. Some young people choose poor friends because they don't receive the acceptance that they need at home. If we can help our children feel warmth, friendship, and acceptance at home, their need to be accepted by others will be diminished. Then they can become more selective in their friendships. Here are some suggestions that will help us become better friends with our children:

Relax and Give Love and Support

Most of us had great fantasies as teenagers and would sometimes imagine ourselves as star athletes, cheerleaders, or sterling scholars. Very few of us had these fantasies fulfilled, but we still seemed to develop into fairly successful parents and Church members. We need to be careful to avoid trying to relive some of these teenage fantasies through our children. We want them to be well-liked and successful, but we need to be careful not to push them too hard. President Kimball discusses this problem: "The mother who thinks it cute to permit her little girl makeup, high heels, or fancy hairdos is asking for trouble. Those parents who permit or encourage early social activities are unwittingly begging for sorrows and heartbreaks. Mothers often fear spinsterhood for their teenage daughters who are not immediately popular. Their every push is likely to bring them sorrows and tears." (Improvement Era, Sept. 1965, p. 763.)

Sometimes our teenagers share feelings of discouragement with us when they fail to get dates, are rejected, lose elections, or don't seem to have many friends. It is difficult for us not to feel discouraged along with them and, in some cases, overreact to the problem. A large percentage of teenagers never hold a high-school office, never become extremely popular, or don't even date while in high school, yet they become happily married and successful adults. We need to relax a little during these years and just give our children plenty of love and support. These feelings of frustration and discouragement are just part of growing up.

Following are comments from teenagers on how to help them choose good friends:
