Allan K. Burgess, Helping Your Children Stay Morally Clean ( 1984)

8

Teaching the Importance of Chastity

"When you keep the law of chastity, it helps you try harder because you know that you can make it to the celestial kingdom. If you don't, you feel like it's an unreachable goal. " (Teenage girl.)

A serious attitude problem that some teenagers have today is shown well in the following letter that was received by Elder Thomas S. Monson: "When I joined [the Church], I was engaged to a wonderful man who had left for the service three months prior to my becoming a member. He has since returned, and I spent Christmas vacation with him. Brother Monson, I broke the Word of Wisdom. I was guilty of doubting the teachings of the Church, and I slept with the boy I love several times. I don't in the least regret or feel ashamed of having shared my love with him, but I truly am ashamed of having taken a taste of rum and Coke." (Pathways to Perfection [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1974], p. 88.)

It is doubtful that most teenagers in the Church feel that chastity is not important, but our children do need support against the barrage of material that suggests that immorality is acceptable. This chapter contains ideas that may be helpful in emphasizing the importance of chastity.

Study the Principle of Chastity

Chapter five in President Spencer W. Kimball's book The Miracle of Forgiveness contains excellent information on the seriousness of immorality. It would be good to study this chapter and then teach some of the concepts that President Kimball stresses. As our children get older, we could encourage them to read this chapter for themselves. They could also read other information on the seriousness of immorality.

Teach the Consequences of Immorality

Even in this life, certain consequences follow immorality, and many of these take place whether we repent or not. These consequences are not inflicted upon us by God but come naturally because of our actions. Some of the consequences do not follow every immoral act, but no disobedient person can avoid all of them. As young people realize the consequences of immoral behavior, they become more committed to the moral law.

As part of a recent family home evening, one family generated a list of the possible consequences of immorality. Here is their list. We might share this list with our children or have them generate a list of their own:

Teach the Blessings of Chastity

In the long run, positive feelings are more motivating than negative ones. Studies indicate that reward changes behavior much more readily than does punishment. Generating a list with our family of the blessings that accompany chastity can be a worthwhile activity. Here is such a list that one family generated:

No One Can Sin and Get Away with It

The people after the time of Noah built a tower that they said would "reach unto heaven." (Genesis 11:4.) Their purpose seems to have been to build a tower so high that they could sin and then when God caused another flood, they could climb up above the flood and mock God. They really felt that they could sin and get away with it. This seems to be a prevalent attitude today, and we may want to remind our children that no one can sin and get away with it. President Spencer W. Kimball has said, "There comes a time when the fornicator, like the murderer, wishes he could hide—hide from all the world, from all the ghosts, and especially his own, but there is no place to hide. There are dark corners and hidden spots and closed cars in which the transgression can be committed, but to totally conceal it is impossible. There is no night so dark, no room so tightly locked, no canyon so closed in, no desert so totally uninhabited that one can find a place to hide from his sins, from himself, or from the Lord. Eventually, one must face the great Maker. (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], pp. 265-66.)

Our children can come to understand and remember that there are always at least three people who know what is happening on a date—the boy, the girl, and the Lord. They can be taught how pleased and happy Heavenly Father feels when they date properly and keep themselves clean and pure.

Teach Chastity Often

Because of the constant barrage of propaganda that supports and promotes immorality, we could make moral cleanliness a regular agenda item in our family home evenings. It is much more effective to consistently discuss different aspects of morality than to dump the whole load one Sunday afternoon and then not bring it up again for a year or two. It is also very important to use a variety of approaches and avoid preaching. Some of the ideas in chapter six may help.

Choose Uplifting Entertainment

Elder Boyd K. Packer has written, "His devilish invitations appear on billboards. They are coined into jokes and written into the lyrics of songs. They are acted out on television and at theaters. They will stare at you now from most magazines. There are magazines—you know the word, pornography—open, wicked persuasions to pervert and misuse this sacred power. You grow up in a society where before you is the constant invitation to tamper with these sacred powers." (Conference Report, Apr. 1972, p. 138)

In spite of everything that we say to our children, they notice what we do and where we go. They pay attention to what we watch on television and which movies we decide to make part of our lives.

It will be much easier to teach our children the sacredness and importance of chastity if we choose entertainment that does not include suggestive or immoral material.

As a matter of fact, one of the greatest teaching tools that we have is our selection of books, magazines, and entertainment. Following are comments from teenagers about the blessings that come from keeping the law of chastity:
