Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

4Take This to Your Father"

4The 18th [May, 1884] found a line of members outside Bishop Henry Ballard's home as he wrote recommends for his ward members. The day was warm and pleasant, and Ellen, Henry's nine-year-old daughter, was chatting with friends on the sidewalk outside the house when two elderly men approached, walking in the middle of the street. One of the men called, "Come here, little girl." As Ellen hesitated, the stranger pointed to her and said, "I mean you." Placing a newspaper in her hand, he said: "Take this to your father. Give it to no one else. Go quickly and don't lose it."

Henry's wife, Margaret, now picks up the story. "Ellen came in and asked for her father. I told her that her father was busy [writing recommends] and asked her to give me the newspaper she had in her hand so that I might give it to him. She said, 'No, the man who gave the paper to me told me to give it to no one but Father.' I let the child take the paper to her father."

5Henry quickly took in the situation. The newspaper was the Newbury Weekly News containing "Wanderer's" jottings from Thatcham churchyard—names and other genealogical details for sixty or so now-dead acquaintances of Henry and his father. Who had brought it? Rapidly quizzing Ellen he hurried outside, went around the block searching and questioning. In that sparsely settled community, where all the inhabitants were known to each other, no neighbors had seen the two strangers. They were never found. This disappearance of the messengers was itself cause enough to wonder, but perhaps even more impressive was the date on the newspaper—May 15, 1884. In an era long before the advent of air transportation and when mail took several weeks to get from England to western America, this newspaper had made the journey in three days!

5The next day Bishop Ballard took the newspaper and recited the facts to President Merrill, president of the Logan Temple, who concluded: "Brother Ballard, someone on the other side is anxious for their work to be done and they knew that you would do it if this paper got into your hands. It is for you to do the work, for you received the paper through messengers of the Lord." To their great joy, the Ballards received baptism and endowments in the temple for all the people he had listed. "Wanderer" never knew in this life the great work his vacation ramblings had made possible.

5Ballard, Melvin J. Ballard—Crusader for Righteousness (Bookcraft), pp. 16-17.
