Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

"What Does Stephen Think About It Now?

I remember going from Nauvoo over to the capitol of the state, Springfield, Illinois, and holding a conference of missionaries from northern and southern Illinois. And I remember that two of us, myself and companion, who had charge of these two districts, applied to the governor of the state. It was considerable nerve, I will grant you; but in my youth I was zealous and was willing to ask for anything—and we had the nerve to ask the governor of the state of Illinois to give us the State Capitol building in which to hold a "Mormon" conference. Well, he happily surprised us by granting us the privilege, and that without a dollar's cost to us. We were permitted to use the Hall of Representatives; and before large numbers of people, who filled that hall, we discoursed upon the principles of the glorious, restored gospel and bore witness and testimony that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and that the Book of Mormon was true. My soul was thrilled, because, I remember, as I looked about that place and saw on the one side of the rostrum a life-sized portrait, full length, of Abraham Lincoln and on the other side a life-sized portrait of Stephen A. Douglas, I could not help but wonder in my soul, What does Stephen think about it now? For it was in this identical place that Stephen A. Douglas delivered his address on the "Mormon" question, while running for the presidency of the nation, and proposed that if elected he would apply the knife to this pestiferous cancer "Mormonism," which was a growth upon the body politic, and he would burn it out and destroy it. Well, he did not live long enough to do that, and "Mormonism" came back to his home, into the very place where he was eulogized by his associates for his stand against this work, and yet, here we were, peacefully, at the kindness of the officials of that state, permitted to declare again the glad news that the God of heaven had spoken to Joseph Smith, and that we had a message for all men.

Conference Report, 1921, p. 100.
