Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

8"His Arms Laden With Books"

8The older Indians told us, on several occasions, the story of their first meeting with Elder Ballard. They said that one day Elder Ballard was traveling east across Montana by train. As the train approached a very small town which was just being settled, Elder Ballard noticed, from the train window, a huge encampment of several hundred Indians. Their teepees were pitched in a large circle on the prairie. Elder Ballard was instantly interested and felt a keen urge to visit with them. He obtained stopover privileges and left the train to spend the day at the encampment, with the intention of proceeding on his journey the next day. He hired a horse and buggy, secured an interpreter, and drove out to the Indian encampment at a place called "Chicken Hill," on the banks of the Missouri River.

8Elder Ballard left the horse and buggy and with the interpreter walked out among the people. As he approached them, they showed signs of great emotion and began talking excitedly to him. They seemed to be asking him for something. The interpreter explained that many of the Indians had seen, in dreams, a white man come among them. Always he had his arms laden with books which were of great value to the Indians from their contents. As soon as they saw Elder Ballard, they recognized him as the man they had seen, in their dreams and they wanted the books he was supposed to bring to them.

8Of course, Elder Ballard was exceedingly impressed and told them briefly the story of the Book of Mormon and of its significance to them. He told them he must go on his way now, but that he would return soon to bring them the books and teach them more.

When Elder Ballard returned to the town he felt impressed to buy two lots in the newly laid-out town, which he obtained for a very low price. When he returned a short time later the lots had skyrocketed in price to such a figure that he was able to sell them at a tremendous profit. The money thus obtained was used to buy building materials and some acreage further out of the town, in fact, at "Chicken Hill." There a boarding school and a chapel were built, and the Lamanites were given their Book of Mormon and were taught the Gospel, as well as general school work. Many of the Indians joined the Church there, and today their descendants and many others are firm in the faith. Great spiritual manifestations occurred in this particular place, as the writings of Elder Ballard relate. Many were the healings, and many the spiritual gifts that were made manifest among the Indians. . . .

9One such instance was told to us by an Indian called "Looking." He was a young boy when Brother Ballard came among his people, and he had been blind since birth. When he heard that there was a "Mormon Prayer Man" (as the Indians called the missionaries) on the reservation, he begged to be taken to Elder Ballard that he might be blessed to receive his sight. Elder Ballard administered to him, and through the power of the priesthood and the child's simple, sincere faith, his sight was restored and he was appropriately given the name of "Looking." In gratitude, Looking insisted on giving the hay from his small field each year to help feed the Church livestock at Chicken Hill.

9Ballard, Melvin J. Ballard—Crusader for Righteousness (Bookcraft), pp. 55-57.
