Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofBallard, Melvin J.10"The Biggest Crop of Wheat"

10At a stake quarterly conference of the Taylor Stake, which was held in Raymond, Alberta, Canada, Elder Melvin J. Ballard was the visiting authority. He had spoken inspiringly, during the various sessions of the conference, but there seemed to be an unexpressed desire pervading the conference for a blessing from the lips of this great man. Elder Ballard remarked about this and felt impelled to say what is here recorded. "I advise you brethren to plant every available acre of wheat land that you have, even if you have to stubble it in, and I promise you that the rains will come and that you will harvest the biggest crop of wheat ever known in the history of this country." This prophecy was made in the month of May, at a time when the Canadian farmers feel that they have gone beyond the date when crops can be planted which would mature before the early frosts come, but the brethren took Elder Ballard at his word. So strong was the spirit, that they were moved upon to plant every available acre they owned. Elder Ballard had said that the rains would come, but it went for some time, and the rains did not come, and it seemed that the grain would rot before germination.

10The brethren began to despair and some felt to complain that Elder Ballard had made a mistake this time, that he had spoken out of emotion of his heart and had not been prompted of the Lord. But the rains did come in greater abundance than anyone had probably witnessed in that locality for many years. The fields were in the southern parts of the province of Alberta, Canada.

The grain germinated and grew to a height of more than six feet in some of the fields. Early frosts came and went throughout the western provinces in Canada, and when the Canadian Pacific Railway published its crop report in December of that same year, it showed that where the Latter-day Saints were living, the early frost had not affected their wheat, and they were about to garner the greatest wheat crop in the history of that country up to that time. Many fields of wheat harvested eighty bushels to the acre, and truly it was a bounteous return, a literal fulfillment of the prophecy made by Elder Melvin J. Ballard.

11Ballard, Melvin J. Ballard—Crusader for Righteousness (Bookcraft), p. 90.
