Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

189"I Walked Awhile and Then Sat Down and Read Awhile"

189There are some, I presume, in this congregation who . . . have not heard my testimony. I have been acquainted in this Church and connected with it, from the first year of its organization in the wilderness of western New York. It was organized on the 6th day of April, 1830, and I was baptized into it about the first of September following.

189When I first became a member of this Church, one small room could have contained all the members there then were in the world, and that too without being crowded, for at that time I presume there were not fifty.

189The first thing that attracted my attention towards this work was the Book of Mormon; I happened to see a copy of it. Some man nearly a stranger to it, and not particularly a believer in it, happened to get hold of a copy; he made mention of it to me, and gave me the privilege of coming to his house and reading it. This was at a place about a day's journey from the residence of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and his father, and while I was returning to the work of my ministry; for I was then traveling and preaching, being connected with a society of people sometimes called Campbellites or Reformed Baptists.

190I had diligently searched the scriptures, and prayed to God to open my mind that I might understand them; and he had poured His Spirit and understanding into my heart, so that I did understand the scriptures in a good degree, the letter of the Gospel, its forms and first principles in their truth, as they are written in the Bible. These things were opened to my mind, but the power, the gifts and the authority of the gospel I knew were lacking, and I did really expect that they would be restored, because I knew that the things that were predicted could never be fulfilled, until that power and that authority were restored. . . . All this I was looking for, and the Spirit seemed to whisper to my mind that I should see it in my day.

190Under these circumstances, I was traveling to impart the light which I had to others, and while doing this I found as before stated, the Book of Mormon. I read it carefully and diligently, . . . as I read I was convinced that it was true, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon me while I read and enlightened my mind, convinced my judgment and riveted the truth upon my understanding, so that I knew that the book was true, just as well as a man knows the daylight from the dark night, or any other things that can be implanted in his understanding. I did not know it by any audible voice from heaven, by any ministration of an angel, by any open vision; but I knew it by the spirit of understanding in my heart, by the light that was in me. I knew it was true, because it was light and had come in fulfillment of the scriptures, and I bore testimony of its truth to the neighbors that came in during the first day that I sat reading it, at the house of an old Baptist deacon named Hamblin.

This same Spirit led me to inquire after and search out the translator, Joseph Smith; and I traveled on foot during the whole of a very hot day in August, blistering my feet, in order to go where I heard he lived; and at night I arrived in the neighborhood of the little village of Manchester, then in Ontario County, New York. On the way I overtook a man driving some cows, and inquired for Joseph Smith, the finder and translator of the Book of Mormon. He told me that he lived away off, something more than a hundred miles from there, in the State of Pennyslvania. I then inquired for the father of the Prophet, and he pointed to the house, but said that the old gentleman had gone on a journey to some distant place. After awhile, in conversation, the man told me that his name was Hyrum Smith, and that he was a brother to the Prophet Joseph. This was the first Latter-day Saint that I had ever seen. . . .

191I attended to my appointments, and was back again the next morning to Brother Hyrum's. He made me a present of the Book of Mormon. . . . I walked awhile, and then sat down and read awhile, for it was not my mind to read the book through at once. I would read, and then read on. I was filled with joy and gladness, my spirit was made rich and I was made to realize, almost as vividly as if I had seen it myself, that the Lord Jesus Christ did appear in His own proper person, in His resurrected body, and minister to the people in America in ancient times. He had surely risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, and did come down on the American continent, in the land Bountiful. . . .

191As before stated, I fulfilled my two appointments; crowds heard me and were interested, and solicited me to make more appointments. I told them that I would not, that I had a duty to perform for myself. I bid them farewell, and returned to Hyrum Smith, who took me to a place, about twenty-five miles off, in Seneca County, New York. He there introduced me to the Three Witnesses whose names appear at the beginning of the Book of Mormon, also to the Eight Witnesses. I conversed with Oliver Cowdery, one of the Three Witnesses, and on the next day we repaired to Seneca Lake, where I was baptized by Oliver Cowdery, then the second Apostle in this Church, and a man who had received the ministration of an angel, as you can learn by reading his testimony.

191After being baptized, I was confirmed in a little meeting during the same day, was full of the Holy Ghost, and was ordained an Elder. This transpired on the first day of September, 1830, and from that day to this I have endeavored to magnify my calling, and to honor the priesthood which God has given. . . .

191Preston Nibley, Missionary Experiences (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1942), pp. 12-18.
