Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

AdversityRichards, Franklin D.219"One Potato for the Sick Child"

219On June 10, 1846, Franklin wrote: I accepted the offer of two yoke of oxen, a wagon, a jack screw, a chain and a whip, the whole valued at not to exceed one hundred and twenty five dollars, in exchange for a two story brick house, and an acre of ground which my neighbors a year ago considered worth five hundred dollars. About sunset we bade adieu to our little home in Nauvoo.

219After arriving in Sugar Creek, on July 3rd he committed his loved ones to the protecting care of Divine Providence and turned his face sadly yet resolutely toward the east, without money and scantily clothed, to make his way across continent and ocean into a strange land to fulfill a mission he was called to prior to the death of Joseph Smith.

Jane Snyder Richards started out for the west without her husband, and twenty days after leaving Sugar Creek she gave birth to her second child, a son whom she named Isaac; but the babe had barely opened its eyes upon this world when it was summoned to the spirit land. The picture of this homeless pilgrim mother, lying helpless in her wagon on the broad, lonely prairie, her dead babe on her breast, and her husband a thousand miles away, was pitiful enough to melt a heart of stone.

220At this time her only remaining child, Wealthy, not yet three years old, was lying sick, having been stricken sick from a disease shortly after they left Sugar Creek. As they approached the Missouri River she gradually grew weaker and weaker. She had scarcely eaten anything for a month or more. She was very fond of potatoes, and one day while passing a farm in the midst of a fine field of these vegetables, hearing them mentioned, she asked for one. Jane Snyder Richards' mother went to the house to ask if they could have one potato for the sick child. "I wouldn't sell or give one of you Mormons a potato to save your life," was the woman's brutal reply. She had even set her dog upon Sister Snyder when she saw her approaching. Wealthy died on the 14th of September and was buried at Cutler's Park a little west of the Missouri River. The first night Brother Richards arrived in Liverpool he wrote: Today my little daughter Wealthy, if she lives, is three years old. May her life and health be precious in thy sight, O Lord.

220Franklin L. West, Life of Franklin D. Richards (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1924), pp. 68-71.
