Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Book of MormonSmith, George A.232"The Minister Fled in Dismay"

232A Lutheran minister arose when I was through, and stated that I had told the people that the Book of Mormon was true and they should all be damned if they did not believe it. "Now," says he, "we cannot be damned if we have not the evidence. As to the Bible its truth is attested in three ways. First, we have a map of all the country it describes. I challenge this stranger to present a map of Zarahemla spoken of in the Book of Mormon. Secondly, we have the original records of the Bible. I challenge these strangers to produce the original records of the Book of Mormon. Thirdly, we must have evidence that the translation of the Book of Mormon was rendered by competent persons. We demand these evidences. We are prepared to meet the issue. Our evidence is ready as far as the Bible is concerned, and the same evidence must be produced in relation to the Book of Mormon, or we pronounce it an imposition, and the propagators children of Hell."

In reply I stated that this gentleman could not be a man of fair reputation or he would not say in the presence of this congregation as he had said, that I had stated in my discourse that every one of you would be damned if you did not believe the Book of Mormon, when he must be aware that you all know that I said no such thing. Interrupting me he cried out: "Show the map of Zarahemla." I replied, "At any time and place that you will produce the map of the land of Nod, spoken of in Genesis, I am prepared to meet you and produce the map of Zarahemla." He said: "Show us the original plates of the Book of Mormon. I am prepared to exhibit the original of the Bible." I answered, "Any time you bring forward the original tablets of stone, upon which God wrote with his finger the Ten Commandments; and the original parchment of papyrus, upon which Moses wrote the book of the law; and also bring the two sticks upon which Ezekiel wrote, I will exhibit the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated."

233The audience laughed, and the minister fled in dismay, cursing on his way.

233Smith, "Memoirs," p. 49.
