Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

ELDER REED SMOOT

Biographical Sketch

235Reed Smoot was born January 19, 1862, in Salt Lake City and grew up in Provo, Utah. His father, Abraham O. Smoot, was the second mayor of Salt Lake City, mayor of Provo, and one of the founding fathers of the Brigham Young Academy. His mother, Annie Kirstine Morrison, was a Norwegian convert who left her family to follow her newfound religion to Utah.

235While in Salt Lake City, Reed Smoot attended schools under William Willes and Dr. Karl G. Maeser. In 1872 the family moved to Provo, where he attended the Timpanogos Branch of the University of Deseret. When the Brigham Young Academy opened in April 1876, Reed was the first student to enroll there. It is said that he passed through every higher course then offered, graduating in business and commerce in 1879.

The amazing business success of Reed Smoot began in the Provo Co-operative Institution where he was employed sacking produce, sorting potatoes, and doing odd jobs. Shortly after obtaining this position, he resolved that he would become superintendent of the Provo Co-op, a goal that he realized some 18 months later, in 1881.

236After four years as superintendent of the co-op, where he made the business prosper, Reed became manager of the Provo Woolen Mills.

236Already recognized as a successful businessman, Elder Smoot left home in November 1890 to serve in the European Mission.

236In 1895 he was named as a counselor to Edward Partridge in the Utah Stake. In 1900 he was sustained as an apostle and set apart by President Lorenzo Snow.

236In January 1903, the State Legislature elected him to the United States Senate. Elder Smoot served as a distinguished Senator for thirty years. The Senator from Utah could be cited as the one person most responsible for creating a favorable image for the Church.

236Upon the Senator's return to Utah in 1933, he became an active member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, but his health was already beginning to fail him. He served for 41 years as an apostle, his service ending with his death in February 1941. [^1]

236President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., paid Elder Smoot the following great compliment:

236"I want to take this occasion to thank my Heavenly Father, as a member of this Church, for the return amongst us of one whom I regard as the greatest missionary of his own generation. I refer to the Honorable Reed Smoot.

"I went East to live at about the time he went into the Senate. I know something of the feeling that then existed toward us. I have seen the smile of disdain and the curl of the lip of scorn at the statement that one was a Mormon. During the thirty years of Senator Smoot's tenure of office, I have lived a great part of my time in the East in the same environment. . . . I want now to say to you, brethren and sisters, that, judged at any rate by my human wisdom and understanding, no other contributing cause equals that of the service which he has furnished, to the change that has come among the people of the earth who now honor and respect where formerly they scorned and despised. Furthermore Senator Smoot has given to his country a devoted service rarely equalled and never excelled." [^2]

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith, Sr., the father of the prophet.
