Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

"This Night a Prayer Shall Go Up From My House"

I know as well as I know I live that there is power in prayer. I do not know but what it would be proper for me, at this time, to call attention to an experience that I had four weeks ago today. Sunday afternoon I called at the White House, to call upon the President. For days Mrs. Harding had been lying at the point of death. The President was in the sick room when I arrived, together with Dr. Mayhoe, Dr. Finney, Dr. Harding and some three or four other prominent doctors. The attendant announced to the President that I had called to see him, and he came out of the sick room into his private office adjoining the sick room. He had been watching over Mrs. Harding for days and nights past, seeing each day bring her nearer to the brink of the grave, and the doctors had just decided that nothing would save her but an operation. The question of the operation was left to the President for decision. The President said: "I have never had, in all my life, a question brought to me for decision that I feel so helpless in arriving at." I haven't the time to go into the details. Worried as he was, haggard as he was, it seemed to me if any word of encouragement could be given to him, it ought to have been given. What a wonderful woman Mrs. Harding is, lying upon her sick bed for days. When Dr. Finney was leaving the room, she gave orders to take him down to the depot in the President's car, rather than send for one himself, and, while the President and I were discussing questions affecting legislation, on which he had asked me to make a report to him, and just as I was about to leave, the attendant brought into the room a beautiful box of roses, stating that Mrs. Harding had directed him to bring them to me to Mrs. Smoot. Nobody thought that Mrs. Harding would live through the night. The decision as to an operation had to be reached, so the President told me, before midnight; and, as I left the room, he came with me until we stood at the head of the stairs. I turned to the President and said, "President, there is hope yet. I have seen men and women raised from a death-bed. I know that there is power, Mr. President, in prayer—the wife can yet be saved. Do not be discouraged." And I said, "This night a prayer shall go up from my home, that God may spare her life, that she will not have to undergo an operation." He said to me: "Senator Smoot, I wish I knew that. I believe in prayer. I wish I knew that God through prayer would heal the sick." There were millions of people praying for her, from one end of the land to the other, but as those noted physicians sat around the bed, as midnight was approaching, there came a change. God had heard the prayers for her and the crisis had passed.

248How many cases could we relate, testifying to just such power, and I hope and I trust that we will never forget that God rules the universe.

248Conference Report, October 1922, p. 102-103.
