Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

23"Give Me Work"

23God does not always answer prayers miraculously. He often shapes events so naturally that we may scarcely recognize His hand in our welfare. But He is our Father—He will help us in the hour of need if we only will ask of Him as of a father—honestly and sincerely. Here is an extract from the journal of Brother Horace H. Cummings, Superintendent of Schools of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which shows with perfect clearness that God will bless His servants when they trust in Him and attempt to do His will:

23"When I was old enough my father put me to work in the Deseret Mills near Salt Lake City in the finishing department. He told all of his sons that they might have one tenth of their wages and all their over time to spend as they pleased, while he took the rest to help maintain the family. My wages were nine dollars a week and fifty cents a night for working over time until nine o'clock.

"I saved most of my money and when about eighteen years of age I had enough to attend school at the Deseret University. Unfortunately, I was unable to register until the beginning of the second term and by the end of the third term circumstances forced me to quit. My father and oldest brother were both called on missions and that meant for me to leave school and keep the family.

24"For any other reason, it would have been a matter of the greatest regret to have to leave school after going only two terms, or half a year, but it rather appealed to me as an honor that had come to us. So I quit school and began looking for work. Being the last of February or the first of March, there was little to be found to do. I visited the stores, the shops, the trunk factory, and made inquiries to find work on some of the nearby farms.

24"Night after night I would come home with no prospect of work until I began to be discouraged. The baby was sick and mother was not very well, and the stock of family provisions was getting decidedly low. I began to feel that something must be done.

24"Before being called on his mission, my father had torn down the rear part of our old home which was a small adobe hut, and had begun to build a commodious home for us to live in. He was only able to finish one room of the new house, however, so we were living in parts of both houses.

24"The day that the situation reached the climax, I went back into the closet of the new house and there knelt before the Lord in prayer. Now, of course, I had prayed to the Lord many times to give me work, but this time I had a peculiar, earnest determination to get what I wanted. I prayed with such earnestness that I cried. I fear my prayer was somewhat of a complaint, for I told the Lord He had called my father and brother to preach His Gospel and left me to support the family; that I had looked and looked for work and could not find any.

24"To my great satisfaction, that very day saw an answer to my prayer. Two school trustees from the county were in need of a teacher in their district and had come to the city to get one. On making inquiry of Dr. John R. Park, the president of the university, where I had been attending, they had been referred to me as a suitable person to teach their school and after a short conversation they engaged me at $60 a month."

24Adam S. Bennion, "What It Means to Be a Mormon," Deseret Sunday School Union, 1917, pp. 69-71.
