Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

HealingsWhitney, Orson F."The Pain Has Gone"

It was April 8, 1877, when I left Columbia for Elyria, Ohio. Arriving at my destination, I walked three miles into the country, to the farm where dwelt the Frinks. They were not aware of my coming, but had been praying that an Elder of the Church might be led that way, several of their neighbors, with whom Sister Frink had conversed, having expressed a desire to hear more of the Gospel, and hear it from the lips of a 'Mormon' missionary. I was the only one in that part of the country.

270On the other side of the country road passing the farm house where I was staying, stood the residence of Truman Frink's brother, a bitter anti-Mormon, who had been heard to say that if one of our Elders crossed his threshold he would kick him into the street. . . . His wife, Margaret Frink, was an excellent woman, childless by him but by a former husband the mother of several daughters, all married. The eldest, a widow with one child, shared her mother's home.

270Mrs. Frink had been confined to her room with an attack of neuralgia, which for many weeks had caused her intense pain. Her daughter had learned . . . that . . . healing was practiced by the Latter-day Saints. . . . She therefore invited me to come and bless her mother, that she might be healed. Sister 'Angie' seconded the suggestion—if, indeed, she did not originate it—and again I was all but paralyzed at the prospect.

270Never did I feel so helpless—or so humble. I besought the the Lord with all my soul to stand by me in this critical hour, to perfect my faith, and use me, if He could consistently, as an instrument for showing forth His merciful power upon the afflicted one. I then consecrated, as best I could, some olive oil provided by Sister Frink, and went with her and her husband to Mrs. Frink's abode.

270It was evening and the family were all at home. The daughter met us at the door, and ushered us into her mother's apartment, on the right of a hallway leading through the house, with rooms on either side. We had heard, as we entered, men's gruff voices and loud laughter in a room to the left; and presently Eli Frink thrust his head through a rear doorway, glanced around suspiciously, and then retired without uttering a word.

Mrs. Frink, with her head bandaged, was sitting up, but still suffering much pain. Laying my hands upon her head, which I previously had anointed, I proceeded to bless her. Scarcely had I begun, when a power fell upon me that I had never felt before. . . . It was a warm glow in my throat and breast—not painful, but powerful, almost preventing utterance, and it ran like liquid flame to the very tips of my fingers. The effect was instant. "Thank God!" said the sufferer, "the pain has gone." . . . I was so overcome by a sense of gratitude for this signal manifestation of divine favor, that I sank into a chair and burst into tears.

271Whitney, Through Memory's Halls, pp. 85-87.
