Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

CallingsWhitney, Orson F.271"The Best Bishop in the Church"

271My installation as Bishop came about in this manner. On my way to church that Sabbath evening I pursued an indirect course, lengthening my walk from the parental home on City Creek to the Deseret Bank corner, where, as I turned to go east, I was accosted by Laron Cummings, who had a room on an upper floor of the Bank building.

271"Come up to my room," said Laron.

271"Thank you," said I, "but I must go to meeting. They are going to put me in Bishop tonight."

271He laughed, and I laughed and passed on, little dreaming that I had uttered in jest a prediction that was about to be fulfilled. I had been told that a new Bishopric could be installed that night, but as to the proposed personnel I knew nothing.

271When the President of the Stake said to the congregation:

272"It has been moved and seconded that Orson F. Whitney be the Bishop of the Eighteenth Ward," I was astounded. If the earth had opened and swallowed me, I could scarcely have been more surprised. An unmarried youth, just turned twenty-three, with scarcely any experience in Church work, to preside over a ward where Youngs, Kimballs, Caines, Calders and other noted families dwelt!—the thought was overpowering; it almost took my breath.

272Called upon to express my feelings, I tremblingly took the stand and tremulously addressed the large congregation. I told them—what they already knew—that I was young and inexperienced; but that time would cure those defects; and I accepted my call to the bishopric as I had accepted my call to the mission field, trusting in the Lord to qualify me for my duties.

272President Daniel H. Wells, for many years one of the First Presidency, but since President Young's death a Counselor to the Twelve Apostles; George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith and Brigham Young, Jr., all members of that quorum; with the Stake Presidency, Angus M. Cannon, Joseph E. Taylor and David O. Calder, then laid their hands upon my head, and President Wells ordained me a High Priest and set me apart to preside over the Eighteenth Ward as its Bishop.

272George Q. Cannon then addressed the meeting. "Bishop Whitney," he remarked, "said a good thing when he told us that time would remedy in him the defects of youth and inexperience. And I will add this: If the people of this ward will rally round him and hold up his hands, the time will come when they will think they have the best bishop in the Church."

272He did not say that I would be the best bishop—and of course I never was; but he said the people would think so; and that prophecy was abundantly fulfilled. During the well-nigh twenty-eight years of my bishopric, I had the love and loyal support of the good people of the Eighteenth Ward. They thought me the best bishop, just as children in a family think their father the best of men. It does not have to be fact. It is a sentiment, and a wholesome one, an expression of loyalty akin to patriotism, the love of one's own native land.

The President of the Stake followed with a jocular allusion to my unmarried status, quoting Paul the Apostle on "blameless" bishops and matrimony, and adding: "We are pleased to hear Brother Whitney say that he will endeavor to qualify himself." Thus the incident closed.

273Whitney, Through Memory's Halls, pp. 106-107.
