Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

AdversityWhitney, Orson F.274"In a Lake of Living Fire"

274Among my newly formed acquaintances in Cleveland was a very estimable lady, the widow of a Union officer who had fallen in battle during the Civil War. She loved her departed husband, tenderly cherished his memory, and frequently expressed for him the fondest and deepest devotion. When I explained to her the doctrines of salvation for the dead and marriage for eternity, stating that these were among the purposes for which Latter-day Saints build Temples and officiate therein, she was greatly interested, and put to me this pointed question:

"Do you mean to tell me that if I become a Latter-day Saint I can have such work done for my dear husband, and be his wife in another world?"

275"Yes," I answered.

275Then this from her: "I have never heard anything so beautiful, so sublime. Convince me of it, and I will be baptized, though it were in a lake of living fire."

275To which I replied: "I cannot convince you, but the Lord can and will if you ask Him."

275She said she would; and no doubt she did, for not long afterwards I received a note from her, stating that she had received the testimony she sought, and was ready to be baptized.

275Immediately I wrote, telling her that I would make up a little party and meet her at a given time and place on the shore of Lake Erie, and there baptize her. The party was made up and about ready to start, when there came another note from her, reading as follows: "I never knew till now what a poor, weak, frail creature I am. I thought myself brave enough to take this step; but I am not. If I should become a 'Mormon' all my friends would forsake me, I would lose my social standing, and my name would be cast out as evil. I cannot make the sacrifice. And yet I believe the doctrine true, and that you are a real servant of God. I hope the time will come when we can stand upon the same plane and be brother and sister in the Church of Christ; but I cannot do that now."

275It was with mixed feelings of sorrow and pity that I perused this communication. How like the impetuous Apostle, I thought—he who said to the Master: "Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee." But he thrice denied that he knew the Holy One by whom he had vowed to stand. And this good woman—for she was a good woman, a child of Israel, no doubt, else why did she believe?—supposed herself willing to be baptized "in a lake of living fire." But when the test came she was found wanting. Let us hope that like the penitent Peter, who so nobly redeemed himself, she may yet turn and make amends. . . .

275Whitney, Through Memory's Halls, pp. 96-97.
