Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

285"Sister Widtsoe Is Not a Beggar, Yet"

285It was pride, foolish pride, perhaps, rather than necessity, that on several occasions led the little family in those early days to the brink of want. In the spring of 1884 Anna Widtsoe moved into a two room house—a noble rise in fortune—nearer the business centre and in another ward so that her customers would not have so far to go. Collections were slow one month; John was out of work. At last the family had only a sack of "shorts" left. For three weeks, they lived on "shorts" and water. Never before, in man's history, had "shorts" been served in so many different dishes as the widow's ingenuity devised. Nevertheless, the diet was frightfully monotonous. They did not know, then, the high nutritive value of "shorts." One day, after nearly three weeks of rations on "shorts" and water, the sixth ward had a ward reunion. A Mormon ward reunion includes a feast of all the good things of earth, or nearly all. When the meal was ended, there was food left over, and the good-hearted Bishop Skanchy—and no man was ever kinder to the poor—filled a large basket with roast chicken and lamb, vegetables and bread, cakes and desserts, and sent them by a messenger to the widow and her sons, who now lived in the first ward. When the "shorts"-filled boys saw the well filled basket of goodies uncovered upon their table, there was eager, anticipating swallowing, and much inward joy; all of which was changed to darkest despair when the widow drew herself up to her full height and said, "Brother, please take the basket back to the bishop with my thanks, and say to him that Sister Widtsoe is not a beggar, yet." To the boys, the departure of that basket with its contents, was the darkest moment of their first years in Zion. It seemed a foolish pride, but perhaps it was better for the family to nurse a stubborn independence.

285Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net (Bookcraft), pp. 67-68.
