Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

"With Eyes Now Blazing"

During this time, as always, she was firm in her devotion to the Gospel. The eternal truth restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith was the joy of her life. That faith she knew must be kept untarnished. That must be defended at all costs. She was everywhere the upholder of the Church, its principles and officers. At times this attitude was put to the test. For example, about 1896, Moses Thatcher, an apostle of the Church, was suspended from service in the Quorum of Twelve Apostles. Brother Thatcher, a man of unusual gifts and most charming personality, was very popular in his home town of Logan, as throughout the Church. His suspension caused wide-spread discussion, and many of his intimate Logan friends felt that he had been treated unjustly, and took his side against the action of the authorities of the Church. The temporary unheaval was tempestuous. Men's feelings ran high. While the excitement was at its height, two of the ward elders called at the Widtsoe home as ward teachers. It so happened that the widow's two sons were home, and the whole family assembled to be instructed by the visiting teachers. Soon the visitors began to comment on the "Thatcher episode," as it was called, and explained how unjustly Brother Thatcher had been treated. The widow answered not a word, but there was a gathering storm in her stern eyes and high-held head. After some minutes of listening to the visitors find fault with the quorum of the apostles with respect to Brother Thatcher, she slowly got up from her chair and as slowly walked to the entrance door of the house which she threw wide open. With eyes now blazing she turned to the two brethren and said: "There is the door. I want you to leave this house instantly. I will not permit anyone in this house to revile the authorities of the Church, men laboring under divine inspiration. Nor do I wish such things spoken before my sons whom I have taught to love the leaders of the Church. And don't come back until you come in the right spirit to teach us the Gospel. Here is the door. Now go!" The visitors hurried out shamefacedly, for the widow had chastised them thoroughly. In defense of the Gospel, Sister Widtsoe knew no fear.

289Widtsoe, In the Gospel Net (Bookcraft), pp. 81-82.
