Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

CallingsWidtsoe, John A."Without Hesitation I Answered, Yes"

On March 17th, 1921, as I was nearing the end of my fifth year with the university, [^1] my future was changed. That sunshiny morning, I had gone directly from my home, with the superintendent of buildings and grounds, to plan for a recreation area for the children of the training school of the School of Education. My office did not know of my whereabouts. When I returned about noon, I was told that Dr. Richard R. Lyman had telephoned for me repeatedly. When I called, he asked me to come to his office without delay. He took me directly to the temple into the room of the Presidency, in which, with the Twelve, they were holding their regular Thursday meeting. Even then, I did not guess the purpose of the visit. After some business items had been transacted President Grant turned to me, and told me that I had been called to fill the vacancy in the Council of the Twelve, occasioned by the death of President Anthon H. Lund. Was I willing to accept the call? There flashed before my mind the probable result: The laying aside of many a cherished desire; the constant service to the end of life; the complete change in life from that for which I had been trained. But, the biggest thing in my life was the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. It had full claim upon me. Was I worthy of the office? Could I perform its duties properly? I have always been conscious of my limitations. Question after question rushed through my mind. For a moment all time and space were mine. Then, without hesitation I answered, yes. I had never refused a call by the priesthood. It was too late to begin now. The vote of the Council was taken. Under the hands of all, President Grant ordained me at once an apostle and set me apart a member of the Council of Twelve. His accompanying blessing has always been a comfort to me. The prayer circle that followed cleared my mind. As I left the temple that day, I knew the time had come to turn my back on the projects of the past. On Sunday, the following April 3, 1921, at the General Conference of the Church, the action taken by the Presidency and Twelve was confirmed by the people, and I was sustained as a member of the Council of the Twelve.

Widtsoe, In a Sunlit Land, pp. 156-57.

---
Notas:
[^1] The University of Utah.
