Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

CallingsWidtsoe, John A."Three Whole Days"

Since my boyhood I have known the restored gospel to be true. In my college days I had subjected it to every test known to me. Throughout my life it had made the days joyous. Doubt had fled. I possessed the Truth and understood, measurably, the pure and simple gospel of Jesus Christ.

291I had studied the gospel as carefully as any science. The literature of the Church I had acquired and read. During my spare time, day by day, I had increased my gospel learning. And I had put gospel truth to work in daily life, and had never found it wanting.

291The claims of Joseph Smith the Prophet had been examined and weighed. No scientific claim had received a more thorough analysis. Everywhere the divine mission of the latter-day prophet was confirmed.

291The restored Church had been compared with other churches. Doctrine for doctrine, principle for principle, organization for organization, the churches had been placed side by side. Compared with the churches of the world, the Church of Jesus Christ, as restored through Joseph Smith, stood like a field of ripening grain by the side of scattering stalks. . . .

291I had throughout my life from early youth an unwavering testimony of the truth of the restored gospel—the testimony of the spirit. Truth had always been my first love. In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I had found, used, and enjoyed truth.

291The priesthood I had recognized as the life-giving power of the Church. Whether in quorums or in the ecclesiastical organizations it had been held in high respect by me. Those who were called to official positions, I looked upon as specially chosen for the work assigned to them. I recognized that among the offices of the priesthood the apostleship included all the divine power designed to be used for the completion of the plan of salvation and progress for men on earth. Other priesthood offices had specific limited assignments. The apostleship permitted the holder to perform any and every authorized service within the Church. Members of the Quorum of the Twelve and their associates were charged, in addition, with the responsibility of bearing witness of the truth of the glad latter-day message to all the world.

This high calling had now come to me. Faith was mine. A reasonably correct life was mine. Could I serve the cause acceptably? That was my urgent question. I knew that hundreds, perhaps thousands of men could fill the position to full satisfaction. But the call had come to me. I must seek to use my every gift for the promotion of the Lord's latter-day work. I knew that in addition I would have the Lord's help. At the best, my own powers would be inadequate. So I told the Lord, as I prayed for help, and in that spirit set out to meet the requirements that might be made of me. . . .

292Two weeks after the fateful March 17, at the general conference on April 3rd, 1921, I sat on the stand and saw a sea of hands raised to sustain me, with the other General Authorities of the Church. Then I knew the die had been cast; I must enter into new activities, and travel a new road. And, I thanked the Lord for his guidance.

292The first task was to provide for my family under new conditions. I had earned well for many years, and, until the university appointment, with the help of a wise wife, had been moving towards financial independence. Now, the Church allowance, supposed to be sufficient for a modest support, was about a third of what my annual earnings had been, going on two decades. My university expenses had exceeded the income. We had just built a home near the university. Our setting was made for some university years. Not much of the savings of earlier years was left. The two older children were ready for missions. There was only one thing to do: to rearrange the family mode of living to come within the reduced income. So, the automobile was sold, and the hired help was dismissed. The family did not complain. My wife, true to her pioneer ancestry and her faith in the gospel, went on under the changed conditions cheerily and with a smile.

292After some years finances became somewhat easier, but have never reached the professional level of the early years. Now we can laugh at ourselves and some of the experiences of that day. For the apostleship I turned my face from the pursuit of money.

Our silver wedding anniversary came during this period. There was no money for silver, and going into debt was foreign to our code of living. Automobile there was none. So I put the whole matter up to the lady involved; and she reached a quick and possible solution. She asked that for an anniversary gift I stay with her three whole days. That was an unusual request in a household where the husband spent much time in travel and the other time in office and public service. But, in consultation with President Rudger Clawson of the Council of the Twelve, that was arranged. Then on the anniversary I asked her what we should do. She suggested that since we had no automobile we take a street-car ride. We boarded the Fort Douglas street car, and traveled to the end of the line. We had never seen the whole car line before. It was a real adventure on that glorious spring day (June 1, 1923). Other inexpensive events followed. If one so desires, great satisfaction may be found in simple pleasures. That is a lesson well to learn.

293Widtsoe, In a Sunlit Land, pp. 158-62.
