Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

27"A Prayer Circle Was Held"

27Many people of the world today read of the miraculous healings recorded in the New Testament and remark that it must have been glorious to live at a time when the power of the Lord was so manifest in the world. They realize that the Savior had the gift of healing . . . today just as well as in the days of the Savior or of ancient Israel. Through the Holy Priesthood, wonderful things have been done since the organization of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

27"Miss Charlotte E. Dancy, Superintendent of Nurses at the L.D.S. Hospital, came to Salt Lake City several years ago and became interested in the Gospel and finally was convinced of its divinity, but before baptism, was stricken down with a case of blood-poisoning.

27"She had at her command the best medical and scientific skill in the state; all the splendid doctors who knew her, were ready to lend their best efforts; trained and competent nurses were present night and day, with every convenience and aid the splendidly equipped L.D.S. Hospital could furnish. Without an exception all who attended her said it was impossible for her to recover.

27"For days she lay unconscious. She was loved and respected by all who knew her and was even revered by the nurses and by them was looked upon as a sweet, gentle, intelligent loving mother. They wanted her to live and a prayer circle was held, at which every nurse, who could be spared from active duty in the hospital, joined in that special service held at the Nurses' home and with the Elders implored the gracious Father to spare her life for service in the world. To see the girls dressed in white, united in faith, bowing in prayer, pleading for the life of one so dearly loved, was an impressive, beautiful sight never to be forgotten.

28Soon her temperature changed, her consciousness was restored and her recovery brought joy and gladness to all who knew her. She lives as a monument of faith in the true and living God and of His wonderful power to heal; and today she is a ray of sunshine, a teacher of rare ability, a consistent, faithful, Latter-day Saint."

28Bennion, "What It Means to Be a Mormon," pp. 76-77.
