Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

PerseveranceWidtsoe, John A."The Strange Bird Became the Object of Attention"

A flock of seagulls followed us by day and roosted in the rigging by night. On the morning of the fifth day out, a newcomer was among them. Grey-brown, long winged, larger than the gulls, with long, thin legs laid under the body and projecting beyond the tail feathers.

295He flew with an effort. At times he would descend toward the water as if ready to rest upon it; then with redoubled effort he would raise himself and strive to keep up with the ship.

295The strange bird became the object of attention. What kind of bird was he? Where did he come from? Why did he fly so wearily?

295Spy glasses were brought out. Once, he nearly overtook the ship so he could be seen quite clearly with the naked eye. We soon concluded that it was a crane, driven from its shorelands over the ocean by the terrific storm of the week before.

295We became more interested. Cranes are wading birds, hence their long legs. To rise to flight easily their feet must touch solid ground. While the sea-gull may float upon the water and rise directly into flight, a crane would find it difficult and tend to remain afloat until it reached a shallow place where its feet could touch bottom.

295What would happen to the crane? Would he weary into desperation, settle upon the water and be destroyed? Or would he save himself by attempting a landing upon the ship.

295The day wore on and the bird's predicament held passengers and crew in tense suspense.

295Finally, toward the end of the afternoon, the crane determined upon an effort to save himself, lengthened his body in fierce desire, beat his wings in violent regularity and strained every muscle in a sight to stir the soul. Nearer and nearer he came to the ship, reached it, hovered over it, flew almost to the first mast and then dropped heavily to the deck.

295The passengers and crew rejoiced that the bird had made a wise decision and summoned sufficient energy to escape the dreary end that would have come if he had been enticed into the easier rest on the water. On the last day, when land was in sight, he was released for an easy flight to the shore to wade on solid ground.

Elder Widtsoe related this to being driven by winds of false doctrine, superstition and disobedience; humanity has settled into an ocean of error. There it drifts, finding it difficult or impossible to rise in orderly flight to a haven of happiness without solid truth beneath its feet. Once in a while, someone bends every energy to find truth and sets out to find truth after truth until he enters into the kingdom of truth and finds unspeakable joy.

Millennial Star, February 2, 1928.
