Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

301"I'm Not Going to Lose Sight of His Wagon Wheels"

301After reaching the Salt Lake Valley, President Brigham Young returned to Winter Quarters to bring the rest of his family and other pioneers to their new home in Utah. After traveling many many miles the pioneers became very tired and discouraged. Had this been any other people, there would have been mutiny and a sharp turn backward to the shelter of civilization.

301Always alert to the pressure of influences about him President Young felt the resistance that manifested itself in silence rather than in words. One afternoon at three o'clock, he hitched up his coach and with the terse statement that he was "going to the valley; if anybody wants to follow, the road is open," the President put the whip to his horses and gave not a glance behind. Like a flash the boy flung the yoke upon his oxen, hitched them to his wagon, picked up his whip and drove as rapidly as he could after the coach rolling away to the west.

The determination which filled his whole soul and which stiffened the youthful lips into the iron line across his face so much like his father's was expressed in the words which he uttered to his father's who expressed in the words which he uttered to his father's wife who hastily took her seat in the wagon: "Father's started; I'm not going to lose sight of his wagon wheels while daylight lasts." Fun may bubble, play may be fascinating, but when "father starts or leads the way," there will his son Brigham follow—even to the very courts of heaven.

302Away flew the coach and one carriage and away clumsily followed the double yoke of oxen not too far behind. The storm whistled and raged, and the stiff fingers of the boy could scarcely hold the whip. But on he ran beside his oxen, urging them on with word and lash. Evening came early, and aided by the gloomy clouds overhead, the whole country was enveloped in pitchy darkness. The road would loom up in the gloom as if the little swale ahead were a precipice hundreds of feet to the bottom. Even that much light was soon absorbed in night and the storm, and the whip was lost from the half-frozen hands of the little driver as he stumbled over a stump. His body was thinly clad; he wore only a pair of jeans pants; no shoes or stockings, a thin, calico shirt, with a bit of a cape made by his mother from a coat tail, and the cape was worse than useless as it was blown constantly about his ears and head. Clinging to the bow, the boy ran beside the clumsy beasts, knowing not where he was going or what would be the end. But "father was ahead," and the boy's heart leaned upon "father" and upon the God of his father! The hours came and went in that fearful drive. . . . A light! Tis campfire! And the faithful oxen moved heavily into camp. They had traveled about eighteen miles since three o'clock and now it was just midnight!

302Gates, "Lives of Our Leaders, the Apostles," Juvenile Instructor, May 1, 1900, pp. 260-61.
