Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

PrayerYoung, Brigham, Jr.303"I'll Take Father's Counsel"

303In 1864, Brigham Young, Jr., was called to return to Europe to assist President Daniel H. Wells in the presidency of the European mission. Before leaving home, President Young took his son aside and said to him: "My son, you are going away upon a long and important mission. You will have heavy responsibility placed upon you, and you will not be near me so as to receive help and counsel. But there is One always near you, who will listen to your prayer and give you counsel and help. Whenever you are in doubt or trouble, go to Him in secret, and state your case fully to Him just as you would to me. He knows your desire, but there is a power in expressed or uttered prayer. You may not understand or desire the best way, and if you put your thoughts into words, the Spirit will make things plain to your mind, and teach you through your own words exactly what to pray for. Therefore, just talk to the Lord, and explain fully what you want. It is your right to receive revelation, and God will give it unto you just when and how you need it. When you seek Him you will find Him."

Many times Elder Young had occasion to recall and act upon the counsel of his father. At one time he arranged to send a large emigration to America; and for this purpose he chartered a sailing vessel for five hundred souls. If the passengers through any mischance failed to sail, he was to forfeit $100.00 a day as long as she waited. The time for sailing came perilously near; only a week remained, and as yet not one emigrant sent in his name and fee. Elder Young was in Liverpool, but as the time drew nearer still, he took the train for London to see if there were any returns received in that office. He, as well as the other brethren, were seized with dismay when they discovered that only three days remained and not a return had been made. After hours of restless anxiety, the thought flashed over the young man's mind, "I'll take father's counsel!" Upstairs he ran, and shutting himself in the upper chamber, he composed his mind, and kneeling down, told the Lord exactly the trouble which lay heavy at his heart, with the desires which accompanied his anxieties. No sooner was his prayer uttered that the answer came, "The returns will all be in, and the vessel will sail on time." He arose from his knees, assured and at perfect peace. As he came down the stairs, Bishop Thurber, who was assisting him, looked and seeing the beaming face, flew up the stairs, and catching him in his arms, said joyously, "It'll be all right," said Elder Young. And it was all right. The returns began pouring in, almost all on one mail, and every berth was taken and the vessel sailed on the appointed hour. As the company were about to sail, Elder Young blessed them, giving them many words of good and wise counsel, adding, "You will reach the other side in safety and not one soul will be buried in the ocean." Strange to say, although this prophecy was literally fulfilled, two Saints died two days after landing and were buried in New York.

304Gates, "Lives of Our Leaders, the Apostles," Juvenile Instructor, May 1, 1900, pp. 262-63.
