Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

InspirationBennion, Adam S.30"William Clayton"

30When you gather in this edifice, [Tabernacle] you must think of the faith of men who from 1863 to 1867 toiled to build it—to 1870 to complete the balcony. As you look at the pipes in this great organ, you must be mindful that some of them were made possible only because the pioneers discovered certain kinds of timber three hundred miles to the south.

30Do you know what William Clayton was doing when he wrote that Come Come Ye Saints? It was on the 15th of April between Nauvoo and Winter Quarters one of the toughest trips that any people ever took. I beg of you to remember that six hundred people lost their lives in those three hundred miles. He had been sick much of the time. Pick up his journal and read the first twenty pages—the little journal of William Clayton. He had been ill. His wife, Diantha, was still ill—too ill to travel. As you read those twenty pages, you will notice how often he was writing a letter to be sent back to his wife, hoping that she would be well. Then came the glad news that she had given birth to a son, she herself too ill to move. She struggled against the mumps. He himself was sick, but the morning, I love to read this—the morning the word came that he had a son—notice the practicality of it—he said they had been spending the day in a search for, "Henry Terry's horses are missing. They've been hunted all day, but are not found yet. This morning I composed a new song, 'All Is Well'. I feel to thank my heavenly Father for my boy and pray that he will spare and preserve his life and that of his mother, and so order that it be soon that we may be together again." He asked President Brigham Young, "Could they not send back and bring her along?"

30President Young said, "You may."

31I tried to conjure up last night that as William Clayton talked to Brigham Young about the new song he had just written, whether either one of them could ever had imagined, even in fancy, that a hundred years later 379 voices of the choir would take that same hymn and sing it to 60,000 people in Europe, and yet they did it. . . . That's faith in its fulfillment.

31Conference Report, October 1955, p. 118-19.
