Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

CourageCannon, George Q.35"Whittling and Whistling"

35In the aftermath of the prophet's martyrdom, the state of Illinois revoked the Nauvoo City Charter, thereby leaving the city unprotected by law. This condition naturally attracted unsavory strangers who hoped to capitalize on this absence of law enforcement. George Cannon tells how the boys his age carried on an effective voluntary defense against possible troublemakers to the Saints:

It was, and still is, a common practice among Yankees, when engaged in conversation or in making a bargain, to take out their pocket knives and commence whittling; frequently, also, when engaged in thought they indulge in the same practice, accompanying the whittling by whistling. No person could object, therefore, to the practices of whittling and whistling. Many of the boys of the city had each a large bowie knife made, and when a man came to town who was known to be a villain, and there for evil purposes, a few of them would get together, and go where the obnoxious person was, and having previously provided themselves with pine shingles, would commence whittling. The presence of a number of boys, each whittling with a bright, large bowie knife, was not a sight to escape the notice of a stranger, especially when these knives came uncomfortably close to his body. His first movement, of course, would be to step back and ask what this meant. The boys would make no reply, but with grave faces, keep up their whistling. What could the man do? If he was armed, he could shoot, but the resolute expression of the boys' faces, and the gleaming knives would convince him that discretion was the better part of valor. The most we ever knew them to do was to stand for a while and curse and threaten. . . then they would walk off, followed by a troop of boys vigorously whittling and whistling.

36Although in telling this story, Brother Cannon avoided stating that he was one of these boys, in the above account he slips and says "we." This pronoun and the apparent delight with which he tells the story are pretty good evidence that he was a participant and enjoyed being one.

36Lawrence R. Flake, George Q. Cannon: His Missionary Years (Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Brigham Young University, August 1970), pp. 23-29.
