Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

37"He Was Hungry Again"

37The first winter the Saints spent in the valley was a remarkably mild one. There were two or three cold spells of weather but they did not last long. This was most fortunate for the people, for neither their food nor their clothing was of such a character as to enable them to endure very cold weather. . . .

37The food had to be carefully husbanded. The greater part of the people weighed out their flour and cooked and ate so much each day. Those who were destitute had to be helped. . . . Bishops Tarleton Lewis and Edward Hunter were appointed to act in behalf of the destitute and to see that they did not suffer. In the spring, the thistle-tops were cooked for greens, and pronounced excellent.

Living on short rations was particularly hard on young people who were growing, and who had plenty of steady hard work to do. After living for months without having an opportunity of gratifying the appetite to its full extent, they would be apt to wonder how it was, when they had plenty of food, and the privilege of eating all they wished, they ever stopped eating; for in the hungry condition in which they were then, it seemed to them that if they had plenty of food they would not know how to stop eating it. Their systems, being reduced by the scantiness of their food, and the hard labor they had to perform, craved nourishment, and the filling of the stomach once did not satisfy this craving. We will relate an instance to illustrate this:

38A boy who was approaching manhood was allowed the privilege of inviting some of his companions to dinner on his birthday, which happened to be in mid-winter, when the scarcity of food was probably felt more keenly than at the other time during the season of scarcity. At that meal, and for that occasion only, as it was his birthday, food was not to be measured, but all were to eat as much as they pleased. Some . . . may have had the experience of living for some time on a short allowance of food. If so, they can easily imagine the feeling of the boy whose birthday was to be thus celebrated. He dwelt with a rare anticipation of enjoyment on the feast in preparation, and made his calculations on the quantity he meant to eat. "I will eat," said he to himself, "enough at that meal to make up for the scantiness of many future meals." But alas! he found, when he had done his best, that he had eaten but little more than his usual rations, and had failed completely in laying up such a store as he had anticipated. He had not been aware until he made this trial, that his stomach had contracted, and had accommodated itself to the limited quantity of food which it received at each meal, and, therefore, could not be so suddenly distended for one meal to suit his wishes. Half an hour after he had eaten, he was hungry again.

38Preston Nibley, LDS Adventure Stories (Bookcraft, 1953), pp. 93-105.
