Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

"I Took the 'Poi' in Preference to the Bread"

The principal food of the natives of the Sandwich Islands [Hawaii] is called poi. This is made out of a root which they call kalo. "Kalo" patches are so made that they can be flooded with water; and the ground is never allowed to be uncovered. In planting this root they do not use seed. When a native gathers the "kalo," he carries it to his home, where he cuts off the tops. These are carefully saved, tied up in a bundle, and carried back to the patch. These tops he sticks in the mud at the proper distances apart, and at the end of eleven months he has another crop of "kalo." This is the process of gathering and planting.

41The "kalo" bears some resemblance in its leaves and taste to the wild Indian turnips, but its root is much larger; not quite the shape of a tame turnip, but as large as a moderate sized one. There is a variety called the "dry land kalo." It is not so extensively cultivated as the other kind, and is not considered so good eating.

41When the "kalo" has been in long enough to cook, it is uncovered; the skin is washed off, and it is pounded with a stone pestle, on a large, flat slab of wood, until it is like a mass of dough. Then it is put into a calabash, or gourd, and by the next day fermentation has commenced; or, as we would say if it were bread, it has "raised." Water is then added to it, and it is mixed until it is a little thinner than we usually make mush. There is a little sour taste about it the first day. But it is never eaten at that time by the natives, unless they have no other food. They like it best when it is quite sour. This is what they call "poi," and there is no other food that they think can equal it.

41Their usual method of eating is worthy of notice. A large calabash of "poi" is placed on the mats; around this the family seat themselves.

41In families where they make any pretensions to cleanliness, a small calabash of water is passed around, and each one rinses his or her fingers before commencing to eat.

41To keep off the flies, a boy or a girl stands waving a kahili, which is made by fastening feathers to a long, slender stick.

41In eating, they dip their first two fingers into the calabash, load them with the "poi," and pass them into their mouths. The sucking of the fingers, the gusto with which they eat, and the incessant conversation mingled with laughter which they keep up, would lead a bystander to conclude that they enjoy their food. And they do. If the "poi" be good, and they have plenty of fish or meat to eat with it, they have great pleasure in eating. They think white men who eat together without conversing very unsocial beings. They have an idea that it contributes to health and to the enjoyment of the food to have pleasant and lively conversation while eating.

42Before leaving Lahaina, I had tasted a teaspoonful of "poi"; but the smell of it and the calabash in which it was contained was so much like that of a bookbinder's old, sour, pastepot that when I put it to my mouth I gagged at it, and would have vomited had I swallowed it. But in traveling among the people I soon learned that if I did not eat "poi" I would put them to great inconvenience; for they would have to cook separate food for me every meal. This would make me burdensome to them, and might interfere with my success. I, therefore, determined to learn to live on their food, and, that I might do so, I asked the Lord to make it sweet to me. My prayer was heard and answered; the next time I tasted it, I ate a bowlful, and I positively liked it. It was my food, whenever I could get it from that time as long as I remained on the islands.

42It may sound strange, yet it is true, that I have sat down to a table on which bread was placed, and though I had not tasted the latter for months, I took "poi" in preference to the bread; it was sweeter to me than any food I had ever eaten.

42George Q. Cannon, "My First Mission," in Preston Nibley, comp., Three Mormon Classics (Bookcraft, 1944), pp. 144-47.
