Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

45"The Pangs of Parting"

45In the spring of 1854, word came from the brethren in the Salt Lake City that George and his four original companions were free to return home. They continued to labor until July of that year, when at last he prepared to board the ship at Honolulu. The Elders would not have been able to return even then had it not been for the generosity of the Saints, who raised enough money to help pay for their passage. When they arrived at the wharf, they were greeted by hundreds of Saints who were gathered to bid them farewell. These Saints had prepared a huge feast in their honor and planned to have a two-day farewell meeting. Not only had the Saints gathered, but there were also many non-members of the Church, government officials and others who had known and learned to love Elder Cannon. Typical of his humility, he recognized his fame without taking credit for it. He knew the source and purpose of it:

45During my travels on the different islands I have been surprised at my own notoriety. They seemed to be as well acquainted with me on Kauai as far as my name (Geogi Pukuniahi) and my proceedings were concerned, as they were on Maui. As far as a name is concerned I have got one on these lands, and the Lord has blessed me with influence far beyond what I ever could have expected, but I do not want the praise of men. I desire to be approved by my Heavenly Father and all the influence I can attain to over the hearts of the children of men I desire to have wisdom and grace to use it in spreading and building the kingdom of God.

45Elder Cannon recorded that night the feelings he had as he sat before the table laden with the sumptuous feast these native people of modest means had prepared in his honor.

I could not eat, all my appetite had left me, the thoughts of leaving those with whom I had been associated in all circumstances for years on the closest terms of brotherly intimacy, deprived me of all relish for food; my feelings were poignant, and the pangs of parting deprived me of all feelings of joy at the prospect that was opening before me of seeing my mountain home with all its loved associations.

46As the ship bearing the Elders set sail for San Francisco, Elder Cannon watched the islands fade into the distance. Only a few years before, the message of the restoration had not been heard on these islands, and now there were "upwards of four thousand members of the Church in Hawaii." He could not help but compare the difference between their modest arrival and this glorious send-off:

46How great the contrast between our landing and our departure! We had landed there friendless and unknown—so far as man was concerned. Now there were thousands who loved us, who rejoiced in the truth of the gospel and in the testimony of Jesus. On that wharf that day was an illustration of the wonderful power of the gospel in creating love in the hearts of the children of men. We had gone forth weeping and bearing precious seed. The Lord had given us souls for our hire.
