Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

46"I Knew I Had But to Call"

46In early April, President Young called upon George Q. Cannon to perform another publishing mission. He was to remove the press and type and some supplies of the Deseret News to Fillmore, Utah, and publish the paper there, reducing it in size from eight to four pages.

Elder Cannon continued to publish the News until early September when he was directed to return the press to Great Salt Lake City. When he reached Payson with his heavily loaded wagons, a messenger from President Young met him with some very unexpected news. If he had any dreams of finally being able to settle down to a "normal" life, they would have to wait. The message contained another mission call, this time to the Eastern Sates. Elder Cannon recalled this incident in these words:

47At Payson at noon on Monday, as I was unhitching my team at Brother William B. Preston's . . . Brother John Bollwinkle drove up with a carriage and mules and handed me a note. It was from President Young, and was dated the previous Sunday. He informed me that I had been appointed to go East on a mission. The company I was to go with expected to start the next day (the day I received the note), and he wished me to come to the city as quickly as I could. In reply to my inquiry, the messenger said he would be ready to start back as soon as he had eaten his dinner and fed his mules.

47While he was gone, I gathered up what clothing and bedding and weapons I needed for the journey, and in about three quarters of an hour we were on our way to Salt Lake City, where we arrived the next morning as day was breaking.

47He journeyed all night and reported to President Young early the next morning. Upon seeing him, Brigham Young turned to the others in the office and said, "Didn't I tell you it would be so? I knew I had but to call and here he is!"

47Later on that same day, Elder Cannon was on his way to the East:

47As I had only been home from a mission, a few weeks before I went to Fillmore, and had been absent several years before on another mission, I had no home in Salt Lake City. In leaving my family at the roadside, therefore, I left them with no bright prospect for comfort and ease during my absence. But they uttered no complaints. They put their trust in the Lord and during the two years of my absence, He was their benefactor and friend.

47Flake, George Q. Cannon: His Missionary Years, pp. 141-42, 145-47.
