Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

InspirationDickens, Charles51"Charles Dickens"

51More than 13,000 were emigrated under President Cannon's direction. The port of departure was Liverpool, but on a few occasions ships were sent out from London. The first of these was the Amazon with nearly nine hundred Saints aboard. The sailing was June 4, 1863. This is the ship visited by Charles Dickens, and he tells of it in his Uncommercial Traveler. The agent was George Q. Cannon. We quote some passages from that interesting account:

51"Now, I have seen emigrant ships before this day in June, and these people are so strikingly different from all other people in like circumstances. . . .

51". . . nobody in ill-temper, nobody is the worse for drink, nobody swears an oath or uses a coarse word, nobody appears depressed, nobody is weeping. . . ."

52Then Dickens quotes what the captain of the ship says about them. "Most of these came aboard yesterday evening. They came from various parts of England, in small parties that had never seen one another before. Yet they had not been a couple of hours on board when they had established their own police, made their own regulations, and set their own watches at all the hatchways. Before nine o'clock the ship was as orderly and as quiet as a man-o-war.

52"The Mormon agent who had been active in getting them together, and in making the contract with my friends the owners of the ship to take them as far as New York on their way to the Great Salt Lake, was pointed out to me. A compactly-made handsome man in black, rather short, with rich brown hair and beard, and clear bright eyes. From his speech, I should set him down as American, probably a man who had 'knocked about the world' pretty much. A man with a frank, open manner, and unshrinking look; withal a man of great quickness."

52In the conversation with Elder Cannon, Dickens, the uncommercial Traveler, remarks: "I think it would be difficult to find eight hundred people together anywhere else, and find so much beauty and so much strength and capacity for work among them. . . .

52"I went on board their ship to bear testimony against them if they deserved it, as I fully believed they would; to my great astonishment they did not deserve it; and my predispositions and tendencies must not affect me as an honest witness. I went over the Amazon's side, feeling it impossible to deny that, so far, some remarkable influence had produced remarkable result, which better known influences have often missed."

52Instructor, January 1945, p. 12-13.
