Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Missionary WorkClawson, Rudger57"The Death of Joseph Standing"

57The account of Joseph Standing's martyrdom which follows is substantially as related by President Clawson to the writer. [^1]

57As these missionaries made their way on foot to the conference Elder Standing related a dream he had had which greatly impressed him and which was weighing heavily upon his mind. The dream proved to be a premonition of the awful tragedy here related.

After a long and tiresome day's journey, near midnight, the Elders knocked at the door of Mr. Holston, not a member of the Church. After explaining to him who they were he said: "Gentlemen, come in. You are welcome to my home." He secured a light and said further: "In all likelihood the mob will be here searching for you—but," said he with clenched fists and great emphasis, "if they come into my yard I will shoot them down like dogs." He knew what a mob meant but he was unafraid. The Elders were shown to their room. Fatigued with the journey and exhausted with anxiety they were soon lost in sleep. The morning of July 21, 1879, dawned bright and beautiful. It was Sunday—peace permeated the very atmosphere they breathed. There was a calmness and a spirit of tranquillity that was in keeping with the Holy day; it was, however, but the calm that precedes the cyclone.

58After expressing their gratitude and appreciation to Mr. Holston and explaining that they would call on their way back, the young missionaries started on their journey. Peace was in their youthful hearts. They carried the message of good will toward all men. They were young, alone, unarmed, and far from home. Their only armor of defense was the truth. As they walked through the primeval woods of Georgia with the feeling that all the trouble was over, they made a turn in the road and suddenly came in view of an armed mob.

58With shouts and vile imprecations the mob charged down upon them. The leader said: "You are our prisoners." Elder Standing replied: "By what authority do you arrest us upon the public highway? If you have a warrant for our arrest we should like to see it." The answer was: "The United States of America is 'agin' you and there is no law in Georgia for the Mormons. You go with us." "We'll show you by what authority we act!" some of them shouted.

58The mobocrats led the way and the missionaries followed. Elder Standing was greatly agitated. He was deathly pale and moved nervously and quickly all the time, endeavoring to explain to the mob the nature of their mission, what they were doing—expostulating with them to no avail. Elder Clawson walked more deliberately and slowly, which seemed to exasperate one of the fiends behind him who gave him a heavy blow on the back of the head which almost felled him to the ground. A few minutes later this same murderer raised a heavy club and was about to deliver a death-dealing blow to this innocent man when one of the mob caught his arm. This vicious fellow had already flourished a cocked pistol menacingly in Elder Clawson's face accompanied with oaths and threats.

As they went along Elder Standing repeatedly asked for water. He seemed to have an insatiable thirst. They soon reached a spring of water in a secluded spot deep in the woods. They sat around this spring and one of the mobocrats said to Elder Standing: "There's the water; you've been asking for it; why don't you drink?" Elder Standing said: "I don't wish to drink now." "You needn't be afraid; we won't hurt you while you do." There upon Elder Standing walked slowly to the spring, lay down and drank and drank. It seemed almost impossible for him to quench his thirst. He returned to his seat in the circle. A desultory conversation ensued in the course of which the vilest accusations were laid against the Mormons. A space of nearly an hour was consumed in this way.

59We quote the words of President Clawson:

59The fateful moment had arrived. The three men on horses rode up. The presumption is that they had left the party shortly after our arrest for the purpose of locating a secluded place in the forest to carry out the intent of the mob. . . . The spokesman with a rifle in his trembling hands, for he appeared greatly agitated, said: "Follow us." . . . At that critical instant, Joseph Standing jumped to his feet, turned and faced the horsemen, clasped his hands firmly together, and said in a commanding voice, "Surrender."

59As the word "Surrender" left the lips of Joseph Standing, one of the men sitting in the circle pointed his weapon at Elder Standing and fired. Elder Standing, whirling in his tracks, fell heavily to the ground face downward, and immediately turned upon his back with his face upward. The mobocrats instantly stood upon their feet. A cloud of smoke and dust enveloped the body of the wounded man. At this critical juncture the leading mobocrat, pointing at me, said: "Shoot that man." Every weapon was leveled at my head. My time had come, so it seemed to me. My turn to follow Joseph Standing was at hand. The command to shoot had been given. I was looking down the gun barrels of the murderous mobs. I folded my arms and said: "Shoot," and almost persuaded myself that I was shot, so intense were my feelings.

59I quickly recovered my presence of mind when I heard the voice of a mobocrat which said hurriedly and in a tone of fear: "Don't shoot."

59I then stepped over to the spot where Joseph Standing had fallen. He was breathing heavily; the death rattle was in his throat and a great, gaping bullet wound appeared in his forehead just above the bridge of his nose. He was unconscious. I did not speak to him. I saw at a glance that he was beyond all earthly help.

The chief mobocrat stepped up by my side and together we stood looking down upon the prostrate form of the dying man. Do you ask, "What does one experience who receives a bullet into his body at a vital point?" I can tell you, although no bullet has ever entered my body. When the guns and pistols of the mobocrats were leveled at my head and the command to fire had been given, I thought I was actually shot and suffered for a moment or two the agony of a dying man. With my eyes wide open, gazing into the muzzles of the deadly weapons, instantly the sight went out of my eyes; total blindness followed, and I was enveloped in darkness. The world around me seemed to be blotted out. When I heard the voice in command say: "Don't shoot," it was just then that the realization came to me that I had not been shot. My sight gradually returned and I lived again, so to speak.

60I am sure this was the experience of Elder Standing, only in his case he did not live again.

60Suddenly the mob appeared to sense the horrible character of the deed they had committed, and seized with consternation they instinctively rushed together in a compact group as if seeking mutual protection. Elder Clawson walked over to where Elder Standing was lying, stooped and looked into his face. He was breathing heavily. He raised the dying man's head, and tenderly placed his hat under it to keep it out of the dust. An awful sense of grief and utter loneliness seized him; he could only put his trust in God. He exclaimed: "Gentlemen, it is a burning shame to leave a man to die in these woods this way. For Heaven's sake, either you go and secure assistance that the body may be removed and cared for or allow me to do so." After a moment's consultation they said: "You go."

60Elder Clawson set out at once to find the coroner. It took him from ten o'clock in the morning until sunset to get the coroner and his assistant to the place where the body lay. He says: "I was horrified to discover that the mob had returned—presumably while Elder Standing was yet alive—and had fired several shots into his face and neck." The coroner's jury, after due deliberation, rendered a verdict to the effect that Joseph Standing met his death from gun shots fired by a mob—giving their names. The body was then released.

A door was secured from a deserted cabin near by, the body placed upon it, and six men, Brother Clawson being one of them, carried the remains to Mr. Holston's home where it was placed on a scaffold out under the trees. It was now well into the night. The coroner before leaving said: "Mr. Clawson, why don't you bury the body here in Georgia? After some years you can take up the bones and move them to Utah." He said, "Never, never, never! I am going to do for my companion what he would do for me under like circumstances. I tell you frankly, Mr. Coroner, if I had been shot to death in Georgia, as he was shot to death, I would not wish to be buried in this soil. I am sure Joseph Standing feels that way, I am going to take his body home." "Well," said the coroner, "you will not be able to do it."

61Quoting from Brother Clawson:

61It became my duty to prepare the body. I had never before touched a dead person, and yet there was no help for it. Under the feeble light of several candles I washed the body. With painstaking care I washed the wounds. To me it was a painful ordeal—but willingly and tenderly performed.

61It was far into the dark before he completed this sad and difficult service. This was a supreme test of his loyalty to his companion. All who read this story must know that Rudger Clawson in a supreme and crucial hour displayed the spirit and courage of a martyr.

61He proceeded to secure the best metallic casket obtainable—placed the body in it and had it carefully sealed. However, almost insurmountable difficulties were experienced before the railroad would receive the body for shipment. He was forced to place the metallic casket in a large wooden box and surround it with dry cinders. It was then carried by rail from Dalton, Georgia, to Salt Lake City, a distance of three thousand miles.

---
Notas:
[^1] The writer is Bryant S. Hinckley.
