Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

ELDER MATTHEW COWLEY

Biographical Sketch

63Elder Cowley was born on August 2, 1897, at Preston, Idaho, the son of Matthias F. Cowley and Abbie Hyde. He was called to serve a mission in New Zealand when just seventeen years old.

63He received a law degree from George Washington University.

63In 1938 Elder Cowley was called to preside over the New Zealand Mission.

63On July 13, 1922, while still studying in Washington, D.C., he returned home to be married in the Salt Lake Temple to Elva Eleanor Taylor. Their marriage was performed by President George Albert Smith, then a member of the Council of the Twelve.

63On October 5, 1945, Brother Cowley was sustained a member of the Council of the Twelve as the Church met in solemn assembly in its semiannual conference. In this conference, President George Albert Smith was sustained as the President of the Church, and his first call to the apostleship went to this young man whom he had guided and loved since early childhood.

64On October 11, 1945, Elder Cowley was ordained an apostle, the sixty-fifth of this dispensation, by President Smith. Approximately a year later, a new position of responsibility among the General Authorities of the Church was created, and Elder Cowley was appointed to fill the position as president of the Pacific Islands missions. In this new assignment, he was given the responsibility of directing the affairs of the Church in the many missions of the Pacific. His headquarters in this assignment continued to be in Salt Lake City, but during the following three years, he traveled almost continuously in the islands of the sea. The entire Polynesian people now had the opportunity of being blessed by him as had the Maori people during the years that he had lived with them as missionary and president.

64He had a great gift of language and was able to speak in the native tongue so that he could be understood by the people in all his travels. In addition to his travels in the islands, he visited in the missions of the Orient and in Australia. He visited the Philippine Islands, Japan, and China, dedicating China once again for the preaching of the gospel. After approximately three years in this special assignment, he was released, and from then until his death, he traveled extensively along with the other General Authorities, visiting the stakes and the missions of the Church.

64At the time of his passing on December 13, 1953, he had become one of the most loved men of his time. Few men have ever been so greatly loved and so greatly respected. He affected the lives of everyone who knew him.

64Matthew Cowley Speaks (Deseret Book Co., 1971), pp. vii-xii.
