Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

TestimonyCowley, Matthew76"That's Just Silly"

76You know, I had an experience out in one part of the state here. I couldn't stay in the stake president's home because of sickness, and so the president of the Relief Society insisted that I go to her home. I thought that was wonderful. The lovely-looking Relief Society president and I went to her home, and we went inside. There sat a fine-looking man at the table playing a game with his children. I had never met him. His wife took me over and introduced me. She said, "You know, there is only one thing wrong with my husband." I said, "What is that?" She said, "He doesn't belong to the Church." So I said to him, "Hey, what's the idea? You're not supposed to be having home night with your children! That is our program. You don't belong to the Church. You are not supposed to be doing that." I was just kidding him along, you know. We got in quite a conversation. He said, "You know, I can't question the doctrine of your Church. Oh, I have studied it, and I have read the Bible, and I can't argue against the doctrine of your Church. It is right. But I go to fast meetings sometimes, and of all the silly, ridiculous things I ever heard in my life, are the fast meetings of the Mormon Church." I said, "What's that?" He said, "Those people actually get up and say, 'I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.' That's just silly." I said, "Do you think so?" He said, "Yes, that's ridiculous." I said, "Well, I'll tell you what you do. You get baptized, and the next fast meeting you go to you will be confirmed a member of the Church. Then if you have enough nerve, you will stand up on your feet, and you will say the silliest thing you have ever said in all your life."

A year and a half later I received a message from him. He said, "I've been thinking about what you said. Next Tuesday we are all coming into the temple." I opened my eyes. I hadn't heard that he had joined the Church. He said, "You know, six months after you were out here, my eighteen-year-old boy was ordained a priest. I got to thinking about it, and I went to him, and I said, 'My boy, you go to the bishop and get permission to baptize your dad.' That's the fastest running I have ever seen in my life. He got permission, and he baptized me. The next fast meeting I went to, I was confirmed a member of the Church. I mustered up enough courage to stand upon my feet, and I said the most ridiculous thing I have ever said in all my life. I said, 'I know that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God.' Now we are all coming in next Tuesday." It was the year of all that snow; the trains were blocked. He said, "We are all coming into the temple, and we want you to be there." Well, I was there. We went into that room, and he and his wife knelt at the altar with their hands joined, and they were sealed for time and all eternity. Then we went out and brought in all those youngsters, and they knelt around the altar, and their hands joined with their parents, and there was that eighteen-year-old boy that was responsible for the whole thing. They were all sealed for time and for all eternity. The father is in the bishopric now. Last year I met his son back in the Eastern states. He is preaching the gospel to his father's relatives in Pennsylvania. His father is an oil man. . . . He is well-to-do, yet he is standing up and saying that silly thing. He has turned into being one of the greatest braggers I ever saw in all my life.

Matthew Cowley Speaks, pp. 93-94.
