Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

ELDER ALONZO A. HINCKLEY

Biographical Sketch

89Elder Hinckley was born April 23, 1870, at Cove Fort, Utah, a son of Ira Nathaniel Hinckley and Angeline Noble, New Englanders who helped to pioneer Utah. His ancestry is traced back to the early settlers of the American continent, who came in 1635. His father was a prominent pioneer, and his mother was one of the first school teachers in Salt Lake City, having taught in the old First Ward. Among her pupils was the mother of Maud Adams, world-famed actress.

89In 1867, Brigham Young called his father to Cove Creek to supervise the building of the fort there.

89Elder Hinckley's early life was spent in Cove Fort, his father moving to Fillmore when appointed president of Millard Stake in 1877.

89A graduate of Fillmore grammar school and Brigham Young University, Elder Hinckley taught school for a number of years in Deseret, Millard County. As a dairyman, he aided his father and carried on his stock-raising interests after his father's death.

In 1892 he married Rose May Robison and lived in Deseret one year before moving to Hinckley, where he made his home. He left home on July 14, 1897, to spend three years in Holland on a mission. He was then the father of three children with the near advent of another.

90Elder Hinckley served two terms in the legislature, representing Millard County. When Charles R. Mabey was elected governor, he appointed him state commissioner of agriculture.

90Elder Hinckley was chosen in 1902, at the age of 32 years, to succeed his father as president of the Millard Stake and presided over that stake until it was divided into the Millard and Deseret Stakes.

90From his early youth Elder Hinckley had assumed positions of leadership.

90Following his release from the Millard Stake presidency, Elder Hinckley made his home for a short time in Salt Lake City, laboring as a special worker in the Salt Lake Temple, until his appointment as president of the California Mission.

90On October 3, 1934, he was called to fill a vacancy in the Council of the Twelve Apostles caused by the death of President Anthony W. Ivins, to whom he bore a very striking resemblance.

90While a member of the Council of Twelve he visited many of the stakes of the Church. However, his continuing ill health in 1935 caused him to relinquish his active duties and he spent most of the winter and summer of 1935-36 on the Pacific Coast recuperating from a serious ailment.

90Elder Hinckley died December 22, 1936, at Salt Lake City, Utah. He was sixty-four years old.

90The Improvement Era, February 1937.
