Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Holy Ghost, Gifts ofHinckley, Alonzo A.91"I Was Understanding Dutch"

91When I first arrived in Holland to fill a mission in 1897, I was unable to learn the language. I wrote home to my father and asked him to call upon the Bishop of the Ward, the Patriarch of the Stake, and other men in whom he had confidence, and invite them to join him in praying to the Lord in my behalf that I might acquire the language and be able to deliver my message to the people.

91I had never sought for a sign because I was fearful of them, but I did seek the Spirit of the Lord to help me touch the hearts of men. I not only prayed to the Lord to assist me to learn the Dutch language, but I also studied it as faithfully as I could. I succeeded in learning two or three sentences which enabled me to deliver my literature from door to door.

One day, when I was alone, visiting among the people at Rotterdam, it was my duty to go back to the homes in which I had left tracts and take up the literature. As I went to gather the booklets, some power, that I cannot understand, possessed me until I quaked and trembled. I stood and looked at the house at which I was to call and felt as if I could not go to the door. But I knew my duty and so, with fortitude and determination I went to the house, raised the knocker and dropped it. Almost instantly, the door opened and an irate woman stepped out and closed it behind her. She talked in a very loud, shrill voice, berating me most severely.

92I did not realize for the moment, that I was understanding Dutch as clearly as though she had been speaking English. I felt no supernatural power, or influence, or feeling. I just knew every word she was saying. She spoke so loudly that a carpenter, who was working across the street, building a porch on a little store, heard her and, I suppose, thought I was abusing the woman, for he came over to where we stood and brought his son with him and, greatly to my alarm, he carried a broadax. The man took his position near me and listened to the woman, who continued her tirade against me in a shouting voice.

92I did not grow angry because of the woman's abuse, but to the contrary, my soul was filled with a burning desire to speak her language and to testify of the divinity of the Gospel and of the Lord Jesus Christ. I thought if I could only explain to her the importance of my message and the good it would do her, she would not berate me as she does now.

92In a few moments she ceased her abuse and I began speaking. And I spoke the Dutch language. I defended the Truth and bore testimony of the restoration of the Gospel.

92I had forgotten the large man who stood near me with his ax, and, as I looked at the woman and delivered my message of truth, he put his arms across my shoulders and, looking the woman in the face, said, "The Mormon Church may have its black sheep, but this is a man of God."

92Her bitterness now gone, the woman replied, "I know it."

92After the conversation, I went back home, hardly touching the ground. It dawned upon me that the prayers I had offered—and perhaps as a result, in part, of the hard study I had made—and the prayers of those at home, had been answered in a moment, for I had spoken the Dutch language intelligently for the first time in my life.

92In ecstasy, I rushed home to tell Brother Thatcher in the office, and to tell the president of the mission; but when I attempted to speak, to my great dismay, I was the same as before. I could not understand nor speak the language.

93President Farrell asked me if I would go to meeting that night.

93"Yes, President Farrell," I answered, "after a man has been blessed of the Lord as I have been, I will gladly go. But I beg of you not to call upon me to speak even if you call upon someone to interpret what I say."

93"Very well," he agreed, "I promise you, Brother Hinckley, that if you go you will not be asked to speak."

93I went to meeting, and everything progressed nicely, as I thought, until Brother DeBry, the Branch President, arose and, contrary to Brother Farrell's promise, announced, "We shall now hear from Elder Hinckley."

93President Farrell stepped forward, greatly embarrassed, and, addressing me, asked, "Brother Hinckley, shall I interpret for you?"

93I felt a power I can not describe. "Wait, President Farrell," I said as I stood upon my feet. And then I began to speak, not in my native tongue, but in the Dutch language. And, then and there, I delivered the first discourse in my life in the tongue of that mission. The following morning I was sent to preside over the Amsterdam District.

93Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers (Deseret Book Company, 1959), pp. 231-33.
