Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

"I Am Prepared"

With 64 years of life behind him, and a record of dedicated service to the Lord, Alonzo Hinckley was called to serve as a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

95Only a year later, he became seriously ill, and though he told few others, knew that the illness would be fatal. Thereupon, he wrote to the First Presidency of the Church, expressing a feeling of resignation and reiterating his testimony to the restoration of the Gospel.

95The letter included these thoughts, manifesting the rich and abiding faith Elder Hinckley had in his Heavenly Father and his willingness to yield to His divine will:

95I assure you, I am not deeply disturbed over the final results. I am reconciled and I reach my hands to take what my Father has for me, be it life or death. With a spirit of thanksgiving, and I trust free from vanity or boastfulness, I look over the past with satisfaction. I would not turn the leaf down on any chapter of my life. So far as I know, I have honored my Heavenly Father with my time, my humble talents and all the means that he has blessed me with and I have dealt justly with all men. I have fought, but I have fought fairly.

95As to the future, I have no misgivings. It is inviting and glorious and I sense rather clearly what it means to be saved by the redeeming blood of Jesus Christ and to be exalted by his power and be with Him forever more.

95My only concern is for the present. Life is and ever has been sweet indeed to me. My wife, my eternal companion, has been and is all in all to me. What a mother! What a wife! For her I grieve. The children are all right. Twelve of them are living: all are grown; all are pure, clean, wholesome, faithful fixed in their purpose, and devoted to the Church.

95I come to one expression of regret—the possibly shortened period of intimate contact with you and the members of the Council of the Twelve. How I have longed to stand with you and thrust in my sickle with my might and reap a harvest for the Lord and then pass on when you could say, "He wrought valiantly to the end." If it is cut short now it will be hard for me to avoid thinking, "What an unprofitable servant."

95I discovered my letter has reached undue proportions. It also seems to be gloomy. Quite to the contrary, I am not blue or despondant; I am prepared. [^1]

---
Notas:
[^1] Margaret had died on the plains and wolves dug up her grave.
