Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

TestimonyHinckley, Alonzo A.100"Under Those High Cliffs"

100When I was a boy, I had close friends, as all boys have, . . . among them was a boy about my own age. We lived near together; we went to school together. This boy had two older brothers. His parents were devoted Latter-day Saints. The country at that time was wild and lawless among the frontier. These older brothers became freighters; they loved horses and mules, and they delighted in putting together splendid teams, and drove those teams into Montana, and west into Nevada, and down to the coast in California, freighting back merchandise which in those days was needed for the use of the people. They became two of the most profane men I ever knew, indifferent to the faith of their fathers, and intemperate.

One day the body of the elder of those two boys was brought into our town and his funeral services were held there. He had been killed in a difficulty with another man. The other, the next older brother, drifted away, and I lost sight of him. But this boy, who was my chum I grew up with, and pretty soon he obtained a team and he went off to Silver Reef to freight, and learned to swear, and he was following the very road that his older brothers had followed.

101About that time I lost track of him. I went to Mexico. I came back after fifteen or twenty years, and had occasion to go up into Idaho to visit one of the stakes of the Church. I found this man there, presiding as bishop of one of the wards! I found one of his sons the bishop of another ward. I found another son president of the Mutual Improvement Association; and one or two of the boys had been on missions. He had a splendid home there, presided over in dignity by his good wife.

101I looked at it all with wonder, and he smiled and said, "I know what you are thinking about."

101I said, "Tell me how it all happened."

101"Well," he said, "you know that I was going just the way my brothers went."

101"Yes," I said. "That is what surprises me."

101"My parents had always taught me a better way," he said. "They had urged me to read the scriptures, and finally I decided that I would read the Book of Mormon, and I did so while I was freighting. I read it through, and when I came to certain words in the last chapter of Moroni, I was very deeply impressed with them." These are the words to which he referred:

101And I seal up these records, after I have spoken a few words by way of exhortation unto you.

101Behold, I would exhort you that when ye shall read these things, if it be wisdom in God that ye should read them, that ye would remember how merciful the Lord hath been unto the children of men, from the creation of Adam, even down until the time that ye shall receive these things, and ponder it in your hearts.

101And when ye shall receive these things, I would exhort you that ye would ask God, the Eternal Father, in the name of Christ, if these things are not true; and if ye shall ask with a sincere heart, with real intent, having faith in Christ, he will manifest the truth of it unto you, by the power of the Holy Ghost. (Moroni 10:2-4.)

102He said, "When I read these words, I thought I would put the Lord to the test, and I stopped my team, wrapped the lines around the brake, and got down from that high seat, on one of those old-fashioned California wagons that were common in early days, and I turned off from the road; and you remember that piece of straight road," he said, "just below the twist?"

102"Yes," I said, "I remember every rock there is on it, because I have freighted over it."

102"Well, I went out there," he said, "under those high cliffs to the east of the road, and went around behind some rocks where no one could see me, kneeled down there, and thought I would pray, and I couldn't say a word.

102"But," he said, "by making a great effort I managed to appeal to the Lord, told him that I wanted to know the truth, and I want to tell you that those fellows on the day of Pentecost never received a stronger testimony than I did; I felt that I was surrounded by consuming fire, and I got up on my feet knowing just as well that the Lord lived, that Christ was the Redeemer of the World, that the gospel had been restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and that the Book of Mormon is a divine record, as I knew that I was there; and I got on my wagon, drove home, left the road and came up here, located on this quarter section of land, and you can see the rest."

102Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers, pp. 187-90.
