Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

CourageHinckley, Alonzo A.103"The Indians Left Them"

103During the year of 1865 the Navajo Indians were at war with the Government. Hard pressed in their own country, the Northeastern part of Arizona and Northwestern New Mexico, small parties of Indians came across the Colorado River and made raids upon the white settlers who had located in the extreme southeastern part of Utah. . . .

103Because of these and other depredations, the people were called in from outlying settlements and exposed ranches, to places of safety.

103Nathan C. Tenney had established a ranch at Short Creek where he built a house, but in common with others had abandoned it, and moved to Toquerville, about twenty-five miles distant.

103In December, 1866, three horsemen rode out from Toquerville, their destination being the Short Creek Ranch. They were fairly well mounted, and in those early days would have been considered well armed. Nathan C. Tenney carried an old-fashioned cap-and-ball pistol. Enoch Dodge was armed with a light, muzzle-loading rifle. The third member of the party, Ammon M. Tenney, was a mere boy, with black hair, dark eyes and a slender body. He carried an old style six-shooter, and was going with his father to look for horses which had strayed from Toquerville back to the ranch.

103The party reached Short Creek without incident, and spent the night at the ranch house. The following morning they rode out on the Pipe Spring trail to the place where the Berry Brothers had been killed, and after looking over the ground, went on and soon found the horses for which they were hunting.

Not far from them was one of those peculiar hills, or ridges, so common on the Short Creek range. By some convulsion of nature these ridges have been forced up, leaving an abrupt face of rock, often impossible of ascent, on the east or north, while on the west or south they gradually dip to the plains below so that approach to the top of the cliffs from that side is easy.

104At the foot of one of these bluffs, a corral had been constructed to which the horses, eight in number, were driven and hurriedly caught and necked together. Signs indicating to the trained eyes of these experienced frontiersmen that Indians were in the neighbrohood had been observed and commented upon, and that feeling of anxiety which comes to men who sense impending danger that cannot be seen was intense.

104The horses were driven from the corral and headed toward home, when the white men found themselves face to face with eight Navajos. The Indians, spread out in a semi-circle, occupied the plain, while the white men retired to the protection of the cliffs to which reference has been made. What was to be done? That the Indians meant to kill them was plain to the two men. Their weapons, consisting of bows and arrows and a few guns, were made ready as they taunted and denounced the white men.

104To Nathan C. Tenney, a man who had many times looked death in the face, the situation appeared desperate, hopeless. With the impassable cliffs behind, and Indians in front, what chance had they to escape? The boy proposed that all of the horses be killed and used as a breastwork, and that they fight. The father urged that their ammunition would soon be exhausted and they slaughtered. They thought it possible to compromise by giving up their horses.

104The boy spoke to the Indians in Spanish, which language he had learned in California, and found that he was understood. A parley ensued, and one of the Indians, a stalwart man, leaving his arms, came out into the circle and invited the boy to meet him there and arrange terms of capitulation. Removing his pistol, the boy was about ready to comply when his father restrained him. "My son," he said, "that powerful man, will pick you up and carry you away, and then they will kill us."

At this juncture the cliffs echoed with war whoops, and to their dismay the men saw eight additional Indians riding furiously down the plain toward them, their long hair streaming behind as they unslung their guns and quivers.

105"Resistance is now useless," said the elder Tenney. "What hope have we against sixteen well armed and mounted men?" It was at this juncture that the courage and leadership of the boy asserted itself. Drawing his pistol, he turned down the trail at the base of the bluff, and striking the spurs deep into his horse's sides, and crying "Follow me!", rode straight on the Indians, who confronted him, firing as he went. The two men followed. Against this intrepid charge, the Indians gave way, and the race for life began. Thus, for more than a mile they rode, the three on the trail, sheltered to the west by the bluff, while the Indians, who were in front of them, behind them, and on the plain to the east, kept up a constant fusilade of shots as they ran.

105Several times the boy, who was a superb horseman, and better mounted, had opportunity to outstrip his pursuers and escape, and often he returned to encourage his father and Dodge to be brave and come on. He was thus riding in advance when a sharp cry from his father caused him to look back to see both horse and rider rolling in the dust. The Indians, with bows bent to the arrowheads, were bearing down on his father in a body. Without a moment's hesitation the boy turned and spurred his horse between his father and the on-rushing savages, discharging his pistol in the very faces of the men nearest him. The Indians wavered, scattered, and, falling on the opposite side of their horses, discharged a volley at the boy.

105His father declared that he had been shot; and Dodge, also having been wounded, they implored the boy to escape and go to his mother. Instead of doing this, he assisted his father to his feet, and turning the horses loose, with the saddles on, urged the men to climb to the rocks above. For a few moments the attention of the Indians was attracted to the loose horses and during this time the boy succeeded in getting the men up into the rocks, where he covered their retreat, while the Indians, riding by at the foot of the bluff, in single file, kept up a constant fire on him.

When the upper ledge was reached, the situation again looked hopeless; the cliff presented an obstacle which the men declared it would be impossible to pass, but the boy, undismayed, made the effort and succeeded. He then took hold of the gun, and while his father held on, he pulled, and Dodge pushed until the father reached the top where he fell unconscious. With the gun, he then pulled Dodge to the summit.

106A hasty examination showed that the father had not been shot, as he thought, but that the fall from the horse had dislocated and badly bruised his shoulder. Dodge had been shot in the leg. The boy lay down on his back, took his father's hand in his, and placing one foot on the neck, the other in the arm pit, with a quick jerk and strong twist, brought the dislocated joint back into place. He then placed his hands upon the head of his father, and in a few well-chosen words, laid their condition before the Lord, and prayed that his father might be restored. The man arose and they retreated a short distance to the west where they concealed themselves in some loose rocks. They had scarcely done so when they heard the patter of the feet of the Indians, on the very rocks under which they had taken refuge.

106Darkness came on and with it the Indians left them, thinking, undoubtedly, that they had made good their escape and were far away. When it appeared safe, they came out from their hiding place, and guided by the boy, slowly made their way to Duncan's Retreat, from which they were taken to their home by friends.

106Nibley, Pioneer Stories, pp. 138-44.
