Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

111"The Faith of a Little Child"

111During the winter of 1834-1835 a theological school was established in Kirtland. It was the custom at the school to call upon a certain member to speak for the edification of the others. Heber C. Kimball, on one occasion, was invited to address them on the subject of faith. He began by relating an incident that had occurred but recently in his own family. "My wife, one day," commenced Brother Kimball, "when going out on a visit, gave our daughter Helen Mar charge not to touch the dishes," as they were very scarce, expensive, and hard to replace. She advised her that if she broke any during her absence, she would punish her when she returned. "While my wife was absent," continued Brother Kimball, "My daughter broke a number of the dishes by letting the table leaf fall. . . ."

The little girl was greatly frightened and "went out under an apple tree and prayed that her mother's heart might be softened, that when she returned she would not spank her. "Her mother was very punctual," said Brother Kimball, "when she made a promise to her children, to fulfill it, and when she returned, she undertook, as a duty, to carry this promise into effect. She retired with [the little girl] into her room, but found herself powerless to chastise her; her heart was so softened that it was impossible for her to raise her hand against the child. Afterwards, Helen told her mother she had prayed to the Lord that she might not whip her."

112Brother Heber paused in his simple narrative. Tears glistened in the eyes of his listeners; the Prophet Joseph who was a warm and tender-hearted man, was also weeping. He told the brethren that that was the kind of faith they needed: "the faith of a little child, going in humility to its parents, and asking for the desire of its heart." He complimented Brother Kimball and said "the anecdote was well-timed."

112Conference Report, October 1970, p. 20.
