Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Missionary WorkKimball, Heber C.122"Willard, I Baptized Your Wife To-day"

122On Wednesday, August 2nd," says Elder Kimball, "Miss Jennetta Richards, a young lady, the daughter of a minister of the Independent Order, who resided at Walkerfold, about fifteen miles from Preston, came to the house of Thomas Walmesley, with whom she was acquainted. Calling in to see them at the time she was there, I was introduced to her, and we immediately entered into conversation on the subject of the Gospel. I found her very intelligent. She seemed very desirous to hear the things I had to teach and to understand the doctrines of the gospel. I informed her of my appointment to preach that evening, and invited her to attend. She did so; and likewise the evening following. After attending these two services she was fully convinced of the truth.

122"Friday morning, 4th, she sent for me, desiring to be baptized, which request I cheerfully complied with, in the river Ribble, and confirmed her at the water side, Elder Hyde assisting. . . . The following day she started for home, and wept as she was about to leave us. I said to her, 'Sister, be of good cheer, for the Lord will soften the heart of thy father, that I will yet have the privilege of preaching in his chapel, and it shall result in a great opening to preach the Gospel in that region.' I exhorted her to pray and be humble. She requested me to pray for her, and gave me some encouragement to expect that her father would open his chapel for me to preach in. I then hastened to my brethren, told them of the circumstances and the result of my visit with the young lady, and called upon them to unite with me in prayer that the Lord would soften the heart of her father, that he might be induced to open his chapel for us to preach in. . . ."

And now came the fulfillment of Heber's prophecy to Jennetta Richards, daughter of the minister of Walkerfold. The early part of the week brought two letters to Elder Kimball, one from Miss Richards and the other from her father. The latter read as follows:

123Mr. H. C. Kimball,

123Sir:—You are expected to be here next Sunday. You are given out to preach in the forenoon, afternoon and evening. Although we be strangers to one another, yet, I hope we are not strangers to our blessed Redeemer, else I would not have given out for you to preach. Our chapel is but small and the congregation few,—yet if one soul be converted it is of more value than the whole world.

123I remain, in haste,

123JOHN RICHARDS.

123While laboring in this neighborhood, Heber had a dream in which Willard Richards appeared to him and said: "You are wanted at Preston, and we cannot do without you any longer."

123"The next morning," says he, "I started for Preston where I found that I was anxiously expected by the brethren. . . ."

123Another of Heber's prophecies—one of those seemingly casual though fateful utterances for which he was famous—must here be mentioned.

123"Willard, I baptized your wife to-day," were his words addressed to Elder Richards just after Jennetta Richards joined the Church. Willard and Jennetta had not yet seen each other. The sequel is in Willard's own words, taken from his diary. Time: March, 1838:

123"I took a tour through the branches, and preached. While walking in Thornly I plucked a snowdrop, far through the hedge, and carried it to James Mercer's and hung it up in his kitchen. Soon after, Jennetta Richards came into the room, and I walked with her and Alice Parker to Ribchester, and attended meeting with Brothers Kimball and Hyde at Brother Clark's.

123"While walking with these sisters, I remarked, 'Richards is a good name; I never want to change it; do you, Jennetta?' 'No; I do not,' was her reply, 'and I think I never will.'

"September 24th, 1839, I married Jennetta Richards, daughter of the Rev. John Richards, independent minister at Walkerfold, Chaigley, Lancashire. Most truly do I praise my Heavenly Father for his great kindness in providing me a partner according to His promise. I receive her from the Lord, and hold her at His disposal. I pray that He may bless us forever. Amen!"

124Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Bookcraft), pp. 137-44.
