Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Missionary WorkKimball, Heber C.126"I Wept for Several Miles"

126We left Apostles Kimball and Hyde, with their associates in the ministry, visiting the various branches of the mission they had founded, preparatory to taking farewell leave of the Saints and sailing for America. They agreed to hold a general conference in Preston on the 8th of April, the day before their departure. . . .

126In the interval, writes Heber, "I went and visited the branches in the regions of Clithero and Chatburn, and on the morning when I left Chatburn many were in tears, thinking they should see my face no more. When I left them, my feelings were such as I cannot describe. As I walked down the street I was followed by numbers; the doors were crowded by the inmates of the houses to bid me farewell, who could only give vent to their grief in sobs and broken accents. While contemplating this scene I was constrained to take off my hat, for I felt as if the place was holy ground. The Spirit of the Lord rested down upon me and I was constrained to bless that whole region of country. I was followed by a great number to Clithero, a considerable distance from the villages, who could then hardly separate from me. My heart was like unto theirs, and I thought my head was a fountain of tears, for I wept for several miles after I bid them adieu. I had to leave the road three times to go to streams of water to bathe my eyes."

126"Who can read this," says Tullidge, beautifully, "without feeling of profound veneration for the great and good man whose memory is enshrined in the hearts of the British Saints as their spiritual father? That touching scene is enough to immortalize the character of Heber C. Kimball as a true apostle of Christ; and the pathos is actually heightened when he is seen alone by the wayside weeping, or by the streams washing away those sacred tears."

Heber C. Kimball was indeed a true apostle of Christ, one of the called and chosen; a prophet and a servant of God, in nature as well as name.

127The Prophet Joseph told him in after years that the reason he felt as he did in the streets of Chatburn was because the place was indeed "holy ground," that some of the ancient prophets had traveled in that region and dedicated the land, and that he, Heber, had reaped the benefit of their blessing. . . .

127". . . When we spoke of our departure their souls were melted; they gave vent to their feelings and wept like little children, and broke out in lamentations like the following: 'How can we part with our beloved brethren!' 'We may never see them again!' 'O, why must you leave us!' I could not restrain my feelings, and they found vent in a flood of tears. It would have been almost an impossibility for us to have left this affectionate people, if we had not had the most implicit confidence in the brethren who had been appointed to preside over them in our absence; but knowing they had the confidence of the Church, we felt that affairs would be conducted in righteousness. . . ."

127At nine o'clock on the morning of April 9th, Elders Kimball, Hyde and Russell left Preston for Liverpool. Through the kindness of the Saints, many of whom assembled to bid them farewell, they were provided with means to take them back to Kirtland. With tearful eyes they were gazed at by the multitude until the coach was lost to view. . . .

127"After a ride of about four hours we arrived at Liverpool." It was on the 20th of April, 1838, that the Elders embarked for home. ". . . Sunday, July 20th, I met Joseph, Sidney and Hyrum on the public square, as they started for Adam-On-di-Ahman. Joseph requested me to preach to the Saints and give them a history of my mission, saying, 'It will revive their spirits and do them good,' which I did, although I was scarcely able to stand. I related many things respecting my mission and travels, which were gladly received by them, whose hearts were cheered by the recital, while many of the Elders were stirred up to diligence, and expressed a great desire to accompany me when I should return to England."

127Whitney, Life of Heber C. Kimball (Bookcraft), pp. 187-88, 194, 204.
