Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

"What a Delightful Day I Can Have Reading the Bible"

At the early age of four years Anthon H. Lund was sent to a private school, where he mastered the first elements of reading, writing, arithmetic, etc., and when seven years old he entered the public school of the city of Aalborg. His industry as a student and his aptitude for learning are shown in the fact that he rapidly advanced from one grade to another, passing entirely over the second grade. And while preparing himself for graduation in the course of study given in the school, he took besides private lessons in English, and also studied German and French. At the age of eleven years he held the first place in the school. Already at his early age Brother Lund had an irresistible desire to study the word of God. In his grandmother's house was a Bible belonging to his uncle, which his uncle had forbidden him to touch for fear he should soil or otherwise deface the precious volume. But his grandmother often asked him to read the whole book, and encouraged in this by his grandmother, he commenced at the beginning and made himself familiar with the main events narrated in that sacred volume. One day in Lent when the streets were filled with people looking at the Lent procession, he thought: What a delightful day I can have reading the Bible! He imagined that his uncle would be among the sight-seeing multitude. He had settled himself down on his favorite place with the Bible open, reading the fascinating history of Israel under the kings, when he heard a step on the stairs; the door opened and there stood his uncle before him. He asked his uncle to excuse his having taken the Bible without permission. His uncle answered: "I am delighted, my boy, to find you thus employed on a day like this. Read it as much as you like." As he was only in his eighth year, his uncle was surprised to find how much he had read, and how well he had grasped the meaning. Brother Lund said those early readings have been a great help to him, as they fastened the thread of the Bible narrative securely upon his mind.

136J. M. Sjodahl, "Memorial Address of Funeral Service of Anthon H. Lund" (J. Reuben Clark Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah), pp. 5-6.
