Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

Missionary WorkLund, Anthon H."Fists Like Sledge Hammers"

Brother Lund had on one occasion obtained permission to hold a meeting in a town where it had hitherto been impossible to make an opening. The meeting was appointed for the next Sunday; and in company with a couple of Elders, Brother Lund went there. On entering the town they were warned not to go to the meeting, as the mob would disturb the meeting, and they had given the blacksmith, the bully of several parishes, all the liquor he would drink in order to get him to pound the "Mormon" Elders. They thanked their informant, but said they must honor their appointment. They found the house full of people and great numbers outside that could not get in. The meeting was opened, and in stalked the blacksmith. Brother Lund said when he saw him, he thought he was a very Polyphemus. He had only one eye, a sinister look, and fists like sledge hammers. They prayed earnestly that God would overrule the plans of the wicked. The advent of the blacksmith was the signal for disturbing the meeting and some commenced calling the Elders liars, etc. The blacksmith arose to his feet when he heard the interruptions, and slowly eyeing the audience he said: "I want you all to understand that these are men of God, and they speak his word pure and simple. If any one again interrupts them he shall feel the weight of this," showing his large fist. The crowd did not know what this meant; he had drunk their liquor and promised to thrash the Elders; he must be joking. A loudmouthed fellow commenced again calling the Elders opprobrious names, when the blacksmith elbowed his way through the dense crowd, and taking hold of the disturber he threw him out of the door. This settled it. For two hours the Elders preached to the congregation and the one-eyed giant stood guard as a policeman; but as soon as the meeting was dismissed, he seemed to realize that he was on the wrong side, and he commenced to be ugly and wanted to quarrel with the brethren, but they got away as quickly as possible. Brother Lund was the last to leave, and he heard those behind say to those in front of him, "Give him a diff!" But Brother Lund nodded politely to the crowd as he passed through and got away unhurt. Some of those present have since come to Utah and have informed Brother Lund that even the man who opened his house for the meeting was in the conspiracy against the Elders. The Elders felt that their prayers were heard in an almost miraculous manner.

139Sjodahl, "Memorial Address at Funeral Services of Anthon H. Lund," pp. 12-13.
