Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

RevelationMerril, Joseph F.151"I Experienced a Shock"

151Some years ago I was appointed to go to one of the stakes and re-organize the stake presidency. I was to go alone. After the meeting I spoke to President Clark and said, "You are acquainted in that stake. Who would you suggest to be the new president?" He said that he had no suggestions. I said, "I don't know a single soul in that stake except a public school teacher and I know he isn't going to be the president because he is not valiant in the faith. What shall I do?" He told me to go out and fulfill my appointment.

151I went to President McKay and said, "I know you are acquainted in that stake because I am going to release the president you installed ten years ago. Who do you suggest?" He told me he had no suggestions. What could I do? I was going out there unacquainted. Well in view of some previous experiences I had, I decided to send over to the Presiding Bishop's office and get a list of all the priesthood authorities in that stake. That list came to me a little later, and the holders of the priesthood occupying positions of more or less importance were all listed in the wards in which they lived and the wards were listed alphabetically. I spread that sheet out in front of me and locked the door. Then I got down on my knees and prayed. When I got half-way down I experienced something . . . as true as I stand here I experienced a shock.

151For many years I have been in charge of the electrical laboratory at the University of Utah and if ever I went to the switchboard and wanted to know if a couple of the terminals were alive, if the power was O.K., I quickly passed my finger on one terminal and passed another finger over the other terminal and I experienced a shock. If I did I would know the terminals were alive. This was not dangerous because there was never enough power to make it so.

152I experienced exactly that kind of a shock when my eyes fell upon a name. I looked more carefully and this revelation in these words were impressed upon my mind, not in words audibly spoken, but nevertheless just as indelible as if spoken in tones of thunder, "He is the man." . . .

152With the feeling "He is the man" simultaneously came that feeling of peace, of knowledge. I actually knew, I felt I knew and with satisfaction I went out and I knew who was to be president of that stake. We admonished them to ask God for guidance. We asked them to send a silent prayer to heaven to help them to feel. Seventy-six of these slips came back and sixty-nine had the name written on them. The name of the man I knew to be president of the stake. I asked the president, "Is brother so and so here?" He told me that he was sitting in the back. That was the first time I had ever seen the man.

152Well how may we know then that a revelation is divine? Through feeling. It may be scholars would say, "My, my emotion." Do we not get knowledge through feeling? If I had a headache wouldn't I know it? How else can we know it?

152I once went to a doctor and said, "Three days ago I fell on my shoulder and something is wrong with it." He took some X-rays and told me to come back the next day. The next day he told me that there was nothing wrong and he swung my arm around. I said, "Doctor, you say nothing is wrong, but if I gave vent to my feeling I would scream. The pain you are causing is so great that I can hardly stand it." I know I had a pain. How did I know? Through feeling.

152Joseph F. Merrill, "Characteristic Teachings of the Church," Assembly, Brigham Young University, November 5, 1946.
