Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

158"Won't You Sell Me a Little Flour?"

158In the year 1855 the grasshoppers first came to Utah and did great damage to crops. But owing to the advanced stage of the crops when they came considerable grain was saved, but not enough for bread for the people. And before the harvest in 1856 great suffering was experienced by many for bread. My crop being short in 1855 and only raising that year 49 bushels of wheat, and out of that paying my tithing, threshing, blacksmith bills, etc., I was left with only a few bushels for the year's bread—not enough to last us. On finding that I would be short of bread stuff I got lumber from the canyon and took 750 feet to Salt Lake City to trade for flour, but found that kind of a trade very difficult. I could sell my lumber for money in different places, but could not buy flour for money. I finally as the last resort for flour took my lumber to Superintendent Daniel H. Wells, then Superintendent of Public Works for Church, and asked him if he would give me flour for it. I must here confess that I had but little hope or faith to get flour for my lumber, as the Church had many work hands depending on the Superintendent for bread, besides a great many old and infirm people who looked to that source for supplies.

158But to my surprise, after Brother Wells asked a great many questions as to what I wanted with so much flour, he said, "Yes, I will take your lumber and give you flour for it." I did not expect to get much flour for my load of lumber, as flour was worth at that time $20 cash per 100 pounds, when it could be bought at all, as it was a rare thing to hear of any flour for sale. Hence when Brother Wells asked me what I wanted with so much flour for my family I could not understand him, as 150 pounds of flour was all I expected to get for my 750 feet of lumber, and in fact I had offered it for that many times during the day.

159Brother Wells did not ask me how much flour I wanted for my load of lumber, but simply said to me: "Drive it over to the Temple Block and Brother Fordham will measure it for you." I had told Brother Wells that my father-in-law with a large family and many of my neighbors were also out of flour, and that I expected to divide what I got with them. On getting my lumber measured and a receipt from Brother Fordham, and finding that I had $30 worth, it being considered worth $4 per 100 feet, which was the market price at that time, I went back to the Store House (then Tithing Office) with a light heart and cheerful countenance expecting to get 150 pounds of flour to take home to my family and neighbors. When I handed the receipt to Brother Wells he looked at it for a moment, and that moment seemed a long time to me, for I expected to hear him say, "Can't hardly afford to give you all flour for your lumber, you must take some cash with it." But to my surprise he said: "Brother Hill, go and put Brother Merrill up 500 pounds of flour." Six dollars per 100 pounds was the Church price then and for many years afterwards, and two dollars per bushel for wheat. I felt like weeping for joy, but suppressed my feelings and said secretly: "God bless you, Brother Wells, for your kindness to me. . . ."

159Getting my 500 pounds of flour stacked on the running gears of my wagon, I started homeward, it being 8 miles to where I then lived north of Salt Lake City. I was extremely glad when I passed beyond the limits of the city, as I was accosted at every block with: "Say, Brother, won't you sell me a little flour? I will give you $20 in gold for a hundred pounds", etc. I was almost sorry I did not stay in the Tithing Yard until it was dark so people could not see what I had on my wagon, as I had no blanket or quilt to cover it up. But I had to say sorrowfully, "No, Brother, (or Sister) I cannot peddle out this flour, it is all engaged."

When I arrived home we felt to thank the Lord for His kindness to us. And we did not feel selfish with our store of bread, for we divided it with our brethren and sisters around us, and fed all who came in and asked for bread. We did not sell one pound of the flour, but loaned it and gave it to the poor, etc. We let it go so freely that before our little crop came in or got ripe we found ourselves nearly out again. One day a poor Danish or Swedish Brother came along and asked for some bread to eat. My wife told him we had but little but she would divide with him. When she set a little bread and milk before him he blessed it in his own language. I happened to be in the house at the time and felt that the Lord was with that man, and that although he was almost destitute of clothing the power of God was with him. He left a sweet influence in the house and our flour was increased to us in a manner unknown and we never have wanted for bread. God will bless all persons who will feed and comfort the poor of His people, and all such will never want for bread. Thus the hand of the Lord was over us and we were enabled to pass through those scanty times and gain an experience that has been valuable in after years.

160Merrill, Utah Pioneer and Apostle Marriner Wood Merrill and His Family, pp. 41-44.
