Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

IntegrityMarriner, Merrill W.167"Eight Dollars Per Ton Is a Fair Price"

167The spring of 1901 was a late one following a long hard winter. Nearly everybody's hay stacks were gone and feed for farm animals was very scarce. The few who had hay to sell could demand almost any price and those whose cattle were suffering for the want of feed would have to pay the price. Marriner W. Merrill, having sold his young stock during the previous autumn, had a good supply of hay left on hand when winter was breaking and spring was at hand.

167Several different men had approached him asking him to name a price on the entire lot, some 75 to 100 tons. It would have been to his advantage to sell the hay in one lot and to receive his money in one check. These men wanted to buy it and sell it in small lots at high prices to those who were urgently in need of it.

167Brother Merrill, as everyone called him, appointed me as his agent [^1] to sell the hay in small quantities to those who actually wanted to feed it to their own cattle and who would not buy it to resell at a profit. He said $8.00 per ton was a fair price and that it should be sold at that price. When it became known that the hay, first-class timothy, was offered at that price people came to get their load or two—the limit allowed to any one until all others in the community had had a chance to supply their immediate needs.

Then came, one at a time, several men who had hay to spare and said to me who was handling the Merrill hay, "Why sell so cheap? There is a distinct shortage of hay and we few who have a little to sell may as well get $12.00 to $15.00 per ton as not." The proposal was presented to Brother Merrill, who, after thinking for a moment, said, "Eight dollars per ton is a fair price. That gives me a reasonable profit for producing it and it is all that those who are short of feed can afford to pay. Continue to sell it at $8.00. After mine is gone those who demand more may sell for whatever they can get."

---
Notas:
[^1] James W. Funk, Elder Merrill's son-in law.
