Leon R. Hartshorn, Exceptional Stories from the Lives of Our Apostles ( 1972)

173"I Was Once Again Seated Comfortably on My Pony"

173When I was a young boy my father entrusted the family cow to my care, both at our home in the city as well as at our home in the mountains in the summer. My first trip from the city to the mountains with the cow was made on horseback. I had a wonderful Indian pony, jet black in color and round as a barrel. She had a beautiful thick long mane and tail. She was my pride and joy. For the most part I rode her bareback and took great delight in currying her regularly. I even fed her carrots to improve the shine of her hair and even kept her shod, whereas most of the ponies were ridden without shoes. Somehow or other as a boy I sensed that whatever I did to perfect the pony seemed to pay dividends, the pony did more for me.

173Well, I could go on telling you of my experiences with this pony, but it is the leading of the cow from Salt Lake City to Brighton in Big Cottonwood Canyon that I started to tell you about. You know it can be hard work leading a cow by a rope attached to her halter with the other end wrapped around the horn of the saddle. It took most of the day to get the cow from Salt Lake City to the mouth of the canyon.

174Around noon I stopped at a farm located on Highland Drive below Sugar House, now built upon with houses. I milked the cow to make traveling easier for her and fed the pony and the cow. The fresh warm milk tasted good with the sandwiches Mother had put in my saddlebag.

174Toward evening as we neared the Spillett farm, the cow balked. I lost hold of the rope, and the cow took off up the hill in the thick scrub oak brush. I left my pony on the canyon road. I climbed into the brush to hunt the cow, but I could not find her, and it was getting darker all the time. When I felt I had done all I could to help myself, I knelt down to pray. I knew then that the Lord heard and answered our prayers when we did our part. I felt good when I stood up. I was not afraid any more. I walked a short distance up the hill and came upon an old irrigation ditch that was used to bring water from the canyon stream onto some high land west and north owned by the Green family. A short distance up the ditch I saw my cow hidden by the lower high bank of the ditch. After thanking the Lord for answering my prayer, I drove the cow ahead of me in the ditch until we came out into the clear. I tied the cow to a bush, and soon went down the canyon road until I was once again seated comfortably on my pony, thanks to the Lord.

174If I were you I would pray and develop the gift within me of talking to the Lord and depending upon him to help me when his help is necessary. You will find throughout life he will always be there to help you. Without his help, we do not accomplish much. With his help there is nothing we cannot accomplish if we will.

174The Improvement Era, February 1963, p. 119.
