Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

SECTION 1

THE DIVINE CONNECTION

We are children of God. And because of our divine connection, we have inherent and unchanging worth.

CHAPTER 1

THE POWER OF SELF-WORTH

What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny matters compared to what lies within us.

—Oliver Wendell Holmes

Much has been said about self-esteem in recent years. If you go to a bookstore and check the "Self-help," "Psychology," "Home and Family," or even the "Business" section, you will find scores of books on how to maximize personal and professional effectiveness with a properly developed, "new and improved" self-concept. Seminars by the hundreds saturate our psyches with self-improvement ideology. Articles on self-esteem and self-image spot nearly every periodical on the shelves; from Forbes to Family Circle to Seventeen to Self, magazines indoctrinate us with self- esteem psychology. An article on self-esteem in Newsweek, "Hey, I'm Terrific," documented: "A recent survey of the literature estimated that more than 10,000 scientific studies of self-esteem have been conducted. Researchers have measured it with more than 200 different tests." [^1] Textbooks— replete with such testing—entertain the subject in all of its "scientific" depth, just as entire college courses are devoted to its discussion. Motivational audio and video tapes bring such self-improvement theories into our cars, businesses, exercise rooms, and homes.

Without question, self-esteem has become both a conversational and a clinical "cure-all," a catchword for the infirmities of our time. Almost every contemporary problem seems to hinge around self-concept; and many emotional, spiritual, and sometimes even physical ailments share the same diagnosis: poor self-esteem. What do our parents tell us about the neighborhood bullies? "They do not like themselves." Why do friends and co-workers misbehave? "Because they feel insecure and inadequate." And how are spouses able to mistreat their cherished companions? "By letting a poor self-image get in the way of real communication and selfless love." Such a correspondence between the private and the public, between liking ourselves before we can really like others, is a maxim from which both professional and pop psychologists draw many conclusions— and make many therapeutic suggestions. And rightly so.

Self-Worth vs. Self-Esteem

But let's take a step back to something even more fundamental. In our eager efforts to improve, sometimes the most basic ingredient for real improvement is neglected: a deep and meaningful realization of our divine connection— our relationship with God. How does self-worth differ from self-esteem, and why can an understanding of this difference ultimately change the way we live? Or perhaps more basic than these questions: Why is the topic of self-worth only superficially—and usually interchangeably—connected with self-esteem? Why does success literature lose self-worth to self-esteem? And how could the inclusion of this difference enhance the self-improvement material that already colors our shelves and illuminates our conversations?

Perhaps the best way I can explain the difference between self-worth and self-esteem (or even explain what self- worth is in the first place) is to review my own process of discovery. Nearly all the self-improvement books I have read and the tapes I have listened to place self-esteem at the center of self-help, declare positive thinking as an essential requirement for all change, and use self-worth as a synonym for self-esteem. I would not speak about self-esteem so regularly and study self-improvement literature so intensely if I did not sincerely believe in the importance of a healthy self-esteem, in the power of positive thinking, and in our capacity to change. Certainly, I do not discount such philosophies. Yet my studies have frequently left me feeling that something essential is missing, something intrinsic to the definition of self-worth, something deeply embedded in my own orientation for success that somehow eludes more widespread recognition.

I consciously realized this while searching the dictionary for just the right "self" word—and not being able to find it. Self-worth—that was the word I was looking for. But it was nowhere to be found. Of course, the usual "self" words were there: self-concept, self-esteem, and self-image.

There are more than five hundred "self" entries in Webster's unabridged dictionary: self-control, self-improvement, self-pity, self-respect, self-starter, self-winding, self-worship—all kinds of entries ranging from self-abandoned to self-wrong, but not a single definition for self-worth. [^2] Even in the twenty-volume Oxford English Dictionary (which catalogues words from their origins to their current usages), self-worth was not to be found. Self was there and worth was there, but self-worth was not.

While searching for this elusive word, I was reminded of the transcendent truth I had been taught as a child: each of us is a child of God, and because of that, we all have infinite and eternal worth. Beyond mere self-esteem, a recognition of our inherent, divine endowment of value is the key to making real self-improvement. This is more than just a belief in ourselves; it is an acknowledgment of our divine value as unique human beings, as well as an acknowledgment of the eternal worth of every human soul.

The Divine Connection to Self-Improvement

This "oversight" became a perfect model for the sacred insight I had been attempting to articulate: more essential than good self-esteem is a recognition of our worth as children of God—and yet we seem to forget this basic truth in the very effort to enhance our perceived worth. Our search for self-esteem sometimes obscures our vision of inherent worth.

For example, if daily running becomes an obsessive ritual rather than a fulfilling exercise, we may really be running away from ourselves. Every time we look in the mirror, we will fail to see the exercised body before us for the ever- better body that could be ours. Our level of fitness will never be good enough when self-improvement has evolved into self-worship. The same idea applies to wealth and possessions when they lead to greedy acquisitiveness, for we can never get enough of what we don't need.

Similarly, if the wisdom we glean from reading becomes a principal source of self-identification, we will never be satisfied with the amount of knowledge we are acquiring. But when our identity is separate from any amount of learning we may aspire to, any wealth we may acquire, or any exercise we may follow; when we know who we are without having to show what we know, what we have, and what we can do; then reading, working, and running are the worthy self-improvements they should be. Such activities do not—and cannot—add to or subtract from our self-worth (our inherent value). They can only enhance our self-esteem (the way we feel about ourselves).

When we equate our self-esteem only with our efforts to improve, our self-evaluation becomes a superficial snapshot rather than a penetrating picture guided by a divine viewfinder. Only when the lens of improvement is brought into the focus of God-given worth does real progress and understanding take place. Only then does self-worth become the meaningful, even transformational, means and motivation for improvement that it should be.

The simple truth that we are children of a loving Heavenly Father is, for some, so obvious that it is sometimes discounted as too trite, too fundamental, and even too "religious" to be used in academic circles. We look to more "sophisticated" methods of measuring our identity. We may wear mood rings, take personality profiles, count calories, pay for "wellness consulting," and hover over horoscopes in order to find out about ourselves. But sometimes in the process, we lose sight of our eternal and internal identity. We may spend hours taking a test to determine what kind of a person we are, but rarely do we take a moment to reflect on the fact that we are literally children of God.

Public and private organizations may spend thousands of dollars for motivational training and personal improvement programs but never capitalize on the priceless—and perhaps single most motivating—truth that each of us has a divine inheritance of worth. We can become so energetic in our quest for personal success that, in practice, we may disconnect ourselves from the Greatest Energy Source, the Well-Spring of Success. We may become so focused on the "self" that we inadvertently forget Him who sustains us in our improvement, the Great Improver, through whom we can grow, change, and develop.

The more I thought about the emblematic oversight of self-worth in the dictionary, the more I realized a neglect of self-worth in most books' indexes. I reflected on certain frustrations I have had as a student of self-esteem literature and as a professor of self-help philosophy, and I was able to attribute these concerns to the absence of this divine connection to self-esteem. The self-help books and tapes with which I was familiar outlined great ideas and philosophies for improvement without any recognition or reliance on God. They were so "self-centered" there was no room for a Divine Center. And, in the end, a guiding principle for self-improvement became glaringly apparent to me. The widespread theories on selfhood and a personal desire to involve the Lord in a quest for improvement did not have to be mutually exclusive. In fact, a recognition of our self- worth would enhance every effort to improve our self-esteem because it would put an awareness of our God-given worth back into the self-improvement theories that already make our lives more meaningful.

The molding of our characters, bodies, and even our life-styles would be more complete if our efforts to improve were guided by the refining conviction that each of us is a child of God. Such an understanding of our heavenly heritage instills a deep sense of stewardship about everything in life. When we sincerely believe that we are God's children, we also realize that our time, talents, possessions, relationships, and even our physical bodies are not just our own. We treat everything from the earth to her creatures to our associates and even ourselves differently when we recognize this truth. We are on God's errand; we are His earthly stewards, managing the responsibilities and opportunities with which we are each endowed. And because we are stewards rather than servants, we not only care for the gifts we have, but we also feel a certain ownership over them. Indeed, the implications of this personal ownership are far-reaching for those committed to self-improvement.

What Does It Mean to Be a Child of God?

An understanding of the exalting truth that each of us has a divine inheritance of worth will enrich every effort we make to improve ourselves. Whether it be a social, intellectual, spiritual, or even a physical plan for progress, self-improvement becomes personal empowerment when guided by the recognition that we are children of a loving Heavenly Father. Perhaps the best way to make such a lofty truth more tangible is to consider what it means to be a child of earthly parents—or, quite simply, what it means to be a child. Why is there an eternal cycle of children growing into parents and parents having children?

I am the son of Neil and Verna Newell, and that means I carry on their names, inherit many of their characteristics, and continue their values (to varying degrees). No matter how mature and sophisticated I may become, I will always be their child. I am connected to them by virtue of my birth. Even as a father or grandfather, I will always be their son. In some ways, I will always be dependent on them. While this reliance originally took the form of physical provision and comfort, it has evolved into more of an emotional, and even a spiritual, support. I go to them for advice and look to them for a certain amount of unconditional acceptance and love. Even though my father has passed away, I am still encircled by both his and my mother's eternal stewardship.

Applying this childlike dependence to our relationship with God shows that we have not only a divine birthright but also the ability—and even the responsibility—to involve the Lord in our lives. Although the child in each of us occasionally disguises itself with costumes of experience or robes of knowledge, somewhere beneath all those hard-won layers (awarded by the "school of hard knocks") is a child— a child who is just like all other children: naturally teachable, essentially dependent, alarmingly discerning, and unconditionally loving. If this child seems buried in times of trial and periods of pain, we can renew our spirits by observing a child. Such observation leads to illuminating truths about our eternal childhood. A gaze through this carefully focused lens allows us to see the fine but immutably inscribed print on each of our birth certificates: "You are of infinite and individual worth. You are the essence of greatness with divine and unlimited potential. You are a child of God." And because of that, we each have a perfectly paved (but not necessarily easy) road for success. We need only humble ourselves, like a child, so that we can be led, guided, and walked beside on that personalized path for progress. Perhaps even more humbling, we have to believe in and ask for God's redeeming help when we can no longer pick ourselves up from the unavoidable stumbling blocks along the way.

The Savior becomes our catalyst for improvement when we recognize not only our need to change but also our childlike dependence upon Him. The words of a beloved song from childhood are perhaps most effective in conveying this message:

I am a child of God, and He has sent me here, Has given me an earthly home with parents kind and dear. Lead me, guide me, walk beside me, help me find the way. Teach me all that I must do to live with Him someday. [^3]

Our Eternal Worth

We cannot get more worth. A larger house, a better salary, and an impressive investment portfolio may give us more net worth, but our self-worth remains constant. Getting a new job or not getting a new job, driving an expensive car or driving a used car, wearing new clothes or putting on old clothes will not affect our self-worth, either positively or negatively. While our self-esteem fluctuates, our self-worth never changes. Our feelings of self-worth (or the degree to which an understanding of our self-worth is deeply internalized) will vary; but unlike self-esteem, our self-worth is unaffected by the ups and downs of life. It is a constant power and comfort in our lives. We change as we recognize— and act upon—this inherent gift, this endowment from God. But our self-worth is always the same. The more we realize our intrinsic worth, the less our self-esteem fluctuates, the more we are empowered to change our lives and build our self-esteem.

There is no greater demonstration of both our individual worth and our ability to change than Christ's atonement. I remember a recent conversation I had to this effect. Some associates and I were discussing the idea of self-worth after a seminar one day. One of them interrupted our conversation and challenged, "But do hardened criminals have the same worth as the person who has lived a more reputable and moral life?" Before I had a chance to respond, another friend poignantly replied, "Yes. They have so much worth that Christ died on the cross—even for them." And I could only nod my head in humble agreement.

Each of us has such intrinsic worth that even those who commit heinous crimes can draw upon this divine inheritance of worth and work change in their lives. Paul explained this principle to the Romans hundreds of years ago: "God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." (Romans 5:8.) What greater demonstration of both love and hope is there than that Christ would not just die for us, but, as Paul says, die believing in our ability to change—"while we were yet sinners." Paul similarly expressed to Timothy, "Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief." (1 Timothy 1:15.)

Jesus is the Savior of the world, the Savior of saint and sinner alike. Each of us has an equal right to His saving sacrifice because each of us is of equal worth in His sight. The only prerequisite for calling upon such redeeming love is a childlike submissiveness that allows us to recognize not only our need to improve but also our inability to do so by ourselves. In the Savior's own words, we learn of the necessity for childlike humility: "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein." (Mark 10:15.)

Perhaps that is why the scriptures are replete with references to childhood. If we would incorporate childlike attitudes when we confront adult problems, we would draw upon our divine birthright to facilitate change. Isaiah prophesies that "a little child shall lead them" (Isaiah 11:6), and Hosea reveals that "when Israel was a child, then I loved him" (Hosea 11:1). In the same way, the Lord, in all of His glory, leads with meekness, "as a little child." Children, or at least childlike adults, are the object of God's greatest affection and blessing. Paul says it all in his epistle to the Romans: "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ." (Romans 8:16-17.) Heirs of all the eternal worth and infinite value that a loving and omnipotent Father could instill in His own offspring, we are each endowed with every right and every responsibility for self-improvement.

All of this brings us back to our leading questions: what is the difference between self-worth and self-esteem? and how can we derive power from a recognition of this difference? The answers to both queries are in our definition of self-worth:

Because I am a child of a loving God, I have inherent and infinite worth, and that understanding enables me to fulfill my unique potential, to value others' eternal worth, and, by so doing, to live an abundant life.

This definition will serve not only as the focus for this book but, more important, as a guiding principle in all our efforts to improve. When we realize that self-improvement can neither add to nor take away from our individual worth, we realize the untapped power in each of us. We experience a quiet explosion of the divinity within us. And the more we incorporate an understanding of our self-worth into our plans for personal progress, the more meaningful and lasting our efforts to improve will become.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Newsweek, February 17, 1992, p. 48.
[^2] 2. See Webster's New Twentieth-Century Dictionary, unabridged.
[^3] 3. Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter- day Saints, 1985), no. 301.
