Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

SECTION 2

THE ETERNAL NATURE OF SELF-WORTH

We cannot get more worth. While our self-esteem fluctuates, our self-worth remains the same.

CHAPTER 2

THE SAVIOR'S DISCOURSE ON SELF-WORTH

Deep within the individual is a vast reservoir of untapped power waiting to be used. No person can have the use of all this potential until he learns to know his or her own self. The trouble with many people who fail is that they go through life thinking and writing themselves off as ordinary, commonplace persons. Having no proper belief in themselves, they fail to utilize their talents. They live aimless and erratic lives very largely because they never realize what their lives really can be or what they can become.

—Norman Vincent Peale

Self-improvement is central to Christian living. Christ's teachings are, in effect, a program for personal progress— a set of guidelines for right and for righteous living. Not only has Christ shown us the way to invoke change, but His atonement has made it possible for us to do so. While the atonement is a universal gift, we must make an active claim upon the Savior's sacrifice and teachings. As children of a God who loved the world so much that He gave his Only Begotten Son, we have the right—and even the responsibility—to embrace this redeeming love and allow the Lord to work a transformation in our lives. (See John 3:16.)

Transformation is the essence of Christianity: Christ died so that we might live anew, and, ultimately, so that we might achieve perfection, "even as [our] Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) And in no way can we realize this perfection unless we recognize our self- worth, or our capacity to change coupled with our birthright of the Lord's unconditional love.

The Parable of the Prodigal Son

This truth is beautifully illustrated by the archetypal story of the prodigal son, which can be read as one of the Savior's discourses on self-worth. (See Luke 15:11-32.) The prodigal son's initial request for his inheritance merits careful scrutiny. He doesn't just ask for money upon leaving home, but he rather presumptuously demands, "Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me." (V. 12; italics added.) It is an uncontested fact that an inheritance has been allocated to him. There is no question that certain of the goods "falleth to [him]" as one of his father's children— just as each of our divine inheritances of worth are unconditional endowments from God, gifts that have been freely given to all.

The prodigal son seems to recognize his worth, but he does so in a rather prideful way. As the parable illustrates, it is not enough to be aware of our inherent and infinite worth without simultaneously recognizing the Wellspring of that worth, or without humbling ourselves before God. The prodigal son's downfall is foreshadowed by the demanding nature of his request. He was aware of his promised inheritance, but by requiring of his father what was intended to be a gift, he began to mismanage and even lose sight of his generous reward. Remarkably, the prodigal son denies his worth even while he is in full possession of it—partly because he fails to honor the Source of his endowed strength.

The prodigal son then journeys to a far country and "waste[s] his substance with riotous living." (V. 13.) A famine plagues the land, and the boy begins to starve. Forced into humility by the pains of hunger and the sweat of menial labor, the son "would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat." (V. 16.) Then comes a pivotal moment of truth: "And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger!" (V. 17; italics added.) The entire parable turns on the phrase "when he came to himself."

As if for the first time, the son humbly recognizes both his birthright as his father's son and his never-ceasing dependence upon him. His temporal birthright from an earthly father is an emblem of his (and of all humanity's) spiritual birthright from our Heavenly Father. In other words, it is a manifestation of his divinely endowed worth. And once he realizes this worth—once he "comes to himself"—he is able to initiate constructive change. Even though the son has regressive moments during the trek home when he questions his worthiness to be loved again, his father assuages all fear and doubt when he welcomes him back with a robe, ring, shoes, and festivities. And so it is with each of us. Our worth is constant, immeasurable, and unchanging. We need only "come to [ourselves]" so that the Lord's redeeming love can work in us and lead us along the pathway to perfection.

We are all prodigal children at one time or another in our lives. If only momentarily, we all lose sight of who we really are and make decisions that do not reflect our divinely invested worth. And by so doing, we lower our self-esteem.

While our worth remains constant, sometimes it takes a moment of reflection or an evening of celebration to remind ourselves that we are children of a loving God who wants us to live up to the greatness within us. Not only does the prodigal's father kill the fatted calf and organize a party on his son's behalf, but also, in the two related parables ("The Parable of the Lost Coin" and "The Parable of the Lost Sheep") that precede this story, the stewards have cause to make merry when they find their respective belongings, a piece of silver and a sheep. The shepherd "calleth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my sheep which was lost." (V. 6.) Likewise, the woman who loses her coin "calleth her friends and her neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost." (V. 9.) In all three cases, the father, the shepherd, and the woman pause to celebrate their findings, or, we might say, they pause to recognize and celebrate the worth of those findings.

Celebrating Our Worth

There is something to be said for this kind of commemoration. Whether through an organized gala like those in the parables or even with just a minute of quiet contemplation, we would all glean strength from a purposeful reminder of our self-worth. By virtue of our birth, because we all have birthdays, we are all entitled to "worth" days, or at least hours or even moments when we pause to recognize our inherent worth. Whether or not we have celebrated these birthdays in the past does not change the fact that we all have cause to celebrate—just because we were born and because we are alive. We can make our next birthday a "worth" day and, if only for a moment, remind ourselves of the infinite worth that is God's gift to us (a gift that truly keeps on giving).

Perhaps such worthy reflection would have eased the jealousy of the prodigal's elder brother, who returns from the fields only to hear music and dancing and merrymaking on his brother's behalf. When the elder brother learns that the festivities are in honor of his wayward brother, he resents the celebration and refuses to enter the house. The father comes out to persuade him to join the party, but the brother fumes at his father, "Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: but as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf." (Vv. 29-30.)

The brother seems to have lost sight of his worth; he has forgotten the ever-present and unchanging value that his father places upon him. Just as our Heavenly Father never forgets who we really are, the father never loses sight of either son's worth: "Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found." (Vv. 31-32.) Both the prodigal's and the elder son's worth never change; only their faithfulness, the degree to which they align their thoughts and actions with their worth, varies.

While each is equally valued, the elder brother is the more faithful. James E. Talmage explains in Jesus the Christ:

We are not justified in extolling the virtue of repentance on the part of the prodigal above the faithful, plodding service of his brother, who had remained at home, true to the duties required of him. The devoted son was the heir; the father did not disparage his worth, nor deny his deserts . . . . There is no justification for the inference that a repentant sinner is to be given precedence over a righteous soul who had resisted sin; were such the way of God, then Christ, the one sinless Man, would be surpassed in the Father's esteem by regenerate offenders. Unqualifiedly offensive as is sin, the sinner is yet precious in the Father's eyes, because of the possibility of his repentance and return to righteousness. [^1]

So while both the prodigal son and his elder brother were given an equal inheritance or a commensurate endowment of worth, the prodigal son had been less respectful of that inheritance (or worth) than his brother—even while both of their endowments remained constant. And just as the prodigal initially failed to recognize his value in his father's sight, perhaps the elder son would not have been so disgruntled by his brother's return had he been more fully aware of his own worth—as well as of his wayward brother's worth. Perhaps then the elder brother would have felt more secure about his own faithfulness and more willing to accept his brother as a fallible, changing person, in need of his forgiveness, love, and acceptance.

Lifted out of Darkness

Sometimes we require humbling experiences like this one to strip ourselves of superficial hallmarks of worth and really understand our self-worth. The simplest source of true worth, a recognition that we are children of God, can easily be lost to the more complicated demands of a "successful" life.

J. C. Penney, the wealthy entrepreneur and owner of more than sixteen hundred stores spotting almost every state, discovered his worth after losing almost all that he had. The Penney chain had survived the crash of 1929 and weathered the Depression reasonably well. Penney himself, however, had made some unwise personal investments before the crash and, like many other business executives, was blamed for events out of his control.

These worries began to wear on him physically, and, despite his wealth, he grew less sure of both his net worth and his self-worth. He became so troubled and nervous that he would go for days without sleeping. Eventually he contracted an extreme case of shingles (an excruciatingly painful skin rash) and was hospitalized. Medical treatment did not relieve him, however, and Penney's condition rapidly worsened. He relates: "I was broken nervously and physically, filled with despair, unable to see even a ray of hope. I had nothing to live for." Convinced that he would not see another sunrise, he wrote a farewell letter to his family and signed his name for what he thought would be the last time.

Despite his own doubts, Penney woke up the next morning to a new day—and a new orientation toward life. Surprised that he was even alive, he questioned his own hearing when the melodic strains of a hymn found their way into his hospital room. Intrigued by the fresh and somehow familiar song, he struggled out of bed and followed the music into the resident chapel. A group of patients was singing the hymn "God Will Take Care of You," and Penney felt that God was speaking directly to his heart. He also listened to the reading of a scripture and bowed his head with the congregation in prayer. Then something happened in his soul. He later recalled: "I can only call it a miracle. I felt as if I had been instantly lifted out of the darkness of a dungeon into warm, brilliant sunshine. I felt as if I had been transported from hell to paradise. I felt the power of God as I had never felt it before." [^2]

The Power of Transformation

Penney called it the most dramatic and glorious twenty minutes of his life. The realization that God loved him transformed him into a new person. Believing the words of the hymn, he was empowered with a sense of worth and was able to rediscover purpose in his life. God would take care of him. And because he recognized that truth, he experienced a rebirth. He "came to himself" and realized that he possessed inherent value and was an heir to Godly love. Like the prodigal son, he was dead and became alive; he was lost and then lovingly found.

For J. C. Penney, for the prodigal son, and for each of us, a recognition of self-worth is the key to personal transformation, to significant and lasting change. Just as the popular toys called "transformers" can be altered by turning one hinge after another, we can control our lives by turning to God for help in adjusting the "movable parts" of our souls. My nephews carefully instructed me on the mechanisms of these innovative toys some years ago. They explained how one transformer could be changed from a pick- up truck into a "good guy" by turning certain pieces and adjusting other parts, and another could be transformed from a cassette player into a "bad guy" through a similar evolutionary process.

The toys were rather illustrative of the Christian promise for change: each of us has the ability to transform our lives by making one small improvement after another in our character, personality, or even physical body. But just as we can make changes for the better, it is also possible to make wrong or unnecessary changes. Change for its own sake may not be desirable, but change that is guided by the knowledge of our God-given worth is the essence of Christian living.

Transformation does not take place in an instant. No matter how singular and life-changing an experience might be, transformation is a perpetual process of change, a series of consistent self-improvements. The Apostle Paul experienced one of the most dramatic transformations in the Bible, and yet it was in his day-to-day living that he worked a mighty and lasting change—by regularly adhering to one self-improvement after another. As Saul of Tarsus, he had been a vehement adversary to the Christian cause, "breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord" and even consenting to Stephen's death. (Acts 9:1.) But when Paul had a vision and heard the voice of the Lord, when he "came to himself," he saw himself through God's eyes and realized the unique mission he had to accomplish.

Once he realized that he was a "chosen vessel" who would suffer great things for the cause of righteousness, he used that divine connection to change his ways and to mold his missionary character. He took up the cause of Christianity with even more zeal than he had shown in opposing it because he now realized that he—and all of his fellow creatures—were the "offspring of God." (Acts 17:29.) Paul healed the lame, cast out devils, withstood stonings, converted congregations, and ultimately gave his life for the faith because he knew that God had spoken to him—and he sustained that knowledge through daily efforts to align his life with the mission revealed to him.

Transforming Events

While most of us will not have the kind of visitation that Paul had, all of us will—if we recognize them—undergo what can be called "transforming experiences." We need only keep our heart and mind open during these important and impressionable times. Whether they be a period of trial or an occasion for joy, transforming events are usually cloaked in the pedestrian apparel of the everyday. I will always remember a transformational experience I had in a quiet moment after my father's death.

Feelings of loneliness, bewilderment, and even despair were clouding my thoughts as I rummaged through some of my father's belongings with my now widowed mother. He had died a sudden, accidental death, and we were left no time to prepare for the most shocking news of our lives. In a numbed state of survivalistic acceptance, my mother turned to me with a sweater in her hands and a sliver of a smile on her face. She handed me the wool cardigan that I had given my father several years before—the sweater that he wore almost every day. As I opened its buttons and unfolded the creases in the sleeves, it seemed to exhale my father's memories. At first I was afraid to put it on. But when I finally slipped one arm in, the other arm seemed to fall naturally into place, and before long I felt empowered by its warmth. The sweater was a perfect fit from the first time I put it on.

I stood up and looked in the mirror, and I had what I would consider a transforming experience. In my mind's eye, I saw my father's countenance upon me. I saw my father in me, not just in the physical trappings of his old sweater but, more significantly, in the valuable inheritance he had left me: the love, values, example, and good name that were my birthright. Tears welled in my eyes, and empty longings were accompanied by a grateful heart. My father would never be lost to me. He had instilled in me a life of exemplary love and service, and, because of that, he would always be a part of me—or perhaps more accurately, I would always be a part of him. As his son, I could ever draw from his reservoir of strength and wear his mantle of worth upon my shoulders.

I still wear that sweater, and every time I look at it I am reminded of the priceless inheritance of love and Christian example and teachings my father gave me. In the same way that a recognition of the intangible inheritance I received from my earthly father eased my pain, a realization of the Lord's promise to each of us can give us the necessary fortitude to meet all worthy goals. The Savior has given a universal promise: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls." (Matthew 11:29.) Because we are all children of God, we not only can take His yoke upon us, but, as His offspring, it is our birthright to do so. Each of us has a God-given "sweater," an inheritance of worth that is perfectly fitted to our person. And just as I was blessed with a peaceful assurance that I could meet the challenges before me when I put on my father's sweater, each of us is promised "rest unto [our] souls" when we take His yoke upon us: when we learn of Him and adopt His countenance.

Most frequently, we feel this transforming peace in unannounced, day-to-day interactions. A passing compliment, a breathtaking view, or a small act of service will remind us of the heavenly love and inherent worth to which we all have claim. After an exhausting day at work, a short message on my answering machine from my three-year-old nephew brought a smile to my face and filled my soul with untapped energy. "I love you, Noid; I miss you," is all that he said. But somehow he said more to me. His simple love spoke of the profound love that my Heavenly Father has for me—and for each of us.

Isn't it great to be alive? Something as simple as hearing a child's voice, watching a flock of birds play outside the window, listening to the leaves crunch underfoot on a cool autumn day, or feeling the sun's warm rays on our shoulders tells of the preciousness of life and the endowment of worth that God has given us. He cares about us so much that He has bestowed such priceless gifts as beautiful landscapes, cherished relationships, and divinely inspired scriptures to lead us back to Him.

Staying open to these daily manifestations of God's love will ready our hearts and minds for the kind of transformation that Christ envisioned when He challenged us, "Be ye . . . perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) This imperative statement is perhaps one of the greatest evidences of our inherent worth. So much is invested in and expected of us as God's children that we can eventually become like Him. Ultimately, whether in this life or in the next, we have what it takes to become perfect. C. S. Lewis bears a powerful testimony to this end in Mere Christianity:

The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas. Nor is it a command to do the impossible. He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that command. He said [in the Bible] that we were "gods" and He is going to make good His words. If we let Him—for we can prevent Him, if we choose—He will make the feeblest and filthiest of us into a god or goddess, a dazzling, radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine, a bright stainless mirror which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale) His own boundless power and delight and goodness. The process will be long and in parts very painful; but that is what we are in for. Nothing less. He meant what he said. [^3]

And because He meant it when He said we should work toward perfection, we can get a sense of the power that is within us to transform our lives. We can, in effect, "come to ourselves," or catch sight of the real deep-down, inside- the-skin you and me who are ever visible to our Heavenly Father. Through the grace of God, we can abandon old ways and ever see things anew.

The Potter's Wheel

In the same way that Jeremiah urged ancient Israel to become "as the clay is in the potter's hand," to become malleable to change, each of us can best improve ourselves by looking to God to mold our lives. (Jeremiah 18:6.) We are the clay. He is the Master Potter who lovingly shapes us and smooths out the rough places in our character. We need only be humble enough to change and to see His handiwork in the small acts of wonder that are daily before us.

By so doing, we will steadily evolve into the sculpted masterpiece that we are meant to be. I was struck by some poignant words to this effect from an older woman in a seminar I was conducting. During the middle of the presentation, she raised her hand and with a feeble but resonant voice said, "I'm a masterpiece in progress—I'm not done yet!" Could there be a truer statement?

We are all masterpieces in progress, clay in God's hands, worthy of the molding, sculpting, and scraping that life affords us. We all have the seeds of godhood in us, and in no better way do we let these seeds germinate and grow than when we "come to ourselves" by realizing our self- worth and allowing for a process of godly transformation. President David O. McKay wrote: "Sculptors of life are we, with our uncarved souls before us. Every one of us is carving a soul. Is it going to be a deformed one or is it going to be a thing of beauty?" [^4]

The earth and all of its creatures bespeak such change. As Jesus said of the mustard seed, "[It] is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof." (Matthew 13:32.) Like the mustard seed, we are all growing, and we can work a mighty change and transform our lives. When we sincerely desire to realize our God-given capabilities—when we deeply realize our self-worth—we will humble ourselves, trust the Lord, and live up to the worthy aspirations that are ours to enjoy. We all stand with feet of clay. Each of us is subject to the throws of the Potter's wheel. And if we will hold fast to the inheritance of worth that is our birthright, we will become the masterwork that God intends us to be.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] A Positive Mental Attitude: the starting point of all riches. If I had a completely free year, how would I spend it? Would I work, play, spend time with family, write a book, read, travel, go back to school, sleep? Dennis Waitley, The Double Win (Old Tappan, N.J.: Fleming H. Revell Co., 1985), p. 119.
[^2] Sound Physical Health: results from positive thinking and balanced living. For whom or on what do I spend most of my money? Dan Coats, "America's Youth: Crisis of Character," Imprimis, September 1991, pp. 1-3.
[^3] Harmony in Human Relationships. Why am I in my present occupation? "The Retro Campaign," U.S. News and World Report, December 9, 1991, p. 32.
[^4] Freedom from Fear: no one who fears anything is a free human being. What would I most resist giving up?
