Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 3

VALUES AND THE DIVINE CONNECTION

It is essential that the student acquire an understanding of and a lively feeling for values. [You] must acquire a vivid sense of the beautiful and of the morally good. Otherwise [you]—with [your] specialized knowledge— more closely resemble a well-trained dog than a harmoniously developed person.

—Albert Einstein

Each of us perceives the world, other people, and ourselves in a unique way. We may all look at the same person, thing, or situation, and see it very differently from each other because our experiences and backgrounds have created a personalized set of values for us. We all look at the world through a unique, even "customized," lens that is distinctly fashioned from our individual values. And because we each see the world through our own estimations of worth and worthiness, real self-perception involves not only a look at ourselves but also at the lens through which we see—at our set of values. What dimensions are the focal point of our viewfinder? From what vantage point do we usually take our pictures? What is our method of "capturing" the world?

Such clarification of our values is essential in making meaningful change. Without stopping to examine the lens through which we view the world, we have no way of determining if our self-perceptions include all that they could and should—and if they exclude misconceptions that may weaken our resolve and damage our self-esteem. Sometimes we focus on outward appearance instead of inward substance and never get the "real" picture. We may be vogue on the outside and vague on the inside. Does our view of ourselves and of the world include an eternal perspective of God-given worth?

Transformation, the process of making significant change, is best guided by an awareness of who we really are—not just of who we perceive ourselves to be. If we can somehow remove ourselves from the distractions of life's photo session and concentrate on our true nature, we can make the necessary changes to align our life's lens with the Lord's all-seeing eye. Instead of seeing through our own restricted and imperfect viewfinder, we can open our understanding to the panoramic and eternal focus of a divine viewfinder. Such a realization will not only transform the way we see ourselves, our relationships, and the world, but it will even transform our very souls.

A Correct Map

Another useful way to explain this is to compare values with maps. If we lived our lives without realizing that we are children of a loving God, our search for meaning would be like traveling life's journey with an imperfect map. We would not know where we come from, where we presently stand, or where we are going. Why? Because we would not be able to see past the imperfections of our map and into the real, customized territory the Lord has prepared for each of us. We must remember that the man-made map (our self- esteem) is not the God-given territory (our self-worth). When we see ourselves as God sees us (as one of His children with infinite worth), not only do we alter our map so that our values reflect our worth, but we also catch sight of the wonders of the territory and realize the untapped wealth of resources that have been invested in us all along the way.

As one who has spent a good deal of time on the road, I can attest to the value of a good map. Without such a guide, traveling can be difficult. I remember driving on a lonely road in the dark of Alaska's heartland, uncertain about where I was but knowing I needed to find a remote lodge where I would be speaking the next morning. I was in a hurry. I thought I had no time to plan and prepare— no time to look at a map, let alone purchase one.

As a result, I had only a vague sense of where I should be going. After circling and searching well into the night, I determined never again to embark on such a journey without a better mapping of the course. No matter how positive my attitude and how strong my resolve to find my destination, my efforts were futile. (I reached my destination only after stopping to ask for directions.)

On another occasion, in Australia, I followed the markings of a good map but failed to make the necessary mental adjustments for driving on the left side of the road. This time, even though I had a map, because I was not following it correctly I had a few unnecessary detours—and even some close calls.

These instances of anxious searching are akin to the uncertainty we experience when we fail to clarify our values—when we fail to make a correct map and follow it, when we fail to realize our unchanging worth. Sometimes we are in such a hurry, we are so busy going, that we do not clarify where we are headed or how we are going to get there. We are busy being busy. We push the gas pedal clear to the floor, but our hands are not on the steering wheel.

Values give direction to our life's journey. They help us control our destiny by putting our hands on the steering wheel of life and our feet on the pedals of personal progress. Denis Waitley describes such a scenario: "If you don't know where you're going, you'll end up somewhere else, but it doesn't matter, because you don't recognize where you've been or where you are anyway." [^1]

The Search for Values

In a society where uncertainty and confusion are not only accepted but even encouraged, values are frequently equated with societal norms, and moral instruction is—in many cases—left to the media. Everything from television programs to magazine ads to cereal boxes seems to push a set of values at us. Soap operas and sitcoms provide us with as many different pictures of life and "real" living as we are willing to buy into. We need only press a button to tune into the mode of living that would validate any life-style— however moral or immoral it may be. If we are looking for laziness, dishonesty, extravagance, sarcasm, or sexual immorality, we can find it at the push of a button.

Similarly, advertisers spare no expense to create "success" images in attractive detail: on one channel happiness is personified as a trim body that glides across a crowded room of envious onlookers; on another, a full head of perfectly colored hair is the well-spring of joy; on yet another channel, happiness is a cold glass of beer and a shiny new car. One ad says that "everyone is doing it," even while the "it" that everyone is doing may well be a description of fleeting happiness and ill-defined morality, an "it" that is changing from day to day. Few ads question whether or not the popular way is the right way. Most often, they suggest that what we have is more important than who we are, and, as a result, clearly defined moral values are muddied by the deceptive (but appealing) pollutants of status, wealth, and possessions. Remember the popular comedian's famous line from a few years ago? "It's better to look good—than to be good."

Certainly, not everything on television or in a magazine is abhorrent and deceptive. The media provide much valuable entertainment and learning. But as Dan Coats, a U.S. senator from Indiana, says in his discourse "America's Youth: Crisis of Character," the media has (for too many children and adults) replaced moral instruction. And values have been relegated to an informal and mostly unsupervised education. The senator explains: "We live in a century in which 'facts' are glorified while 'values' are assigned an inferior status as mere matters of opinion. We have seen the development of a militant relativism that dictates that it is impossible to prefer one value above another, since all conceptions of the good are equally subjective . . . . A public school survey in Maryland showed that parents spent an average of 15 minutes a week in 'meaningful dialogue' with their children—children who are left to glean whatever values they can from peers and TV." [^2]

For many youth—and even for many adults—the search for values has become a meaningless game of hide-and-seek. True and moral ways of doing things are confused by classifications of mere opinion. And immoral behavior is likewise subjected to relativism or "political correctness."

An article in U.S. News and World Report, "The Retro Campaign," showed similar findings: "About 8 in 10 Americans say they acquired their core values from the family, according to a new survey sponsored by Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Co. But two thirds say, unhappily, that today's children are getting their values from television, movies, musicians, or music videos." [^3] More than ever before, with all the freedoms and opportunities before us, decision-making is complicated by ill-defined and even undefined guideposts of morality.

The self-worth we have inherited as children of God is the territory against which we can chart our progress, a lens through which we can clarify our values, and a steering wheel with which we can confidently guide our course. Because we are the offspring of deity, our lives have meaning and purpose. We need only remember who we are and then make our decisions based upon this refining and redeeming awareness.

I remember a line to this effect from Wallace Stevens' poem "The Emperor of Ice-Cream": "Let be be finale of seem." I first read this poem quite a few years ago, and its message made an indelible mark in my mind: Don't just seem, but be! No matter what we may seem to be, we are (and always will be) children of God. While at times the reason for our being may elude us, our unique mission is ever-present to the Lord. Let be be finale of seem when it comes to the making of values.

Do You Want to Be a Success?

Many years ago while in college, I had to stop and take conscious inventory of my values. I had to step back from my mental "map-making" and make sure I was plotting the course in life I really wanted to take. While an awareness of my divine parentage was probably not as prevalent in my mind as the awareness that I had earthly parents who loved me and had shown me how to live happily, the same process of recognizing my worth and defining my priorities was put into play.

Working full-time and going to school full-time, I knew the value of a dollar. And so when I was offered a lucrative job selling a gas additive, a "miracle cure" that was supposed to dramatically increase a car's gas mileage (as well as my bank account), the prospect was appealing.

I heard the sales pitches and listened to the persuasive arguments, impressed that all of the founders seemed to be making huge sums of money—they all drove fancy cars and wore designer clothes and Rolex watches. At first, the questionable history of the company was all part of the intrigue. Some obscure researchers in the Midwest had formulated the breakthrough, and of course the "Big Three" automakers would be doing all in their power to suppress the discovery. I was led to believe that I was in on one of the greatest secrets in automotive history. But somehow it seemed too good to be true.

My interest began to deteriorate into mild irritation when one of the more persistent sales representatives visited me at work. He was trying to pressure me into a commitment. "Don't you want to be a success? Don't you want to have money? Don't you want to have a nice car like mine, dress like me, have an expensive watch like mine?" he challenged. Certainly these prospects were inviting for a poor student. But something about his standard for success seemed wrong, misguided. He continued to persuade with every imaginable attraction, and he became more animated as the list went on. He grew adamant, almost apoplectic, as he hovered over me with his red face and sweating brow.

Finally, I had endured enough. I conceded that I wanted to be a success, and I told him that I planned to be successful. But I was not going to let him define success for me. I told him about my father, who had little of what the world classifies as success: money, fame, power, and status. My father worked in a steel mill for thirty-seven years to provide for his wife and seven children. But he had an abundance of the things that really matter: loving relationships, earned respect, great spirituality, and a burning desire to learn and grow and serve. "Your fast-paced company," I told him, "may not survive the turn of the new year." (And it did not. Six months later it had completely folded.) But the kind of wealth my father possessed would bless countless generations.

The sales representative finally turned his head and walked toward the door, and I stood still for a minute, quietly pondering what had been a moment of truth for me. I had been backed up against the wall of decision, forced to clarify my values and act accordingly, and the greatest influence on my decision had been the example my father had given me. Because my parents had shown me the value of love and service and self-respect, I could make a choice that was in line with my inherent worth—and my own definition of success.

My father's strength was a type of the Universal Power to which we all have claim. The intangible inheritance my earthly parents gave me teaches me of the universal and eternal inheritance to which we all are heirs. A recognition that we have worth independent of all worldly measurements of value is the force behind all meaningful self-understanding and transformation. The Lord says it all when He asks: "What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" (Matthew 16:26.) The irreplacable wealth of divinely inspired, value-centered living puts all other life-styles (no matter how profitable they may be) into their proper, and sometimes meaningless, perspective. Real heart-and-soul satisfaction comes from aligning our lives with the people and things that matter most.

Who We Really Are

Acquiring an understanding of what matters most and of who we really are will help us to define our priorities, meet our aspirations, and uncover our unique purposes. When we realize that we are children of God, we know of the infinite and inherent capabilities we possess. This truth was poignantly expressed in the background music to a program that I was recording for teenagers. I was so struck by the message of the song that I wrote down the lyrics as I heard them:

I've got to find out who I am, and when I do, I know I'll be all I can. When I find out who I am, I'll be all I can.

When we figure out who we are, what we're about, and what matters most to us, we can begin to become all that God intended us to be. No matter how well we think we know ourselves and our abilities, if we fail to deeply recognize that we are God's children, we will never fully realize our divine endowments. As Elder Neal Maxwell has said, "If we understand the basic purpose of life, we will find it easier to see purpose in our own life." [^4]

Christ sets the perfect example of one who possessed this abiding sense of purpose. When Mary found the twelve- year-old Jesus after thinking He was lost somewhere in the streets of Jerusalem, He innocently responded to her questions: "How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" (Luke 2:49.) Jesus was so sure about His divine inheritance and His unique mission that He was puzzled that His mother would even wonder about His whereabouts. In His mind, He should not have been anywhere else but in the temple, His Father's house.

Jesus was so fully aware that God was His Father and that He had a mission to perform that, even as a child, He would naturally go to His Father's house. And throughout His life, when mobs combined, calumnies raged, and adversaries challenged, he replied, "Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go." (John 8:14; italics added.) Time and again, Jesus grounded His message and His life in the knowledge that He was sent from God with a saving mission.

And while Jesus is the Only Begotten Son of God, because each of us is God's child and because each of us has a unique mission to perform, we can find direction and purpose from this knowledge. When we base our values on this simple truth, not only does our life have more meaning, but the self-improvements we make will ultimately lead to the development of our God-given potential. We might well say that the process of life is realizing this potential: becoming who we really are and understanding what we are really about. Sometimes we are so busy making a living that we fail to design a life. And, as Goethe phrased it: "Things which matter most must never be at the mercy of things which matter least." But what are the things that matter most and least?

The Things That Matter Most

All too often a dramatic, soul-wrenching experience forces us to redefine our values. Unfortunately, sometimes that is all that will shake us up enough to realize that there is more to life than just living—or, for that matter, just making a living. Well-known CBS news reporter and Middle East correspondent Bob Simon provides an illuminating example of this phenomenon. As a former TV news anchor for a CBS affiliate myself, I have long admired Bob Simon and watched him as he has covered many major news stories. When war broke out with Iraq, it was not surprising to see Bob Simon at the front lines, sending all of the latest news home to anxious Americans. But then, unexpectedly, Bob Simon and his crew were taken prisoner, and for several weeks the rest of the world had no knowledge of whether they were alive or dead.

When the war ended, the good news of their survival was confirmed, and the war-weary prisoners were released. But Bob Simon and company had been affected by their unfavorable circumstances. They had been jolted out of a comfort zone of busy preoccupation. In an interview on "60 Minutes" shortly after his return, Mr. Simon described the soul-searching he had done, the value clarification in which he had engaged during this troublesome time. Instead of concerning himself with the big story, the journalistic possibilities, the history-making events, he had reflected on what mattered most to him during those days of subjugation. Freedom and liberty had become so precious. He had longed to have another walk along the beach with his daughter, another quiet conversation with his wife, another peaceful moment of contemplation. These were some of the things that really mattered to him. And the sense was that never again did he want to put them at the mercy of less valuable things.

Whether or not we undergo such a dramatic experience, all of us have cause to pause and decide what is most important to us—not what matters most to our friends, neighbors, or even family, but what means the most to us. And in no better way can we do this than by turning to God for direction and understanding.

I remember one such time upon graduating from college when I sought for guidance—and found it in the quiet recesses of my heart and mind. Ever since high school, I had been active in debate, public speaking, and student government. I had the "perfect portfolio" for entry into law school, and when I graduated with a bachelor's degree, it was only expected that I would go on to become a lawyer. I had taken the LSAT, filled out the applications, and readied myself for what seemed to be the next logical step in my life. By all exterior indicators, I was tailor-made for the profession.

But while I was waiting to hear from the law schools, something that had been gnawing inside of me for some time surfaced: I did not want to be a lawyer. My professors, my colleagues, and even some of my closest associates thought law was for me, but somehow I knew it wasn't. While law is a worthy profession, I had other interests and talents that I felt could be more fully cultivated by pursuing a graduate degree in communications. And after much prayer and introspection, I came to the peaceful assurance that this was the right decision for me.

Somehow my knowledge that there was a God in heaven to whom I could turn with weighty matters eased the decision-making process. And I felt at peace. I was better able to direct my life because I could rely on God's omniscience and know that He would guide me, as His son, to choose the more fulfilling path for me. Since that pivotal time in my life, I have looked back with many grateful sighs that I took an alternate route that was, for me, more closely aligned to what mattered most.

All of us redefine our values many times throughout our lives. But exactly how do we come to decide what matters most to us? How do we recognize what our values are? Perhaps one of the most effective ways to clarify our own fundamental beliefs and desires is to familiarize ourselves with other people's value systems. Whether it be through casual conversation, formal study, or directed listening, we can observe and evaluate others' beliefs so as to better formulate our own. For example, Napoleon Hill, author of the best-selling Think and Grow Rich, makes a thought- provoking list of "The Twelve Riches of Life," the values without which he believes one cannot be happy. He summarizes:

While this list seems rather authoritative and all-inclusive, it is meant to be carefully considered—and challenged. This and all other value systems are relative determinations of worth, meant to inspire inquisitive minds and lead to the discovery of the unchanging principles and God-given truths behind such lists.

An Examined Life

There is a right and a wrong; there is a difference between truth and error. And the scriptures outline these differences for us. The Savior encouraged us to search for truth with the promise that "the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.) He said of Himself and of His mission: "I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me." (John 14:6.)

The one and only way to our Heavenly Father is through His Son Jesus Christ. When we genuinely strive to live a Christian life, our values will conform to the truths that Christ taught—foremost of which is the understanding that He is our Savior, that He is God's Son, and that we are God's children. Since we all see things from a different perspective with our own customized lens of learning, no set of personal values may be exactly like another's. But when we are guided by the awareness that we have infinite and unchanging worth as children of God, that we are all the benefactors of Christ's redeeming sacrifice, our values will reflect saving principles and lead us to a personalized harvest of truth.

The first step toward such enlightenment is to characterize our present system of values. And building such an awareness is, in large measure, the object of this book. Most quick-and-easy lists or tests will not give us an entirely accurate evaluation of our values, but they may give us a sense of how we perceive the world. We need to take some pensive and prayerful time to come to such an understanding.

These seven questions may help us begin the value- clarifying process:

Also consider some typical values categories: personal, family, social, career, financial, community, and spiritual. List the categories in order of importance. Then write down what is most important to you in each area.

The answers to these questions and the hierarchy of such classifications are often difficult to determine. But as Plato said, "The life which is unexamined is not worth living." An honest investigation of our responses will lead to a better awareness of our values, and with this awareness we can make more meaningful decisions. Our whims will evolve into resolutions, and our goals will be guided by a value-centered vision. If not, we may spend all of our time and energy climbing to the top of a mountain and then realize that we have climbed the "wrong" mountain—a mountain for which we have no real affection or to which we attach little meaning. But when we clearly define our values before we begin the trek, our sincere efforts not only take us to the top of the mountain but also lead us up the "right" mountain, to our personalized pinnacle of success.

Only after we have paused to evaluate the lens through which we see ourselves and the world will we be able to discern which "mountain" really is best for us. Only then will we be able to determine if our lens is in need of repair, cleaning, or clarification. Only then will we be able to look to God for His panoramic vision. When our lens is free from the distracting influences of this world, when the light of Christ shines freely through it, we will uncover our inherent worth and draw upon the power of our divine heritage.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Think and Grow Rich Newsletter, January 1991, p. 1.
[^2] Robert Fulghum, All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten (New York: Ballantine Books, 1989), p. 116.
[^3] U.S. News & World Report, February 4, 1991, pp. 52-53.
[^4] Freedom from Fear: no one who fears anything is a free human being. What would I most resist giving up?
