Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 4

OUR DIVINE PARENTAGE

I believe that I am a child of God, endowed with a divine birthright. I believe that there is something of divinity within me and within each of you. I believe that we have a Godly inheritance and that it is our responsibility, our obligation, and our opportunity to cultivate and nurture the very best of these qualities within us.

—Gordon B. Hinckley

Popular self-improvement theory suggests that if you just "believe in yourself," you can do anything. We are told that everything is possible if we really put our minds to it. Motivational speakers and writers promise us (ad infinitum) that we need only believe, and then we will see whatever it is we desire to accomplish. Much of the self-improvement psychology is summarized in the well-known saying, "Whatever the mind can conceive and believe, the mind can achieve." Such "believe-it-and-you'll-see-it" philosophy certainly has its place and presents us with valid maxims. Without question, positive thinking is a very real and powerful force.

But hundreds of years ago the Lord added upon such positivism when He schooled His disciples in the doctrine of salvation: "With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible." (Matthew 19:26.) Perhaps the allure of realizing that "all things are possible" has clouded our remembrance of the rest of the formula: "with God, all things are possible." In other words, while believing in ourselves is a worthy—and even necessary—mindset, by itself it is never enough.

No matter how thorough and visionary our goals and purposes may be, if they do not make a divine connection to success, all of our achievements may never fully represent our capabilities. Our external accomplishments may not reflect our internal, even eternal, possibilities. If we are really to believe in ourselves, we must first really believe in God.

The Power of Faith

So how do we begin to have such faith? Paul taught in his epistle to the Romans that faith can be kindled by hearing the testimonies of those who do believe: "So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God." (Romans 10:17.)

The faith-promoting story of Alice Alder, a Jew who survived the Holocaust, is sure to awaken such a God-fearing trust. Much like the more celebrated story of Victor Frankl (the Jewish prisoner who "thought" himself through the grueling captivity of a Nazi death camp and then told his stirring tale in his book Man's Search for Meaning), Alice Alder looked to God for physical, mental, and spiritual salvation. A thirty-one-year-old clothes designer and boutique owner in Hungary, Alice was enjoying a comfortable life-style when the Nazis invaded her homeland in 1944. Thrust from her thriving business and pleasant surroundings, she—along with many other Hungarian Jews—was forced into slave labor and moved from one concentration camp to another. Finally, she was put on a train bound for the gas chamber and the crematorium. An unquenchable belief that God had a purpose for her, however, gave Alice the necessary courage to leap from the train during a moment of welcome confusion—and save her life.

Injured, starving, and almost naked, Alice fought to survive in a strange land under uncertain circumstances. Eventually, a French partisan found her in this destitute condition and gave her the needed food and clothing to make a new start. Now in her seventies and living in America, Alice Alder looks back on that dark time through the illuminating lens of gratitude. She recognized then and glories now in the saving faith that carried her through: "I have always believed the hand of God was leading me . . . . I believe that somehow, somewhere, optimism and freedom will triumph." [^1] Alice made a divine connection that enabled her to see beyond the confines of her captivity and into the freedoms of a God-centered life. She believed in her ability to accomplish the "impossible," because she knew that God had purpose for her and would help her to live up to her greatest possibilities. Alice was empowered by the recognition of her inherent, God-given worth.

In another country and a different century, the life of Abraham Lincoln also demonstrates the power that comes from faith. Born in a log cabin in the backwoods, Lincoln knew that God would help him to accomplish any worthy goal; he stopped at nothing to live up to his aspirations and help a struggling nation. His business failed in 1831; he was defeated when he ran for the legislature in 1832; his business failed again in 1834; his fiancÃ©e died in 1835; he was defeated in the election of 1838; he was defeated for Congress in 1843, in 1846, and again in 1848; he was defeated in the senate races of 1855 and 1858; and he was even defeated for the vice-presidency in 1856; yet he still ran for president and was elected in 1860!

But even that win was a marginal victory. The vote was split among four candidates: Bell, Breckinridge, Lincoln, and Lincoln's longtime opponent Stephen Douglas. Lincoln won the election with less than a majority of the popular vote and faced the prospect of leading a nation that was politically discontented and on the verge of civil war. Still not defeated in spirit after many discouraging and even debilitating blows, Lincoln left his home in Springfield, Illinois, on a cold and rainy day and stood tall as he gave a speech before going to the nation's capital. The President spoke above the sound of the pouring rain, a symbolic reminder of the bleak situation he faced:

No one, not in my situation, can appreciate my feeling of sadness at this parting . . . . I now leave, not knowing when or whether ever I may return, with a task before me greater than that which rested upon [George] Washington. Without the assistance of that Divine Being who ever attended him, I cannot succeed. With that assistance I cannot fail. Trusting in Him who can go with me, and remain with you, and be everywhere for good, let us confidently hope that all will yet be well. To His care commending you, as I hope in your prayers you will commend me, I bid you an affectionate farewell.

Lincoln's belief in God was so linked to his own sense of mission and worth that he proceeded on the basis of this faith. Not knowing what, how, or even when to do the things that needed to be done, he believed in his ability to accomplish the tasks before him because he knew that with "that assistance" he could not fail. Imagine the kind of faith and the sense of worth he must have had in order to go forward after so many defeats. Despite his gangly appearance and widespread unpopularity, he knew that God would give him the strength to succeed. This self-worth carried him through turbulent times and, to the surprise of many of his contemporaries, secured a place for him among America's greatest heroes.

What Does It Mean to Have Heavenly Parents?

Just as Lincoln maintained a sense of his unique mission by making a divine connection, we can discover our individual mission and fulfill it by letting Heavenly Father direct our lives. Faith in God and in His purposes is crucial to our discovery of self-worth. The truth that God is our Heavenly Parent and that He sees us as having unique reasons for being affirms (in the most meaningful way) that we have inherent value as individuals. In no greater way can we realize our self-worth and draw upon the power of this realization than by coming to know that God really is our Father.

As incomprehensible and wonderful as the creations of earth and space are, there is no creation as precious, even as sacred, as that of man and woman. "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth . . . . And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very good." (Genesis 1:1, 31.) But "God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them." (Genesis 1:27.) All of God's creations are pleasing to Him, but only we were created in His image. Could there be a more exalting and refining truth than that all of us are literally His children? Our lives can take on new meaning and purpose as we realize the certainty of our divine connection, of our likeness to Him.

Instead of wondering about the existence of God, look to the world around you and discover how it speaks of His glory. Instead of being fearful and frustrated—instead of doubting your own worth—remember that you are God's greatest creation. He knows and loves you. Just as the earth bespeaks God's majesty, the human mind, body, and spirit reflect His infinite love and—His Fatherly stewardship.

Sometimes it is easier to comprehend the eternal stewardship of our Heavenly Father—or our divine connection—by reflecting on the role of earthly stewards. Whether as a secretary, a supervisor, an inventor, an owner, or even a parent "creator" ourselves, we have all been stewards over someone or something. Even a little girl, dressed up as a clown at a family Halloween party, watched over her bag of hard-won candy with the all-seeing eye of real stewardship. She first spent several pensive moments lining up each delicacy and admiring its attractive packaging and unforgettable flavor. Later, when adults and other excited children approached her bag or even took a piece of her candy, she almost instinctively returned to check the contents. And every time, she knew exactly which piece was missing. Sometimes she would share with the new "owner" (relinquishing ownership), and other times she would demand the candy's return. I was amazed by her careful stewardship. She really seemed to know the status of all forty-seven pieces of candy.

And somehow in the midst of this light-hearted observation, I caught a glimpse of how our Heavenly Father is able to watch over and meet the needs of his billions of children. In a small but meaningful way, the Savior's parable of the lost sheep seemed to be acted out before my eyes: "What man of you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing." (Luke 15:4-5.) This little three-year-old "shepherdess" knew when there was a lost "sheep" and faithfully went to find it.

We see this same principle of stewardship at work whenever real caring, concern, compassion, or love accompanies responsibility. I am acquainted with a former rancher who says that he always knew when one of his cows was missing from the pasture. He says that he could sense when there were disputings in the herd, when illness rendered his cows uncomfortable, and even when a cow seemed depressed in spirit. Because this responsible rancher was so interested in the welfare of each member of his herd, he detected their individual needs and almost instinctively diagnosed any problems.

In like fashion, good gardeners take interest in the lives of their plants and flowers. When leaves are yellowing and insects are invading, when the plants are crying out for nourishment and strength, these caretakers come to the rescue with sprays, fertilizers, sunlight, and water. They know when a seed needs to be planted, when branches need to be pruned, when a transplant is necessary, and when the harvest is near.

Because they glory in the fruits of their labors, some gardeners even know their plants by name and care for each seedling in specialized ways. And when flowers are in full bloom and plants are yielding a bounteous harvest, they stop to enjoy the beauties before them.

While the stewardship of ranchers and gardeners reveals much about conscientious caretaking, the guardianship of good parents demonstrates our Heavenly Father's stewardship as no other relationship can. I have marveled at my parents' ability to watch over seven children. They always seemed to know when one is hurting, experiencing quiet sorrow, struggling to understand, or even purporting silence when he or she really needs to talk.

The Creator and His Stewards

Once many years ago, even a stiff upper lip could not disguise my feelings of failure and disappointment from my sensitive parents. I had spent several months intensely preparing and carefully planning for an event of major importance and far-reaching implication. A lot of emotional, mental, and even physical energy had gone into the accomplishment of this goal. And when my expectations were upset, when my efforts had been thwarted, I was deeply discouraged and even disheartened. But on the exterior, I acted as if nothing were wrong. I told my parents about the disappointment, but I made sure to let them know that "it didn't really matter." I offered them all of the proverbial explanations: "It was a good experience," "I sure learned a lot," and "There must have been a reason that it turned out this way." While these explanations were true, they were far from my real feelings at the time.

Somehow, my mother knew that I was more than mildly disappointed. She seemed to read my heart and mind and be aware of what I needed without my ever telling her. I came home from school the next day, and sitting on my bed was a small wooden plaque that read:

Life's battles don't always go to the strongest or fastest; sooner or later, those who win are those who think they can.

I picked up the plaque and ran my fingers across the inscription. Tears began to form in the corners of my eyes as I realized how much my parents cared about me. They knew who I really was, and even when I temporarily lost sight of who I could become, they were there to remind me of my God-given potential. Because they had given me life, they helped me to have vision for that life.

Even now, when I look at that plaque—hanging on my office wall—I remember the quiet victory my parents helped me to achieve. That plaque, its message, and its unwritten sentiment have gone with me through several moves (and many more successes and disappointments), becoming more and more meaningful with life's experiences. Now, the plaque's message is not the only reason it is valuable to me, but the memories of the moment, the feelings of love and of being loved, make it a priceless treasure.

Just as our earthly parents participate in our personal creation (spiritually by molding our character, and physically by giving birth and sustaining our bodies), our Heavenly Father is the supreme Creator, shaping us and our lives by means of a perfect love. My parents, the rancher, the gardener, and even the little girl are all examples of earthly stewards who took care because they have love for their children, cows, plants—and even candies. They are (small "c") creators in their corner of the world, endeavoring to create pockets of love and concern wherever they may be. And so are we all creators: watching over and taking care of the people, places, and things for which we are lovingly responsible.

Imagine, then, the kind of care that our Heavenly Father takes as the Creator who unconditionally and universally loves. The Lord told His disciples that even a sparrow "shall not fall on the ground without your Father" knowing, and that "the very hairs of your head are all numbered" unto God. (Matthew 10:29-30.) This all-knowing and all-powerful Father is aware of the most intimate details of His children's lives. Not only does he know when our heads bow in humble prayer, but he even knows the very hairs that are on those heads.

I don't claim to fully understand such an omniscient and omnipotent stewardship. In many ways it is incomprehensible to me. But I do have faith in a loving Heavenly Father, and I am humbled by His personalized and perfect love for each of us.

One of a Kind

God truly is mindful of us as individuals. He knows us as unique sons and daughters with distinctive talents and different capabilities. And one of the greatest demonstrations of our inherent and infinite worth is the simple fact that no two human beings are exactly alike. Some may react cynically to that claim. I hear the doubtful moans and see the inquisitive glances every time I talk about what I call the "snowflake principle." (Even in the heaviest snowstorm, when inches upon inches of tiny snowflakes gather, no two snowflakes are exactly alike. When viewed under a microscope, each snowflake can be seen to be unique.) Every person over the eons of time is different from his or her fellow beings.

Robert Fulghum looks into the statistics behind this uniqueness in his best-selling book All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten:

The statisticians figure that about 60 billion people have been born so far. And . . . there's no telling how many more there will be, but it looks like a lot. And yet—and here comes the statistic of statistics—with all the possibilities for variation among the sex cells produced by each person's parents, it seems quite certain that each one of the billions of human beings who has ever existed has been distinctly different from every other human being, and that this will continue for the indefinite future.

In other words, if you were to line up on one side of the earth every human being who ever lived or ever will live, and you took a good look at the whole motley crowd, you wouldn't find anybody quite like you. [^2]

What more empowering and motivating thought could there be than this knowledge that you are the only you. Our Heavenly Father knows us so intimately and so completely that, even if we are a twin and look like someone else, He created a distinctly different person in each of us. (Even identical twins have different fingerprints.) And because He knows us so individually and loves us so unconditionally, we really can accomplish any worthy goal with His Fatherly providence.

I once shared the "snowflake principle" with a rambunctious group of middle-school students. There were more than five hundred children in a small auditorium. Half of them were sitting on the floor, and all of them were anxiously whispering and eagerly watching the clock during the last hour of the day. I was the lucky "entertainer" of this less- than-interested crowd.

They probably did not hear much else of what I said that hour, but I will long remember their attentive faces when I told them that they were unique individuals, completely different from every other human being. Even though, in the hour we spent together, thousands of people would be born and thousands more would die, there was no one in that room who was the same as anyone else who had ever lived. For a brief moment, bodies stopped wiggling, mouths stopped whispering, heads turned, and eyes filled with childlike wonderment. For only a second, they seemed to catch a vision of their one-of-a-kind worth. Somehow, these distracted middle schoolers were grabbed by the thought that no one else was quite like them. No longer were they just another student (all with the same haircut, same brand of jeans, and same type of folder), but in their minds' eyes—if only momentarily—they saw the unique individuals who they are. They caught a glimpse of their self-worth.

Unlimited and Amazing Worth

For many years, scientists underestimated the worth (from a strictly chemical standpoint) of the human body itself. Professors used to say that the chemical composition of a human being was worth about thirty-two dollars on the going market. But as the late Earl Nightingale (the well- known self-improvement author) pointed out, since the age of atomic chemistry, scientists now calculate that if the electronic energy in the hydrogen atoms of the body could be used, each human being could supply the electricity for a large, highly industrialized country for nearly one week! As one duPont scientist determined: "The average person— by this estimate—is worth about 85 billion dollars!" Certainly, any human being is worth even more than that dollar amount, but this estimation—or rather underestimation— of worth is indicative of the shortsightedness to which many of us subject ourselves. Whether it be a monetary label for actual physical worth or the subconscious label we give to ourselves, one of the most damaging devices to our personal progress is the failure to believe in our own worth—or in the worth of others.

If we think we are only a "thirty-two-dollar" person and others are only "thirty-two dollar" people, only "thirty-two- dollar" goals will be accomplished, and only "thirty-two- dollar" expectations will be met. But when we realize that God sees us for our "eighty-five-billion-dollar-plus" capabilities and attributes, we capitalize on our unique strengths in such a way that they reflect our infinite worth. If we belittle ourselves, His creations, it is easy to criticize the Creator— which can lead to loss of faith and spiritual alienation.

We Walk by Faith

Without question, such a belief in ourselves and in our infinite capacities may require a courageous leap of faith. Ultimately, we do all that we are capable of doing and become all that we were meant to become when we turn to God for personal vision. It could not be more clear than in the gospel according to Luke: "With God nothing shall be impossible." (Luke 1:37.)

Jesus also said, "If ye have faith . . . nothing shall be impossible unto you," and "all things are possible to him that believeth." (Matthew 17:20; Mark 9:23.) When we believe these words and exercise our faith in Him, spiritual growth becomes possible.

Of course, such change is still not necessarily easy. And our natural tendency is to continue in the way we were, staying in our familiar paths, focusing on things that really may not matter much. But faith in our Heavenly Father helps us to move into new and sometimes uncomfortable territory—in other words, to grow.

Faith also carries us through the things in life that seem beyond our present understanding—through pain, sorrow, and disappointment. We may feel worried about what tomorrow will bring. But for today, we can find comfort in the fact that our Father knows us and loves us, and that in the end He will wipe all the tears from our eyes.

We do not know all the answers. But we can rest assured that God does, and that we can put our trust in Him. As Victor Hugo wrote: "Have courage for the great sorrows of life, and patience for the small ones; and when you have laboriously accomplished your daily task, go to sleep in peace. God is awake."

All things are possible when we believe enough to make a personal leap, when we trust enough to turn our lives over to God.

The Leap of Faith

A leap of faith is exactly what a young American pilot made during the air campaign in World War II. Enemy Japanese fire shot his plane down in the middle of deep Pacific waters. The startled pilot struggled to free himself from his aircraft, only to discover that both Japanese and U.S. ships were racing to his "rescue." Uncertain as to whether he would be saved or imprisoned, the pilot prayed for help and believed in his ability to hang on. To this day, President George Bush asserts that it was more than luck that brought the American submarine to his aid just moments before the Japanese vessel. Friends of Mr. Bush say that he firmly believes that God spared his life for a reason. And as a conversation with a friend during the 1991 Persian Gulf War reveals, he still derives personal strength and inspiration from this belief in God. President Bush explained: "Now I can really understand Lincoln. This is a place [the White House] that makes you want to pray." [^3]

We may have never jumped from an aircraft, but each of us does our own sort of "leaping" when we make decisions based upon faith. Sometimes when we turn our restricted sight over to God's omniscient seeing, we have to make a pretty substantial jump (whether mental, emotional, spiritual, or even physical) from where we have been to where we know, with God, we can go.

One such jump in my life was when I left my job in Pennsylvania and returned to Utah. I had been working as a TV news anchor for a CBS affiliate station in Pennsylvania for several years. I enjoyed my work and was doing well at it. But when it came time to renew my contract, my thoughts turned homeward to a recently widowed mother, family, and other (at-the-time-unknown) reasons to return to Utah. I was not completely sure why I was choosing to go home. I just felt like it was the right thing for me to do—even though it did not seem like a smart career move.

The general manager at the TV station called me into his office many times, rating sheets in his hands, trying to persuade me to stay—and trying to figure out why I would go. He wondered if another station had given me a better offer and was willing to present counteroffers to get me to stay. He kept questioning, "Is it money? Do you need more money? Let's decide on a better salary." In his mind, money was the only logical reason to quit, and the personal explanations I gave for leaving had to be "excuses" for receiving a better salary offer somewhere else. But I was returning to Utah without a job—or even any real prospects for employment.

When I got to Utah, the jobs were not waiting, but they were to be found. And with the perspective of many years, I look back on the blessings and opportunities that have come since my return to Utah and recognize God's hand in directing my life. He knew better than I what my talents were and how they could best be used. I made a leap, and He certainly caught me with the open arms and reassuring embraces of bounteous blessings and inspiring opportunities. I, like the poet, took the road less traveled by, and that has made all the difference.

You have probably done the same thing: made a courageous leap of faith and then reflected on how it has "made all the difference" in your life. People come to such crossroads thousands of times a day in a million different places, and they similarly make decisions without knowing the "why" but believing in the "how." Something as simple as taking an alternate route to work—for no apparent reason— may change the course of our day's events; listening to a different radio station may put us in touch with just the "right" song or message; signing up for another class may give us the very information, and even encouragement, we were secretly searching for; and sending an unexpected "hello" might make all the difference in the life of someone dear to us. We need only look to the Wellspring of all "hows," believe in ourselves to accomplish the "whens," and wait to uncover the divinely inspired "whys."

The Gift of Creation

God, as our Heavenly Father and the Perfect Steward, is ready and waiting to guide us, as believers. When we trust Him enough to hear the quiet whisperings of our own hearts and minds (to believe in the dreams and aspirations that are uniquely ours), we begin to realize the unlimited possibilities that are ours to behold. We believe to see, and we no longer need to see that we might believe.

As creators ourselves, we emulate the Creator of all things, exercising a divinely inspired stewardship. Even while we are engaged in our own earthly molding, we become clay in His hands. Our faith makes us whole. (See Matthew 9:22.) We become better and accomplish more than we thought possible when we realize that seeing always falls short of inspired believing—and that, with God, achieving the "impossible" (the difficult and the challenging) is our birthright. In order to realize our worth, we walk by faith, and other times even make leaps of faith. Our Heavenly Father will be there to guide us—and at times even carry us—along life's customized path as we live up to the greatness within us. And even though the road is oftentimes long and many times hard, realizing our self- worth will help us to weather the storms and walk through the rough places. Believing that God knows us as individuals, with unique talents and distinctive purposes, is a necessary step to making lasting change and experiencing a real transformation.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Awareness. 2. Acceptance. 3. Action. Richard L. Bednar and Scott R. Peterson, Spirituality and Self- Esteem (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990), p. 3.
[^2] Stephen R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989), pp. 18-19.
[^3] See William D. Hersey, Blueprints for Memory (New York: American Management Assoc., 1990), p. 62.
