Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

CHAPTER 5

ETERNAL PRECEPTS, NOT TEMPORARY TACTICS

Nothing comes from nothing. Nothing ever could.

—Richard Rodgers

Unlike the quick-fix (and subsequently short-lived) tactics that have characterized our society in recent years, the process of realizing our self-worth takes time. And while quick-fix strategies promise timely results, the recognition of self-worth incites a timeless transformation. But in a world where fast-pace is often the only pace, it is sometimes hard to see beyond the whirling starts and cosmetic stops of temporary improvement. The more steady and sometimes even staggering steps of real, inside-out improvement are largely less dramatic—and sometimes even invisible.

Our lives may be so inundated by quick-fix improvements that we may not even recognize them as such. Only when we take a few moments to get out of the pool of temporary self-help tactics will we be able to discern some of the superficial strokes and artificial buoys of "immediate" self-improvement. Our homes, offices, literature, media, and mailboxes are full of such quick-and-easy remedies. Sweepstakes, lotteries, and gambling "get-aways" solicit our subscriptions and beg for our "donations" (and charge-card numbers!). In return, their million-dollar prizes promise a life of extravagance and leisure. All we have to do is scrape the silver lining, "sign here," attach the lucky sticker, or return the winning number—and wealth untold will be showered upon us. We want to believe that this is our lucky break, that we will never have to work another day, that we will be driving away in that new sports car, "living the good life" in a luxurious new home—that we really can get something for nothing.

The Quick-and-Easy Way

This quick-fix mentality does not stop with promises of wealth and possessions. Life-changing guarantees are made about our very character, personality, habits, and even our body. If we subscribe to a certain magazine, repeat a designated phrase, go to a particular school, or even listen to a subliminal tape, all of our problems will be solved. We will be instantly changed into the kind of person we have always dreamed of becoming.

This advertisement I received in the mail exemplifies such an "overnight" mentality:

Instant Personal Charm Want to succeed in life and draw others to you? Order our tapes now. Simply play these subliminal tapes at night, while you sleep, and you will find new power in your relationships. You will unleash the natural charm and magnetism within you. You'll stop self-defeating behaviors and draw on the power of the subconscious. You'll automatically take on the actions of a charismatic individual—so that others will want to be around you and want to cooperate with you. Only $19.99. Order now!

By simply playing a tape or flipping a switch, we change into the charismatic, magnetic individual we have long dreamed of becoming!

Most bookstores—and scores of mail-order companies— sell books and tapes that pledge a "perfect" body. After just reading this book or thirty days of regularly listening to this tape, slim thighs and a flat stomach are the easily achieved by-products. Success stories and pictures of beautifully shaped, gorgeous people decorate the books' and tapes' covers, while exercise, a balanced diet, discipline, and all the other things we so painfully associate with weight control may be replaced by a collection of pills and positive thoughts. We all know (perhaps too well) that there is more to losing weight than simply hearing positive thoughts. If listening to a tape were all that was necessary to have a trim body, obesity would have been "cured" long ago.

Just like the promises made by the snake-oil salesmen of the Old West, these companies claim to have discovered the eternal elixir, the fountain of youth, the missing link to personal empowerment. And many of us fall prey to their pledges. We want to be able to buy success, plug in happiness, put on a perfect body, and tap into a guru who has all the answers. As Bednar and Peterson describe in Spirituality and Self-Esteem: "Most of us like things the quick and easy way. You know, a pill for pain and cash for class. We live in a world where appearances seem more important than reality, and the difference between appearance and reality is not as clear as it once was." [^1] We want to alter reality so that it will conform to the easily acquired appearance of success that has been defined for us by so many external sources.

Consider, for example, the late-night television sales programs that are set in what seems to be a newsroom. The would-be anchor sits behind a desk and describes the latest product from his authoritative position as the bearer of good news. The marketing technique is manipulative and even deceptive. We hear about an amazing device (once-in-a- lifetime opportunity!) that miraculously cures pain, an innovative program (with proven results!) for getting rich in our spare time, and even a plan for becoming effortlessly wealthy through real estate (no money down!). Realizing that consumers largely look to the news for facts and information, the companies present their products as if they were newsworthy breakthroughs. They make their ads into "reports" and present their products as if they were life- changing advances in science and technology.

On another channel, at about the same sleepless hour, we are told to dial a toll-free number for psychic readings. If we just press a few buttons and give a little background information, our whole life will pass before our ears and eyes. No more guessing and wondering.

The appeal may be to a family, a corporation, or even to an individual, but the promise for a quick fix is all the same. Whether on TV, in a magazine, over the telephone, or in the mail, we hear about amazing seminars that will immediately change an organization's deep-seated financial, cultural, managerial, and other problems. Many high-level executives invite seminar speakers to talk—for an hour and maybe even for a day—to change the corporate culture, the employees' work habits, or the managerial mindset. They want to buy an easy, painless solution to all their corporate ills. Or at least, they want some literature that will answer all of their questions and solve all of their problems. While speakers and books can present them with some of the tools to make significant changes, their corporations will not be changed overnight. And any medium that promises such an instant turnaround is suspect of using temporary repair tactics, not timeless transformation techniques. If managers expect an immediate, all-inclusive, and lasting cure, they may be disappointed in a week or so when the Band-Aids come off and the sores are still there.

This is not to say that many popular self-improvement strategies cannot be beneficial and even helpful. The long road to change includes many smaller paths of progress— paths that are defined by learned and practiced directives. For example, regulating our diet according to the latest weight reduction program is better—usually—than not monitoring our diet at all. Just as balancing our time according to the most fashionable time-management program is one step closer to efficiency than keeping no schedule whatsoever. But behind the skills and strategies we will discuss in this book is the primary—and abiding—belief that we are children of God who have the capacity, and even the responsibility to take good care of our physical bodies and to use our time productively. When our divine connection motivates our efforts, the improvement process becomes more steady, meaningful, and even transforming.

Personality Ethic versus Character Ethic

In Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen R. Covey labels the quick-fix, superficial-solution mentality as the "Personality Ethic" and juxtaposes it with an internally based, principle-centered approach to life that he calls the "Character Ethic." His research into the first 200 years of American success literature shows that (roughly) the first 150 years of self-improvement theory were founded on "basic principles of effective living": things like integrity, humility, fidelity, justice, patience, industry, and the Golden Rule. However, the success literature of the next 50 years of American history "became more a function of personality, of public image, of attitudes and behaviors, skills and techniques, that lubricate the processes of human interaction." He summarizes: "Reference to the Character Ethic became mostly lip service; the basic thrust was quick-fix influence techniques, power strategies, communication skills, and positive attitudes." [^2]

The reasons for self-improvement evolved from inner, God-fearing transformation to outward, peer-approving pacification, and the methods for changing became more appearance and "success" oriented than principle-centered. The trend was not just to be involved in a program for personal progress but to improve quickly—and to be successful now.

"Be Ye Transformed"

All of this sharply contrasts with the Lord's plan for lasting progression. The scriptures tell us, "Precept must be upon precept . . . line upon line; here a little, and there a little." (Isaiah 28:10.) Real self-improvement is not going to take place all at once. Just as a poor self-esteem will not be changed with a single instance of praise or a moment of self-congratulation, our self-worth will not be discovered overnight. The eternal evolution of our character begins one precept at a time. And no matter how many times we try to be a better communicator, a more efficient worker, or a more loving spouse, our efforts will fall short if they are not based on eternal precepts, foremost of which is the awareness that we are truly children of God. Without understanding the value God places on a person's life, popular self-improvements would be superficial sutures for a wounded self-esteem. If we try to find self-worth in money, jobs, possessions, or personal relationships, what happens when those things fade or fail? If our God-given worth is not the motivating force behind all change, we will not experience real and everlasting change. We will not be transformed through Christ. As Paul admonished in his epistle to the Romans: "Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God." (Romans 12:2; italics added.) We renew our minds by seeking after all that is good, acceptable, perfect, or of God. And by so doing, we are not just changed, altered, or adjusted, but we are transformed.

When our thoughts and actions are not "conformed to this world," when we are not set on making instant progress and measuring success by visible, worldly standards, we will be transformed into the noble sons and daughters our Heavenly Father sees us as becoming. But how do we "renew our minds" and fully understand our self-worth? How can we experience such a transformation? By first understanding that the choices we make, the actions we take, and the thoughts we entertain will bring us closer to or farther away from such a life-changing recognition.

In other words, taking responsibility for the things we say and do is prerequisite to real change. This vital correspondence between making conscionable choices and deeply understanding our inherent worth is the missing link in most self-improvement programs. We cannot expect to improve in any lasting way or to fully comprehend our divine connection if we are making wrong choices, thinking bad thoughts, engaging in unwholesome activities, and wasting our time. But when we are making right choices, thinking good thoughts, engaging in wholesome activities, and productively using our time and energies, the resultant blessing is one of knowing who we really are.

While we do not have to do anything to get self-worth (it is an inherent, free gift from God), we must make daily efforts to remember this worth. And perhaps the best way to explain how to recognize our self-worth is by first exploring how not to merit such a recognition. If we make choices that separate us from God and that lead us to discount our own worthiness, how can we then expect to look to God for an appreciation of our worth? Our Heavenly Father will never withdraw this infinite and unchanging gift of worth from us, but we may withdraw ourselves from Him—and from a recognition of our worth—by doing things that make us feel less than worthy. When we are discouraged by guilt, overwhelmed by busy preoccupation, or hardened by wrongdoing, our burdened spirits may not give way to such a lofty truth.

Abraham Lincoln explained the other side of this truth: "It is difficult to make a man miserable while he feels he is worthy of himself and claims kindred to the great God who made him." When we are making even small strides to feel better about ourselves and the kind of life we are living, we are in a more conducive position to discover our worth. Exercising, eating right, learning, reading, and engaging in the kinds of self-improvements that we all know about are the "leafy branches of the tree," the outward manifestations that lead to real growth and change. But the deep roots that give all change stability and strength are sustained by a vital understanding of our self-worth. We make a godly change, or transformation by digging deep inside ourselves, earnestly praying, and seeking the Lord's help in acquiring a harvest of meaningful improvements.

Three A's of Change

The three A's of change are a convenient way to explain and to remember the precepts of godly transformation:

An awareness of our individual worth is essential to the transformation process. We must search to know truth, to raise our level of consciousness, and to become more sensitive to whether we are moving toward—or away from— a greater understanding of our self-worth. I believe that most of us, whether in the deepest recesses of our minds or the center of our hearts, believe in God. As the Psalmist wrote thousands of years ago: "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." (Psalm 14:1.) And as Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in our own dispensation, "All I have seen teaches me to trust the creator for all that I have not seen." No matter what our religious background and beliefs may be, most people innately sense the need for a Divine Being.

With that belief in place, an awareness that we are His children does not require much stretching. Because there is a God in heaven, it would only make sense that He is our Heavenly Father and that we are His children. This initial and empowering awareness that God is our Father sets a pattern for every ensuing opportunity for change. Before we decide to improve some specific thing about ourselves or our situation, we must first be aware of the need for change.

As we discussed earlier, our values and feelings of self- worth—while ever present—need to be brought to a higher level of consciousness if they are to be deeply understood. For example, if we have a million dollars in the bank, it does us no good if we don't know the money is there. How can we make use of a million dollars without ever realizing it is in our possession? Do you realize that you are breathing right now? Did you know you just blinked your eyes? Probably not. Or at least you were probably not thinking about these involuntary processes—even while you were engaging in them. But these rhetorical questions did raise your level of consciousness. In the same way that breathing and blinking subconsciously help maintain our physical bodies, our values or beliefs—whether we recognize them as such or not—govern our mental, emotional, and even spiritual processes. And if these values are to reflect an awareness of our self-worth, we must first be cognizant of what they are right now and then take note of either their congruence or disparity with our self-worth. We must stop to observe how aware we are of the eternal truth that God is our Heavenly Father. As Jeremiah outlined: "Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart." (Jeremiah 29:13.) We must pause to evaluate our mental "breathing" and spiritual "blinking" before we know to breathe harder or softer, blink sooner or later. We must search with all our heart to become aware of our personal relationship with God.

An acceptance of that awareness is another step on the long road to change. We addressed the idea of acceptance in somewhat different terms (but with the same end in mind) when we talked about faith in chapter 4. A vital step in becoming empowered by our self-worth is simply believing, or having faith, in God and knowing that He is our Heavenly Father. When we really accept our God-given inheritance, we make a significant (and necessary) step toward realizing our self-worth.

We cannot make claim to our divine inheritance if we don't first believe that it really has been given to us. As Paul advised Timothy (and all of us): "Neglect not the gift that is in thee . . . . Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee." (1 Timothy 4:14-16; italics added.) This acceptance of "the gift that is in thee" leads to all other meaningful changes. We then accept responsibility for our actions—whether good or ill—and realize that the future is ours, and only ours, to mold. By embracing our divine endowment of worth, we accept responsibility for whatever changes we make. Life becomes a do-it-yourself-with-God project.

And finally, after we are aware of our self-worth and internalize that awareness, we are in a position to take action—to really make change. When we believe that God is a loving Heavenly Father who knows each of us as individuals, we can accomplish all worthy goals. By becoming aware of and accepting our God-given worth, we align our beliefs with this empowering truth—and really become free: free to do the possible and the impossible, with God. Jesus bore testimony of the power that comes from turning to God to take meaningful action: "All things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." (Matthew 21:22.) Action that is incited by humble prayer will not only bring desired results but will also be aligned with our unique potential.

Perhaps the most important catalyst of change is the sincere prayer of the humble believer. No greater testimony is born of our inherent worth than the peaceful assurance that comes from asking God, in a moment of private petitioning, on bended knee, if He knows us personally and if He loves us unconditionally as His children.

I believe that God hears and answers our prayers and will bless us with the comforting assurance that He knows and loves us. Such prayer may not only give us the strength to take action, but it may also give us an awareness—and the ability to accept the awareness—that we are children of God. In other words, while I presented the three A's of change as if they were consecutive components of improvement (each building on the last), in reality they are more likely to occur concurrently than sequentially.

Sometimes we may take action first, and then, because of the good feeling that results, become aware of our divine endowment of worth and begin to believe in—or accept— our infinite capabilities. Other times, we may faithfully accept a principle of godly improvement, and, from that acceptance, become inspired to raise our level of awareness and then take action.

As is the case with all truth, these components of change are circumscribed into a synergistic whole, powerfully feeding into each other. Graphically, this cycle of growth looks something like the diagram on the next page, concentrically building.

Reality Hits

But common sense is not always common practice. Most of us know doctors who smoke, accountants who don't balance their checkbooks, and management consultants who mismanage their own employees. Undoubtedly, all of us have knowledge we fail to take advantage of. It's not what we know that really matters but what we do with what we know. We may "talk the talk" but never "walk the walk."

No matter how well we may memorize the three A's and talk about their importance, if our actions do not begin to incorporate their essence, we might just as well not know them. And perhaps more primary, if our actions do not begin to be inspired by the knowledge of our self-worth, we deprive ourselves of the life-changing power that comes from this recognition.

Have you ever been excited about a new self-improvement program? Maybe you go to a seminar, read a book, or listen to a tape that gets you all fired up to be a better person. So you decide to awake the next morning at the crack of dawn, jog a mile, eat a balanced breakfast, and do some inspirational reading—all before you go to work.

But when the alarm goes off, reality hits. Suddenly five o'clock seems like an unearthly hour, the early morning temperature is much colder than you remembered, and the inspirational "rah-rah" never seemed so lifeless. So you hit the snooze button and vow that tomorrow you'll start your superhuman self-improvement program.

We pacify ourselves with the illusion that it will be easier to begin tomorrow. Sometimes we fool ourselves by thinking that we will change overnight, that we will be as different as the night is from the day—tomorrow. Peter De Vries has written a one-liner that explains this sentiment well: "Sooner or later reality trundles each of us into surgery for an illusionectomy." Let's hope it's just a minor out- patient operation and not a major hospital-stay surgery.

Dramatize the Commitment

We all set unrealistic goals from time to time. One way of bridging this gap between wishful thinking and realistic action is by dramatizing the commitment to act. In other words, if we know that as children of God we should take care of the physical bodies He has given us (part of the stewardship with which He has entrusted us), we not only recognize the need for exercise, but, as stewards, we also realize our ability to exercise.

Somewhere between knowing we need to exercise and actually beginning to do it, we can easily lose interest. But when we dramatize our commitment by doing some specific thing to get us excited, we give ourselves additional impetus to take the first step. If we buy a new pair of jogging shoes, map out an alternate exercise route, or give our bike a thorough cleaning and lubrication, we make our personal commitment more visible to ourselves. We envision the end that we want to achieve—and make firm our commitment to achieve it—when we go out of our way to act out that commitment.

Share the Information

Another helpful forerunner in taking action (and for internalizing the ideas in this book) is sharing the knowledge we have acquired or the commitments we have made with others. Immediately after information has been presented to us, most of us remember only 50 percent of what we learned. Within a couple of days, we remember even less. After one week, we usually remember only a small percentage of what we initially learned. [^3] But when we share that information with someone else (either right after we learned it or shortly thereafter), we invariably remember much more of the information.

The best way to learn something is to become a teacher, to share what we have learned with loved ones, family, co- workers, friends, or neighbors. The simple act of shifting from learner to teacher significantly facilitates our learning, and our acting upon those precepts and practices we have been taught. The same principle applies in setting a goal. If we share our commitment with someone else, if we even write our commitment down or voice that commitment in private prayer, we are much more likely to achieve that goal.

Walk Before We Run

Another important precept for enacting real change is to master simple tasks before complex ones. A major goal of far-reaching effect is not achieved in a day—or maybe even in a year, many years, or a lifetime. Comedian Eddie Cantor was quick to observe that it took him "twenty years to become an overnight sensation"!

You have probably proven this principle true in your own life. Have you ever rushed out the door, grabbing whatever edible objects were in sight, rationalizing to yourself that at least you were eating "breakfast." You feel fine for the first two hours of the day, but about mid-morning, all the energy you ever had seems to drain from your body. And you just can't quite "get it together" the rest of the day.

Or have you ever gotten up fifteen minutes early, eaten a full breakfast, and maybe even taken a moment or two to organize your thoughts, read something uplifting, and pray? The rest of the day seems to go smoother, you have more energy than usual, and you seem to get twice as much done. It is a simple task, but it has far-reaching effects. (Notice I called them simple—not easy—tasks. Not all simple tasks are easy, but many are worthwhile.) Eating a good breakfast puts us in a better position to solve more complex problems throughout the day. We cannot expect to have a balanced-breakfast day (or life) if we only take time for an instant-breakfast beginning to that day (and life).

In the same way, we cannot expect to run a marathon if all we have ever run is the 100-yard dash. If we are out of shape and suddenly become enthusiastic about exercising, we may be disappointed when we can't run ten miles on the first day. There are no shortcuts to real fitness.

Even spiritual aerobics are difficult if we begin with the "high-intensity" workout. But if we remember that we get in shape (physically, mentally, and spiritually) by taking one step at a time, reading one line upon another, learning one precept after the next, our growth will be much more fulfilling and life-changing. As the classical thinker Publilius said, "It takes a long time to bring excellence to maturity." And it does. But the journey toward fully realizing our self- worth becomes as worthwhile as the actual destination when we maintain a godly vision for our lives—and proceed with genuine effort.

As with all meaningful change, personal battles must be waged before public victories can be expected. "Intra" (or inner) development must precede "inter" (or outer) influence. We must be working on our own challenges before we can help with others' problems. We must become our own caretaker before we can become a caregiver. We must make deposits in our own account before we can make withdrawals—for ourselves and for others.

The Journey of Self-Improvement

Self-worth may not be in the dictionary, but it will be the focal point of our journey as we make the divine connection to self-improvement. When we picture our life through the visionary viewfinder of inherent worth, we capture a world of untapped possibilities and a self of infinite capabilities. The developmental process itself becomes a sacred proving ground as we look to God to process clearly focused pictures of authentic success—and not Instamatic snapshots of what only seems to be success.

Regardless of where we have been, where we are going right now is what matters. And we can remember the words of Richard L. Evans:

Life moves in one direction only—and each day we are faced with an actual set of circumstances, not with what might have been, not with what we might have done, but with what is, and with where we are now— and from this point we must proceed: not from where we were, not from where we wish we were—but from where we are. [^4]

Now is the time to set out on a self-improvement journey that will take us where we have always wanted to be: to our best selves in an even better world. The discovery of our self-worth is an exciting and empowering journey. As T. S. Eliot has written:

We must not cease from exploration, and the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we began and to know the place for the first time.

Frequently, what may at first seem new and unique is simply the excitement of discovering something very old—something that we've just begun to see or understand for ourselves. When Columbus discovered America, the continent had existed for millennia, but it was new to this band of explorers—so new they didn't at first recognize it as "the new world." Columbus didn't invent America—he discovered it. Likewise Newton didn't invent gravity—he described it. Edison didn't invent electricity—he discovered how to tap it.

We all make new discoveries when, for the first time, we understand and comprehend who we really are, who we always have been, and who we always will be: children of God. We will experience a quiet explosion of the eternal potential God has given to each of us as we make the divine connection. We will discover the power that is already within us but that, for many of us, may be realized "for the first time."

. . . . When our thoughts and actions are NOT "conformed to this world," when we are NOT set on making instant progress and measuring success by visible, worldly standards, we will really be transformed into the noble son or daughter our Heavenly Father sees us as becoming. But how do we "renew our minds" and fully understand our self-worth? How can we experience such a transformation? By first understanding that the choices we make, the actions we take, and the thoughts we entertain will either bring us closer to or farther away from such a life-changing recognition. In other words, taking responsibility for the things we say and do is prerequisite to real change. This vital correspondence between making conscionable choices and deeply understanding our inherent worth is the missing link in most self-improvement programs. We cannot expect to improve in any lasting way or really come to understand our divine connection if we are making wrong choices, thinking bad thoughts, engaging in unwholesome activities, and wasting our time. But when we are making right choices, thinking good thoughts, engaging in wholesome activities, and productively using our time and energies, the resultant blessing is one of knowing who we really are.

While we do not have to do anything to get self-worth (it's an inherent, free gift from God), we must make daily efforts to discover this worth. And perhaps the best way to explain how to recognize our self-worth is by first exploring how NOT to merit such a recognition. If we make choices that separate us from God and lead us to disbelieve in our own worthiness, how can we then expect to look to God for an appreciation of our worth? Our Heavenly Father will never withdraw this infinite and unchanging gift of worth from us, but we may withdraw ourselves from Him—and from a recognition of our worth—by doing things that make us feel less than worthy.

When we are discouraged by guilt, overwhelmed by busy preoccupation, and maybe even hardened by wrong-doing, it is difficult for such a lofty truth to find place amidst our burdened spirits. Abraham Lincoln explained the flip-side of this truth: "It is difficult to make a man miserable while he feels he is worthy of himself and claims kindred to the great God who made him." When we are making even small strides to feel better about ourselves and the kind of life we are living, we are in a position to discover our worth.

Exercising, eating right, learning, reading, and engaging in the kinds of self-improvements that we all know about are the leafy branches of the tree, the outward manifestations of sincere efforts to grow and change, but the deep roots that give all change stability and strength are sustained by a vital understanding of our self-worth. We must be engaged in the process of change, before we can make a Godly CHANGE, or transformation. THREE A'S OF CHANGE A convenient way both to explain and to remember the precepts of Godly transformation is the three A's for change: 1. Awareness 2. Acceptance 3. Action An AWARENESS of our individual worth is essential to the transformation process. We must first search to know truth, to raise our level of consciousness, and to become more sensitive to whether we are moving toward—or away from—a greater understanding of our self-worth. I believe that most of us, whether in the hindermost recesses of our minds or in the center of our hearts, believe in God. As the Psalmist wrote thousands of years ago: "The fool hath said in his heart There is no God." (Psalms 14:1) And as Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in our own dispensation: "All I have seen teaches me to trust the creator for all that I have not seen." No matter what our religious background and beliefs may be, we all sort of innately sense the need for a Divine Being. With that belief in place, an awareness that we are His children does not require much stretching. Because there is a God in heaven, it would only make sense that He is our Heavenly Father and that we are His children. (Just the fact that you are reading this book speaks in behalf of your heightened awareness. It would be difficult to peruse these pages without becoming more familiar with the belief that we are each unique sons and daughters of God.) This initial and empowering awareness that God is our Father sets a pattern for every ensuing opportunity for change. Before we decide to improve some specific thing about ourselves or our situation, we must first be aware of the need for change. As we discussed in "Chapter Three," our values and feelings of self- worth—while ever present—need to be brought to a higher level of consciousness if they are to be deeply understood. For example, if we have a million dollars in the bank, it doesn't do any good if we don't know the money is there. How can we make use of a million dollars without ever realizing it is in our possession? Do you realize that you are breathing right now? Did you know you just blinked your eyes? Probably not. Or, at least you were most likely not thinking about these involuntary processes—even while you were engaging in them. But these rhetorical questions did raise your level of consciousness. In the same way that breathing and blinking subconsciously maintain our physical bodies, our values or beliefs—whether we recognize them as such or not—govern our mental, emotional, and even spiritual processes. And if these values are to reflect an awareness of our self-worth, we must first be cognizant of what they are right now. We must stop to observe how aware we are of the eternal truth that God is our Heavenly Father. Or as Jeremiah outlined: " . . . ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart." (Jeremiah 29:13) We must pause to evaluate our mental "breathing" and spiritual "blinking" before we know to breath harder or softer, blink sooner or later. We must search will all our heart in order to become AWARE of our personal relationship with God. An ACCEPTANCE of that awareness is another step on the long road to change. We addressed the idea of acceptance in somewhat different terms (but with the same end in mind) when we talked about faith in "Chapter Four." A vital step in becoming empowered by our "self-worth" is quite simply believing, or having faith in God and knowing that He is our Heavenly Father. When we really accept our God-given inheritance, we make a most significant (and necessary) step toward realizing our self-worth. We cannot make claim to our divine inheritance, if we don't first believe that it really has been given to us. As Paul advised Timothy (and all of us): "Neglect not the gift that is in thee . . . . Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thee." (1 Timothy 4:14-16) This acceptance of "the gift that is in thee" leads to all other meaningful changes. We then accept responsibility for our actions—whether good or ill—and realize that the future is ours, and only ours, to mold. By embracing our divine endowment of worth, we accept responsibility for whatever changes we make.

Life becomes a do-it-yourself-with-God project. And finally, after we are aware of our self-worth and internalize that awareness, we are in a position to take ACTION—or to really make change. When we believe God is a loving Heavenly Father who knows each of us as individuals, we can accomplish all worthy goals. By becoming aware of and then accepting our God-given worth, we align our beliefs with this empowering truth—and really become free: free to do the possible and the impossible, with God. Matthew—and many others—bear testimony of the power that comes from turning to God to take meaningful action: " . . . all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." (Matthew 21:22) Action that is incited by humble prayer will not only bring desired results but will also be congruent with our unique potential. Perhaps the most important catalyst of change is the sincere prayer of the humble believer. No greater testimony is born of our inherent worth than the peaceful assurance that comes from asking God, in a moment of private petitioning—on bended knee, if He knows us personally and if He loves us unconditionally—as His child. I believe that God hears and answers our prayers and will bless us with the comforting assurance that HE KNOWS AND LOVES US. Such prayer may not only give us the strength to take ACTION, but it may also give us an AWARENESS—and the ability to ACCEPT the awareness—that we are children of God. In other words, while I presented the three A's of change as if they were consecutive components of improvement (each building on the last), in reality, they are more likely to occur concurrently than sequentially.

Sometimes we make take ACTION first, and then because of the good feeling that results, become AWARE of our divine endowment of worth and begin to believe in—or ACCEPT—our infinite capabilities. Othertimes, we may blindly ACCEPT a principle of Godly improvment, and from that acceptance, become inspired to raise our level of AWARENESS and take ACTION. As is the case with all truth, these components of change are circumscribed into a synergistic whole, powerfully feeding into each other. Graphically, this cycle of growth looks something like this, concentrically building: REALITY HITS But common sense is not always common practice . . . .

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Awareness. 2. Acceptance. 3. Action. Richard L. Bednar and Scott R. Peterson, Spirituality and Self- Esteem (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1990), p. 3.
[^2] Stephen R. Covey, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989), pp. 18-19.
[^3] See William D. Hersey, Blueprints for Memory (New York: American Management Assoc., 1990), p. 62.
[^4] In Richard Evans' Quote Book (Salt Lake City: Publisher's Press, 1971), p. 65.
