Lloyd D. Newell, Divine Connection: Understanding Your Inherent Worth ( 1992)

SECTION 3

TURNING INWARD

We can change and improve. A real understanding of our self-worth empowers us to reach our God-given potential.

CHAPTER 6

BEYOND SELF-TALK AND VISUALIZATION

Certain thoughts are prayers. There are moments when, whatever the attitude of the body, the soul is on its knees.

—Victor Hugo

Positive thinking, self-talk, and visualization are primary components of self-improvement literature. And justifiably so. These practices are sound, and they have proven to be positive and powerful influences in the lives of many. The Proverbs taught thousands of years ago that "as he thinketh in his heart, so is he" and "a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance." (Proverbs 23:7; 15:13.) In other words, how we talk to ourselves and what we think about ourselves contribute to who we will become and how we will feel about ourselves. But real, transforming self-improvement is more than just thinking and talking positively.

When we recognize and respect our eternal worth, we do more than change the way we talk to ourselves and the way we see ourselves. Our very thought processes and patterns of behavior come to reflect our divine nature. Positive self-talk becomes an empowering form of personal prayer; and hopeful visualization evolves into purposeful foresight.

Taking the "Self" out of Self-Talk

Whether we are aware of it or not, every hour of every day we have an ongoing conversation with ourselves. An inner voice talks to us all day—and all night—long. (If you don't believe it, it's the voice that just asked, "What voice?") In the musical Fiddler on the Roof, the Jewish father Tevye regularly engages in such conversation with himself— and with his God. He is so accustomed to verbalizing his thoughts and addressing them to God that, at one point, he even tells God what the "Good Book" says. He quickly chuckles at the thought that he is telling God what is in the Bible, but this "slip" artfully demonstrates how self-talk can become "prayer-talk" when, like Tevye, we include our Heavenly Father in our everyday introspections. If Tevye is confronted with a problem or forced to make a decision, he takes a minute to reason with himself and then to present his reasoning to God. When his daughter asks permission to marry outside the Jewish faith, he goes back and forth with himself—and with God. "On the one hand," he says, and "on the other hand," he continues, until he eventually grants his daughter permission to marry the man she loves. For Tevye, and for each of us, the most important conversations we have are the ones we have with ourselves and with God.

When our self-talk is inspired by the knowledge that we really are children of God, we not only change the nature of our conversations, but we also have more to talk about. Our personal musings become heartfelt prayers, and our inner voice speaks silent praises to God. Emerson so aptly explains in "Self-Reliance": "Prayer is the contemplation of the facts of life from the highest point of view."

Or, the contemplation of the facts of life from the highest point of view is prayer. Our self-talk becomes prayer when we consider ourselves and our surroundings from that lofty viewpoint. When we realize our inherent worth, our inner monologue becomes an inspiring dialogue with God. We take the "self" out of self-talk and participate in real communion (or a two-way interchange of feelings, thoughts, and ideas) and not just self-centered exposition.

Unfortunately, research indicates that some 75 percent of our self-talk is negative [^1]—let alone divinely connected. Our alarm goes off in the morning, and we tell ourselves that it is going to be a terrible day. We look in the mirror and wonder why we look so awful. We miss our bus and reprimand ourselves for being late. We sometimes go through a whole day saying rude and damaging things to ourselves—things that we would probably not even say to other people. Do any of these exclamations sound familiar: "I can't believe how stupid I am!" "Why did I even get out of bed today!" "With my luck, I'll probably fail anyway." "Who could ever love me?"

Playing the Inner Game First

I have engaged in this sort of negative mental programming while golfing. On several occasions, I have teed off with all the force and energy I have ever put into a swing— only to watch my ball roll off the tee and land just a few feet from where I was standing. I would say things to myself like: "This is going to be a bad day," "I can tell I am just not up to par today." Or on times when I have lost several balls to an embarrassingly avoidable pond, I caught myself saying: "You blew it, Lloyd." "Those were some lousy shots." "You've lost your touch." I would have never said such degrading things to my family and friends, but somehow it was all right for me to chastise myself. And when I complained about hitting a ball in the high grass, in what is called "the rough," I let the same negative thoughts govern my performance.

In The Power of Positive Thinking, Norman Vincent Peale asserts that "the rough" in golf—and in the game of life— is primarily mental. He tells his own golfing story of how he hit a ball in the rough only to receive some of his own advice from his golfing partner. His partner reminded him to think positively: "All you need to do is to keep your eye on that ball and tell yourself that you are going to lift it out of that grass with a lovely stroke." Dr. Peale thanked his partner for the positive reinforcement, and, as would be expected, proceeded to hit the ball back onto the fairway. From that experience, he makes the following assertion: "Believe that Almighty God has put in you the power to lift yourself out of the rough by keeping your eyes firmly fixed on the source of your power. Affirm to yourself that through this power you can do anything you have to do . . . . Believe this, and a sense of victory will come." [^2]

In Dr. Peale's own words, the key to his successful stroke was not in the positive programming alone but, more important, in his recognition that "Almighty God put in [him] the power to lift [himself] out of the rough." The recognition of this inherent power—or divinely endowed worth—was the greater enabler. The positive programming was only the rightful reflection and the necessary forerunner of this more illuminating belief. The rough was not so rough because, more than just thinking positive thoughts, Dr. Peale believed in his God-given power to "do anything [he had] to do."

This empowering sort of positive self-talk is not selfish aggrandizement. My negative conversation with myself while golfing, however, was subtly selfish. I was worried about how I looked: about my form, my golf balls, and my score. My degrading monologue was more self-centered than any of the "I-can-do-anything" thoughts that Dr. Peale summarized—because (even in simple things like a game of golf) his source of strength was a belief in God.

And while the positive thoughts of Dr. Peale's golfing companion were superficially unselfish, this kind of self-talk is more in line with the popular understanding of positive self-talk: sow positive thoughts and we will reap positive results. This mode of thinking is not to be minimalized. There is certainly a place for such a belief in ourselves and in our mind's capacity to turn belief into achievement. But whether Dr. Peale realized it or not, he took his companion's remarks one step further and said, in effect, that we should be positive and expect positive results because we are children of God, the beneficiaries of a divine inheritance of power. In other words, by believing in himself and in his God, he prayed himself into a successful stroke—and into a more fulfilling life. He did more than just think his own positive thoughts; he drew upon the strength of God and turned self-talk into prayer-talk.

When we approach the "rough" in life with a positive attitude and a humble dependence upon God, it is amazing how the rocky road we were once traveling can become so much more smooth. The nature of "the road" really does not change, but our capacity to walk it increases when we turn to God for support. We, like Paul, will then say to ourselves: "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." (Philippians 4:13; italics added.) Even the "can- do" self-talk of a positive thinker can be selfish and self- centered if a divine connection is not made.

The Divine Connection

A man in one of my seminars sensed the potentially selfish nature of positive self-talk when he raised his hand and challenged, "Lloyd, are you telling me to be conceited?"

"Of course, not," I responded. Conceit means that we define our merits, talents, and attributes by comparing them with those of others. We like ourselves—and believe in ourselves—because we are more attractive, dress better, speak more fluently, perform more consistently, get higher grades, drive a nicer car, or live in a bigger house than our neighbors. Conceited self-talk would have us believe in ourselves only so far as we can surpass other people's achievements, demonstrate greater ability and intelligence, or display bigger and better possessions.

But positive self-talk that leads to and is inspired by a recognition of our self-worth is never self-worship. When we speak positively to ourselves—about ourselves—because we are children of God with inherent worth, our thoughts are never really self-centered. Instead, they demonstrate reverence for the Being who endowed us with that worth. Because our thoughts return to our Father, self-talk that is guided by an awareness of our divine connection is more like a humble prayer for success than a declaration of self- made glory.

No longer is it as challenging to speak positively about ourselves—to ourselves and to others—when we realize that by so doing we demonstrate a love for God. While we may sometimes feel uncomfortable about praising ourselves and believing in our own abilities, if we can think of such positive self-talk as indirectly praising God, giving Him all glory and gratitude, and believing in His stewardship and creations, we begin to make good our divine inheritance of worth.

What Do You Say to You?

Before we can change the tone of our self-talk and transform that self-talk into a more selfless prayer-talk, we must first become aware of what kinds of things we are saying to ourselves. Begin by listening to yourself and raising your level of consciousness about your inner monologues. Whether by writing down your inner conversations, saying aloud what you have been thinking, or reminding yourself with a string around your finger or a bean in your shoe, stop and evaluate your thought patterns. Only then can self-talk start to be exchanged for prayer-talk, doubt for hope, and fear for faith.

In The Feeling Good Handbook, Dr. David Burns, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania, outlines ten traps we often fall into while talking to ourselves.

We all make these kinds of mental mistakes. But when these cognitive traps become habits, we become entrenched in the pits of negative thinking. We find it difficult to lift ourselves out of the mental ruts of self-flagellation—and even self-congratulation. When we rely on the negative motivations of guilt, obligation, bribery, conceit, and fear, our resolution to improve becomes weak and ill-founded. We do things out of a begrudging necessity, which creates short- term resentment and long-term frustration. And if—and when—we no longer feel obligated to improve or are afraid to fail, our motivation to succeed is taken away.

But when we are inspired by a godly perspective on progress, we improve our internal conversation out of a love for God and out of a respect for our internal and eternal worth. As Goethe concluded: "Pleasure is more powerful than the threat of the penalty." An uplifting, God-fearing motivation will always be stronger than the selfish and degrading stimuli of obligation and fear.

Turn to God

During World War II, Captain Eddie Rickenbacker and his seven crewmen were shot down in the middle of the Pacific, with only three small rubber rafts to keep them afloat. Besides being surrounded by sharks, they battled stifling heat—and maddening thirst—during the day, while throughout the night they fought off bitterly cold and uncomfortably wet breezes. Nevertheless, they managed to talk positively to themselves, believing they would somehow survive. Part of their conversation consisted of reading the New Testament together and holding morning and evening prayers.

They were eventually rescued, and Eddie Rickenbacker later said: "I don't wear my religion on my cuff. But it is there, deep. Every night I get down on my knees and thank God for the blessings of the day." [^4] Eddie and his crew were able to survive because they looked to God for strength. They filled their minds with positive thoughts and voiced those thoughts to themselves—and to God. They knew that in order to survive, they needed to turn their self-centered and anxious monologues into God-fearing and praising dialogues.

We may not be on a raft in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, but we all do our share of "surviving." We all go through periods when we live from one day to the next, not knowing how we will pay yesterday's bills, meet today's demands, and weather tomorrow's turmoils. When we consider the precariousness of life, the Lord's admonition to the Pharisees comes as comforting counsel: "Men ought always to pray, and not to faint." (Luke 18:1.) In all of His wisdom and foreknowledge, the Lord knew that we would need to do more than just talk to ourselves positively; we would need to "pray always." (Luke 21:36.) We would need to know that Someone would always be listening, that our petitions would always be heard, that we would not just be talking to ourselves, and that we could pray about anything and everything. When we call upon our Heavenly Father, there will not be a busy signal. There is no call-waiting. There is never even a hold button, because He keeps His line open for us, never disconnecting us from His unconditional love and concern.

Tevye talked to himself and to God about everything from his lame horse to his empty pockets to his "lost" daughters. And I believe that God intends for us to do the same. He wants us to intimately involve Him in our lives. No matter how positive our attitude may be, we all need the validation of a listening and loving Ear—always and in "all" ways. Nothing is too small or too great for a sincere prayer directed to a loving Heavenly Father. Positive thinking without reliance on God, without prayer, becomes a selfish attempt to demonstrate our independence. Only when a positive attitude of humble dependence is coupled with faith in God (and voiced in prayer) can real inspiration and empowerment take place.

The Lord teaches in the Sermon on the Mount that our prayers should be heartfelt utterances and not mindless musings: "When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do . . . . Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him." (Matthew 6:7-8.) Because the "Father knoweth what things [we] have need of, before [we] ask him," perhaps prayer is more for us than for God. We are the ones who benefit most from bending our knees and humbling ourselves in the attitude of prayer. We are the beneficiaries of such spoken (or unspoken) gratitude, desire, repentance, and blessing. Just as positive self-talk helps to align our actions with a better outlook on ourselves and our lives, prayer goes several steps further and gives us a chance to contemplate life from God's divine perspective. As we turn to Him for direction, guidance, and support, we bless our lives with the vision of One who perfectly loves us, knows us, and desires everlasting joy for us.

The Lord's Model for Prayer

Sincere prayer aligns our will with our Father's. Christ's prayer in the Garden of Gethsemane is the perfect example of a completely selfless utterance. Even while taking upon Himself the sins of all mankind and undergoing physical and spiritual pain beyond our comprehension, Christ prayed, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." (Matthew 26:39.) The Lord's quiet conversation is a humbling demonstration of what it means to really pray. By all outward appearances, He seemed to be alone, engaging in a soul-weary monologue. But "for those who have eyes to see and ears to hear," He was involved in a perfectly selfless dialogue with God. His "self-talk" was so selfless that He became one with the Father. "Not as I will, but as thou wilt" is a perfect demonstration of what it means to take the "self" out of "self-talk" and to become empowered by a recognition of divine worth. The contrast between self- talk and prayer-talk is great indeed:

Visualization Becomes Vision

Just as self-talk can be replaced with prayer, the popular self-improvement practice of visualization evolves into godly vision when we lose ourselves enough to find ourselves in the embraces of an all-knowing Father. The theory behind visualization suggests that we will be successful if we picture ourselves succeeding. If only we can see ourselves crossing the finish line, giving a flawless speech, singing a perfectly pitched song, or responding to stress with control, we will realize these desired ends. This is what the Music Man (from the Broadway musical) calls "The Think System": if you think you can play a musical instrument, if you can see yourself—and even mentally hear yourself—playing it, you will inevitably play that instrument.

The practice of visualization has much credence. Experimental research and countless personal success stories have proven the theory valid. One of the more famous— and documented—accounts of successful visualization comes from the University of Chicago. Researchers there conducted experiments on three groups of basketball players. The first group practiced no free-throw shots during the month-long experiment. The second group practiced free- throw shots every day. And the third group visualized themselves making free throws every day. When the three groups were tested at the end of the month, the first group showed no improvement. The second group (who had actually practiced) showed a 24-percent improvement. The third group (who had visualized their practice) showed an improvement of 23 percent, only 1 percent less than the second group! In other words, the intense mental practice was nearly as beneficial as the physical workout. (And besides, when you practice in your head, you never miss!)

Positive visualization leads to positive performance. Unfortunately, the reverse is also true: negative visualization undoubtedly leads to negative performance. We see this whenever friends, neighbors, co-workers, or family members call themselves "stupid," "ugly," or "incompetent." And we can discern such negative programming in the subtle turns of their phrases and in the unspoken sentiments of their conversation. A secretary who always complained about her job introduced herself by saying, "I'm just a secretary." Because she saw herself as "just" a secretary (and not the intelligent, creative, competent, and contributing person who she was), she was never promoted to another position or seen as more than "just a secretary." A woman in one of my seminars explained this phenomenon well: "The me I see is the me I'll be."

We must also realize that others will see us the way we see ourselves. How could we expect it to be otherwise?

When we begin to see ourselves as people who matter (as important parts of the work team, integral members of the family, contributing members of the neighborhood, active participants in church functions, and so on), others will eventually see us that way—and will even help us meet our goals. And then when we come up against certain blind spots along the way, if we believe in something beyond ourselves, if we have vision for our lives, we will be able to move beyond our limitations.

All the while, we must remember that change does not happen overnight. It may be a long, slow process of changing our own as well as others' perceptions of us. It also takes a lot of self-discipline and consistent effort. Positive self-talk and visualization will do no good if we do not prepare, practice, and work—physically, emotionally, mentally, and spiritually. No matter how vividly we envision ourselves playing the piano, if we never sit down and actually put our fingers on the keys, we will never produce beautiful music. The mental and spiritual creation is preliminary to a behavioral and physical creation.

Imagine Walt Disney coming home one day and telling his wife: "Honey, I've got this great idea! I'm going to produce movies and design a wonderful amusement park. And it's all going to center around a mouse named Mickey with a falsetto voice." As far-fetched as such a dream might have sounded to his wife—and to countless others—Walt Disney did what we call dreaming and what he called "imagineering," or creatively engineering and vividly imagining to make seemingly impossible dreams come true.

Several years after Walt Disney died, Disney executives were conducting a tour of Disneyworld when a member of the group bemoaned the fact that Walt never got to see all the spectacular wonders of the amusement park. One of the executives quickly replied: "Oh, but he did. Walt Disney saw all of this in his mind. That's why it's here." And that is how any of us get where we want to be: by visualizing and then acting upon our personal goals, dreams, and visions. As Eleanor Roosevelt put it, "The future belongs to those who believe in their dreams." And as Victor Hugo wrote, "There is nothing like a dream to create the future."

Dreaming and Believing

Believing in a dream—and in God's power to turn dreams into reality—is what Tom Monaghan, the well- known founder of Domino's Pizza, did. Famous for creating a multimillion-dollar pizza enterprise, Monaghan is perhaps less known for his abiding belief in God. Starting out as an orphan at St. Joseph's Home for Boys in Jackson, Michigan, and finally becoming a successful entrepreneur in Ann Arbor, this God-fearing dreamer found strength in the simple but penetrating advice a third grade teacher gave him: "Tom, have faith in God, have faith in yourself—then go do it. You can be anything you want to be." Even though framed photos of him with famous personalities, presidents, politicians, and Pope John Paul II now decorate his walls, the picture most prominently displayed in his office and closest to his heart is of Sister Mary Berarda, the teacher who had faith enough to instill a sense of vision in a young orphan boy. From his inauspicious beginnings, this indomitable dreamer had faith in God and in himself and became "anything [he] want[ed] to be." As a result of his faith, he turned his immature imaginings into fully developed realities. [^5] He started in 1961 with $500 and a dream of delivering pizza in thirty minutes or less. And now his fortune is estimated at $500 million.

Whether we are starting a pizza company, "imagineering" an amusement park, or doing whatever we might need to do to follow our dreams, when our efforts are led by something beyond ourselves, by a compelling vision coupled with good, old-fashioned work, we can reach those once- dreamed-about successes. Isn't it interesting how the harder we work and the more inspiring our dreams become, the "luckier" we get?

Warren Bennis, a respected author and perhaps the country's most renowned leadership consultant, interviewed ninety of the most influential leaders in the country (from both public sector and private corporations). As he looked into their work habits and studied their personal profiles, he expected to find several obvious similarities among them. But he did not. He said of his findings: "The group comprised both left-brain and right-brain thinkers; some who dressed for success and some who didn't; some well-spoken, articulate leaders and some laconic, inarticulate ones; some John Wayne types, and some definitely the opposite. Interestingly, the group included only a few stereotypically charismatic leaders." Then he made the following assertion: "Leaders, then, manage through a compelling vision that brings others to a place they have not been before." [^6] The one characteristic these leaders had in common was a compelling vision, an ability to see beyond the mundane—and beyond themselves.

The Power of Vision

It comes as no surprise then, that one of the most visionary social workers of our time was blind. Famous author and lecturer Helen Keller was blind and deaf from the age of eighteen months. In her later years, when a probing reporter asked her what could be worse than being blind, she responded, "Having eyes to see and no vision."

Civilizations, organizations, families, and individuals depend upon vision, or purposeful imagining and divinely inspired foresight—and have done so since the beginning of time. As soon as we become consumed by the here and now, we lose sight of the vision that will lead us to a more meaningful tomorrow. When we engage only in short-term planning, we never accomplish long-term goals. We never see past the looking-glass that shows us only what we look like, not who we can become.

But what happens to our vision when we enrich it with the empowering awareness that we are children of God? What happens to our self-perception when, like the prodigal son, we "come to ourselves"? (See Luke 15:11-32.) What dimensions of our character are uncovered when, like Paul, we see with new eyes and our sight is restored? (See Acts 9.) The answers to these questions are a vital part of our living and being, for, as the Proverbs advise, "Where there is no vision, the people perish." (Proverbs 29:18.) How, then, does a recognition of our self-worth transform visualization into godly vision, into purposeful and inspired foresight?

We do all that we can and become all that God would like us to be when we turn to Him for personal vision. When we take time to think about ourselves and our lives from a divine perspective, to discover who we are and why we are here, we catch sight of both the visible—and the invisible, or seemingly impossible—opportunities and responsibilities that are within our stewardship.

Perhaps the most significant difference between visualization and vision comes in the recognition of a God- given purpose—in the uncovering of our larger reasons for being. If we sincerely believe that we are children of God, it follows that He knows us individually, that we have unique identities, and that we each have personalized paths to walk. And when we go through life committed to realizing the measure of our creation, we are better able to develop our inherent talents and to discover our unique attributes. When we not only visualize the success before us but, more important, envision the successful life that our Heavenly Father wants for us, we are empowered to step over obstacles and step up to achievements.

This is not to say that life with vision will be easy. Certainly not. Even with inspired foresight, we still come up against challenges and difficulties. But vision will help us see beyond the trials of today and into the hopeful reality of a better day in the future. Vision will help us see the responsible adult in our milk-spilling child, the selfless and loving spouse in the husband or wife who is always late and forgetful, and the more tolerant self in the impatient reflection we may see in the mirror. Vision keeps us moving toward worthy goals even when the pitfalls of life would have us give up and revert to an "easier" way.

As Vance Havner said: "The vision must be followed by the venture. It is not enough to stare up the steps—we must step up the stairs." Visualization would have us imagine and then successfully scale a few of life's carefully selected stairs, while vision allows us to more confidently climb whatever steps are before us—even while we catch sight of the eternal staircase, the "big picture," that is before us.

The proverbial story of three bricklayers illustrates the power that comes from seeing more than what is immediately before us. When the first bricklayer was asked what he was doing, he looked up from a pile of bricks, wiped the sweat off his brow, and said, "I am laying bricks." When the second bricklayer was asked what he was doing, he looked up with pride and said, "I am making a strong brick wall." And when the third bricklayer was asked the same question, he resolutely said, "I am building a cathedral."

The first bricklayer did not see beyond his present task. The second visualized a small part of the larger project. But the third envisioned the masterwork before him. Because he saw himself as doing something more than just stacking bricks (because he had a vision of the cathedral that would ensue), his efforts had purpose, and he was able to produce greater results. He was not just making a living, he was building a structure that would touch people's lives through the ages.

Imagine the power that would be instilled in our families, companies, and neighborhoods if a compelling and worthy vision directed our lives. When we rear our children with a sense of the higher laws that govern society, they understand that saying no to drugs is saying yes to the thrills of real freedom. When we teach our family that being kind to each other is really an investment in the most lasting sort of friendships, simple courtesies take on more meaning. When we lead our employees to adhere to seemingly inconsequential quality control measures, we produce better products and services (as well as more satisfied customers and more substantial profit sharing). Mundane duties become integral parts of a greater whole. Ultimately, we have more obedient children, more loving families, and more dedicated employees.

Whether we are building a cathedral, a company, a family, or our own self-esteem, when we proceed with vision, our efforts are more closely aligned with our divinely endowed capabilities. We are inspired to reach sometimes even unseen summits of personal growth. When our visualization is enriched with a godly vision, we gradually (and sometimes painfully) scale higher—and steeper—slopes than we previously imagined possible. C. S. Lewis explains such inspired development in terms of a "living house":

Imagine yourself as a living house. God comes in to rebuild that house. At first, perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right and stopping the leaks in the roofs, and so on: you knew that those jobs needed doing and so you are not surprised. But presently He starts knocking the house about in a way that hurts abominably and does not seem to make sense. What on earth is He up to? The explanation is that He is building quite a different house from the one you thought of—throwing out a wing here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards. You thought you were going to be made into a decent little cottage: but He is building a palace. [^7]

The Lord never said that in His Father's house are many cottages. Instead He promised His disciples, and each of us, "In my Father's house are many mansions"—beautiful, developed, and visionary mansions. (John 14:2; italics added.)

The Light of the World

God sees us as (and shows us how to become) the palatial people who we are and not the pedestrian people we sometimes think ourselves to be, because He is the

Light of the World. The Apostle John explained: "God sent not his son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved . . . . And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light." (John 3:17, 19; italics added.) Men and women may love their own dim-sightedness and fail to find a place in their hearts and minds for the illuminating vision the Light provides.

It is easy to visualize in the dark. We can dream without distraction: without seeing the obstacles that will cause us to stretch, the rough roads we will have to walk, and the difficult doors we will have to open to enter our mansion. And yet, if we try to reach that palace in the dark, we are sure to trip and fall along the way. But when the Light of the World fills our souls with vision, we not only see the mansion prepared for us in all of its intricate detail—a mansion that surpasses our greatest architectural imaginings—but we also walk on a lighted path. (See John 8:12.) When our visualization becomes a divinely inspired vision, we know the Way, the Truth and the Life, and our visionary ventures are channeled by purpose and understanding that is greater than our own. We transcend our personal vision and literally catch sight of the vision that God has for us. God's vision becomes our own.

Visualization that is visionary and self-talk that is prayerful lead to self-improvement that focuses on improvement more than on the self. Christ instructs, "He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." (Matthew 10:39.) When we lose our lives for the Lord's sake, we find the way to real change and lasting improvement. Our selfish success programs become selfless and satisfying services when our God-given worth motivates our efforts, or when we make the divine connection to self- improvement. Whatever self-help practice may invite our attention, whether it be visualization, self-talk, or so many others; when a recognition of our eternal relationship with God illuminates that course of improvement, we will set and achieve goals that are divinely connected to our inherent potential for good.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Comprehensive: Does it include all of your roles— father, mother, son, daughter, neighbor, supervisor, and so on—and all of your interests? In Lewis, Mere Christianity, p. 171.
[^2] Practical: Can it really be lived by? In Plus: The Magazine of Positive Thinking, June 1991, p. 3.
[^4] Neal A. Maxwell, Deposition of a Disciple (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1976), p. 29.
[^5] Jump to conclusions. We believe things will turn out badly—even when the evidence is neutral. U.S. New and World Report, July 29, 1991, pp. 43-44.
[^6] Magnification. We enlarge our problems and shortcomings and minimalize our strengths. 6. Warren Bennis, "Four Competencies of Great Leaders," in Empowering Business Resources, Ken Shelton, ed. (Glenview, Ill.: Scott, Foresman and Co., 1990), p. 208.
[^7] Reason emotionally. We interpret our own negative feelings as a sign that we don't deserve happiness. 7. Lewis, Mere Christianity, p. 173.
